8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 1/233
Borough of Lititz, PA
Friday, August 14, 2020
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1. General Provisions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz: Art. I, 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224,
approved 10-31-1978. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)], the codification of a complete
body of ordinances for the Borough of Lititz, County of Lancaster, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
revised, codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp.
and consisting of Chapters 1 through 122, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a
single ordinance of the Borough of Lititz which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code
of the Borough of Lititz," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of ordinances in force
immediately prior to the enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the
date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect
and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Council of the Borough of Lititz, and it is the
intention of said Council that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and
reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from
this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only new or
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective
date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Borough of
Lititz and in force on the date of the adoption of this Code, and not contained in the Code, are hereby
repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by
repeal.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 2/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following ordinances, rights and obligations which are hereby expressly saved from repeal;
provided, however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from repeal of
ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to revive any ordinance previously
repealed, superseded or no longer of any effect:
Any ordinance adopted subsequent to March 29, 1977.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative provision of the borough
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance in violation of any
legislative provision of the borough, or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending, or any judgment rendered,
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the
borough.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the
borough, or any lawful contract, obligation or agreement.
Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing
the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the borough, or
other instruments or evidence of the borough's indebtedness.
Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax rate.
Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special taxes, assessments or
charges.
Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property or acquiring property
by acceptance of deed, condemnation or exercise of eminent domain.
Any ordinance annexing land to the borough.
Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or reconstruction of sidewalks, curbs and
gutters.
Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public place
or property or designating various streets as public highways.
Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose districts and designating the
boundaries thereof, or providing for a system of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the
construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a system of sewers
or water supply lines.
Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers and employees of the
borough or setting the bond of any officer or employee.
Any ordinance regulating traffic or parking within the Borough of Lititz.
Any ordinance adopting provisions relating to the Recreation Board in the Borough of Lititz.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 3/233
R.
S.
T.
U.
V.
W.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
[1]
D.
The currently effective ordinances regulating building construction in the borough.
The currently effective ordinances establishing the real property tax rate in the borough.
The currently effective ordinances concerning fires or the prevention of fires.
Any ordinance amending provisions creating the Sewer Authority of the borough or ordinances
providing for agreements between the Lititz Sewer Authority and the Borough of Lititz with respect
to the collection, treatment or disposal of garbage.
Resolution No. 251, providing for a police cooperative agreement.
Any ordinance regulating abandoned or junked vehicles, particularly Ord. Nos. C-121 and C-157,
adopted 6-29-1971 and 9-24-1974, respectively.
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, adopted subsequent to the date given in § 1-4A
and/or prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance, are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and
shall, upon being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances;
new provisions.
Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the borough
for adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style
changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Council that all
such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
Nomenclature changes. Throughout the Code, the term "Justice of the Peace" (and "Burgess,"
where a judicial function is involved) have been changed to "District Justice." The obsolete title
"Town Council" has also been changed to "Borough Council," and "Burgess" (except where a
judicial function is involved) has been changed to "Mayor" in accordance with current statutory
provisions.
General deletions.
Sections pertaining to severability, effective dates and repeals have been deleted since such
provisions are included in this ordinance or are of no further effect.
Sections assigning titles to various ordinances have been deleted as all ordinances have
been given chapter or Article titles as part of the Code.
Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and revisions described above, the
following changes and revisions of a substantive nature are hereby made to various ordinances
included in the Code. These changes are made to bring provisions into conformity with the desired
policies of the Council, and it is the intent of the Council that all such changes be adopted as part
of the Code as if the ordinances so changed have been previously formally amended to read as
such. All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the
Code specified in § 1-15.[1]
Editor's Note: Pursuant to Subsection D, the following sections were amended. A complete
description of each change is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary: §§ 16-24, 24-1, 34-3,
34-5D, 36-13, 36-15B, 72-4, 87-4A, 100-25A(1) and (3), 100-25B(1)(a) and (b), 105-4A, 108-26,
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 4/233
[2]
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
F.
A.
B.
118-6, 118-20C(2), 118-22A, 118-26, 118-30B, 118-32, 118-34B, 118-35, 118-36, 118-38 and 118-
39.
Standardization of penalty provisions. The penalty provisions in the following sections of individual
ordinances prescribing penalties for violations are revised to provide for a maximum fine of $300,
plus costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that if the District Justice determines that the
defendant is without the financial means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single
remittance, such defendant be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such
periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.[2]
Editor's Note: Pursuant to Subsection E, the following penalty sections were added or amended:
§§ 24-7, 41-8, 46-6, 46-8, 66-8C, 66-10, 69-15, 72-7, 82-3, 84-3, 87-10, 100-10, 100-24, 105-12,
105-24, 105-26, 110-17B, 110-23, 118-37 and 122-54.
New ordinances. Certain new ordinances were approved by the Council during the process of
codification to replace previously adopted ordinances deemed obsolete and/or inadequate or to
provide regulation and control on new subject matters. These new ordinances are described in the
notice published in conjunction with the adoption of this Code and shall take effect as of the
effective date of the Code specified in § 1-15. Such ordinances are cited within the historical
statements for individual chapters by the phrase "adopted . . . during codification . . ." and are as
follows:
Chapter 5, Article V, Health and Sanitation Advisory Committee.
Chapter 18, Planning Commission.
Chapter 36, Article I, Adoption of Standards.
Chapter 50, Electrical Standards.
Chapter 55, Fees.
Chapter 59, Fire Prevention.
Chapter 89, Plumbing.
Chapter 120, Weeds.
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
Where the provisions of the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall control. Where the provisions of
any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
Chapter and Article titles, headings and titles of sections and other divisions in the Code, or in
supplements made to the Code, are inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to
the Code for the convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the ordinances.
Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information or referring to the statutes or
to other parts of the Code are inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 5/233
Code for the convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the ordinances.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the Ordinance Book in the office of
the Borough Secretary and shall remain there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption,
such copies shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and such certified
copies shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while the said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when passed and adopted
in such form as to indicate the intention of the Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include
such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the post-bound book
containing the said Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary, or someone authorized and directed by him or her, to
keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of
the Borough Secretary for use by the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted by
the Council subsequent to the effective date of this codification, which the Council shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such
changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the manner required a notice of
the introduction and of the adoption of the Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the borough.
The enactment and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notices of
introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability of copies of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of
the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or deletions, or to alter or
tamper with the Code, or any part or portion thereof, in any manner whatsoever which will cause the
law of the borough to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this ordinance shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $300 and costs of prosecution, collectible
as provided by law, or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that if the
District Justice determines that the defendant is without financial means to pay the fines and costs
immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant be permitted to pay the fines or costs in
installments and over such periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
§ 1-14. Severability.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 6/233
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are severable, and if any clause,
sentence, subsection, section, Article or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation and application to the clause,
sentence, subsection, section, Article or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such
judgment shall have been rendered. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that
this ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause,
sentence, subsection, section, Article or part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect on and after November 1,
1978.
§ 1-16. Inclusion of ordinance in Code.
This ordinance shall be included in the Code as Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
Article II. Ordinances Enacted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain complete new ordinances were approved by the
Borough Council for inclusion in the Code of the Borough of Lititz. Such new ordinances are
noted in the histories of individual chapters as "Adopted __________ during codification; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II." In accordance with recognized codification procedures,
these new ordinances have been enacted separately. A complete enumeration of all chapters
and Articles in the Code included in such ordinances is printed below, along with specific
dates of adoption.]
Chapter/Article Ordinance No. Adoption Date Approval Date
Ch. 5, Administration of
Government, Art. V, Health
and Sanitation Advisory
Committee
C-216 10-31-1978 10-31-1978
Ch. 18, Planning Commission C-217 10-31-1978 10-31-1978
Ch. 36, Building Construction,
Art. I, Adoption of Standards
C-218 10-31-1978 10-31-1978
Ch. 50, Electrical Standards C-219 10-31-1978 10-31-1978
Ch. 55, Fees C-220 10-31-1978 10-31-1978
Ch. 59, Fire Prevention C-221 10-31-1978 10-31-1978
Ch. 89, Plumbing C-222 10-31-1978 10-31-1978
Ch. 120, Weeds C-223 10-31-1978 10-31-1978
Chapter 5. Administration of Government
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions and employee benefits — See Ch. 16.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 7/233
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
Article I. Council
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 5-1. Meeting day.
The Council of the Borough of Lititz shall meet on the last Tuesday of each month.
§ 5-2. Compensation.
[Amended 12-19-1974 by Ord. No. C-164; 12-27-1977 by Ord. No. C-206,[1] approved 12-27-1977]
Members of the Borough Council shall receive as compensation the sum of $66.66 a month.
Editor's Note: This ordinance became effective 1-1-1978.
Article II. Compensation of Mayor
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 5-3. Compensation.
The Mayor shall receive as compensation the sum of $66 and $66.66 per month, to be paid in monthly
installments.
Article III. Manager
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]; amended in its entirety 12-12-1998 by Ord. No. C-417,
approved 12-29-1998]
Editor's Note: This article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 5-4. Creation of office.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created, subject to the right of Borough Council, by
ordinance, at any time to abolish such office.
§ 5-5. Filling of office.
The Borough Council shall, from time to time and whenever there is a vacancy, elect, by a vote of a
majority of all the members, one person to fill said office. In case of a vacancy, the Borough Council
shall, by a vote of a majority of its members, fill said office, subject to removal by Council at any time
by a vote of majority of all the members.
§ 5-6. Qualifications.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 8/233
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
A.
The Borough Manager shall have a bachelor's degree from an accredited college in public or business
administration or related field or equivalent work experience, plus considerable experience in municipal
or similar financial administration and in planning, organizing and directing administrative services.
§ 5-7. Compensation.
The Borough Manager shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by the
Borough Council.
§ 5-8. Bond.
The Borough Manager shall be bonded with a trust company or bonding company as surety, in the
sum of $50,000, conditioned for the faithful performance of duties.
§ 5-9. Nature of position; to serve as Secretary/Treasurer.
The position of Borough Manager shall be administrative and managerial in nature, planning,
directing and coordinating the administration of the municipality and advising the Borough Council
in the creation of new municipal policies and the revision of old policies.
The Borough Manager shall also serve as Secretary/Treasurer.
§ 5-10. Specific duties.
Subject to recall by ordinance, the specific duties of the Borough Manager are defined as follows.
The Borough Manager shall:
Attend all public meetings of the Council, prepare meeting agendas and keep full minutes of
the proceedings.
Coordinate borough departments through the Public Works Superintendent, Chief of Police
and Project Manager of contract operations for the Water and Wastewater Treatment Plants.
Prepare the annual budget and maintain budget control throughout the year.
Coordinate the administration for all engineering projects for all areas, including design
through project completion with the cooperation of the Borough Engineer and the Public
Works Superintendent.
Plan, organize, administer and supervise the operations of the borough office.
Coordinate the planning and zoning functions of the borough and serve as Planning
Commission Secretary, keeping full minutes of the proceedings.
Prepare and submit a variety of municipal, state and federal reports.
Coordinate with the appointed accounting firm in the preparation of the annual audit and
coordinate with state auditors in the preparation of the annual police pension, municipal
employees pension, liquid fuels and worker compensation audits.
Serve as liaison to the Borough Solicitor.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 9/233
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
[1]
Administer the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment and services for all borough
departments.
Advise the Council of the financial condition of the borough operating funds.
Develop county, state and federal funding requests.
Oversee tax collection and swimming pool management.
Address citizens' correspondence and complaints.
Manage the borough insurance system.
Administer the borough office computer operations.
Maintain the borough filing system and personnel records.
Serve as Chief Executive Officer for the Police and Municipal Employees Pension Plans.
Administer personnel major medical and life insurance policies.
Recommend changes to personnel policies and the employee benefit package and serve as
the management representative in contract negotiations with police and public works.
Administer the employment of all new personnel.
Serve as Secretary to the Civil Service Commission.
Coordinate the borough's volunteer boards and commissions.
Assist in the preparation of all ordinances and resolutions and implements such after
enactment.
Maintain the Borough Code.
Advertise legal notices.
Attend the letting of contracts.
Perform such other duties as required by law or as directed by the Borough Council.
Article IV. Building Inspector
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 5-11. Creation of office.
There shall be an office of Building Inspector.
§ 5-12. Filling of office; term.
On the first Monday after January 1 in even-numbered years, the Borough Council shall appoint, by a
majority vote of the members present, a properly qualified person to serve as Building Inspector for a
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 10/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
term of two years or until his successor shall be duly appointed. He may be suspended or removed for
cause by the Council, but only after full opportunity has been given him to be heard on specific
charges.
§ 5-13. Qualifications.
No person shall be eligible for appointment as Building Inspector who cannot furnish evidence
satisfactory to the Council that he is generally informed on the quality and strength of building materials
and on the prevailing methods of building construction.
§ 5-14. General duties.
[Amended 3-31-1992 by Ord. No. C-343, approved 3-31-1992]
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector, and he is hereby given the power and authority, to serve
as the code official and enforce the provisions of Chapter 36, Building Construction, Chapter 50,
Electrical Standards, and Chapter 89, Plumbing. It shall also be the duty of the Building Inspector, and
he is hereby given the power and authority, to enforce the provisions of Chapter 69, Housing
Maintenance and Occupancy, and to enforce other borough ordinances as directed by the Borough
Council. For the purpose of enforcing compliance with the law, remedying or removing illegal or unsafe
conditions, securing the necessary safeguards during construction or requiring adequate exit facilities
in existing buildings or structures, he shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary.
§ 5-15. Specific duties.
Subject to recall at any time by Council, the powers and duties of the Building Inspector shall include
the following:
The Building Inspector shall receive and examine all applications and accompanying plans and
specifications required by the provisions of Chapter 36, Building Construction, Chapter 50,
Electrical Standards, Chapter 89, Plumbing, or any other ordinance enacted by the Borough
Council which shall require submission of an application to the Building Inspector. He shall
approve such applications as are in conformity with the requirements of the ordinance which
requires submission of plans to the Building Inspector and shall issue permits therefor. He shall
disapprove such applications as are not in conformity with the provisions of such ordinance and
refuse to issue permits therefor until such applications have been modified to conform to all
applicable standards and regulations.
[Amended 3-31-1992 by Ord. No. C-343, approved 3-31-1992]
The Building Inspector shall receive and examine all applications for certificates of occupancy and
issue such certificates where approved.
The Building Inspector shall inspect, at least once a year, all buildings other than single-family
dwellings to determine any changes in classification or occupancy or construction, to remedy
illegal or unsafe conditions or to require adequate exit facilities.
The Building Inspector shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are
complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely.
The Building Inspector shall keep careful and comprehensive records of applications, of permits
and certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered and of notices or orders issued.
He shall retain on file copies of all papers and plans in connection with building permits for a
period of not less than five years from the date of the issuance of the permit. All such records shall
be kept on file at the office of the Council. They shall be open to inspection during regular office
hours but shall not be removed from the office of the Council.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 11/233
F.
G.
H.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
[1]
[1]
The Building Inspector shall make a report to the Council once each month, or more often if
requested. Such report shall include statements of permits and certificates issued and orders
promulgated.
The Building Inspector shall recommend to the Borough Council any special rules or regulations
that shall, in his opinion, be necessary to define or carry out the intent and purpose of any portion
of this Article.
For the purpose of securing for the public the benefits of new developments in the building
industry and yet ensuring public safety, the Building Inspector may make, or cause to be made,
investigations or may accept duly authenticated reports from reliable sources of new materials or
modes of construction and recommend to the Borough Council rules or regulations setting forth
the conditions under which such materials or modes of construction may be used.
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 36, Building Construction; Ch. 69, Housing Maintenance and Occupancy;
and Ch. 122, Zoning, Art. XIII.
§ 5-16. Right of entry.
The Building Inspector, in the discharge of his duties, shall have authority to enter any building,
structure or premises at any reasonable hour.
§ 5-17. Supplementary rules.
Rules necessary to define or carry out the intent or purpose of this Article or to set forth conditions
under which new materials or methods of construction may be used may be recommended from
time to time by the Building Inspector to the Borough Council and shall become effective upon
approval by Council.
Rules adopted as herein provided shall have the same force and effect as provisions of this
Article.
Any rule may be amended or repealed by the same procedure provided for the adoption of new
rules.
§ 5-18. Appeals from decisions of Building Inspector.
[Amended 3-31-1992 by Ord. No. C-343, approved 3-31-1992]
All appeals from decisions of the Building Inspector shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
the ordinance which authorizes the Building Inspector to render the decision from which an appeal is to
be taken.
Article V. (Reserved)
Editor’s Note: Former Article V, Health and Sanitation Advisory Committee, adopted during codification
10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-216, approved 10-31-1978, was repealed 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. C-572.
Article VI. Police Department
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This Article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 12/233
[1]
[1]
[1]
§ 5-19. Establishment; chief executive.
A Police Department is hereby established in and for the Borough of Lititz. The Chief of Police shall be
the chief executive of the Police Department. He shall, under the direction of the Mayor, be in charge of
the police force and have supervision over its members in the exercise of their powers, duties and
authority.
§ 5-20. Number and compensation of patrolmen.
The Department shall also include such number of full-time and/or part-time patrolmen as shall be
determined by the Borough Council from time to time, and the compensation of members of the Police
Department shall also be as determined by the Borough Council from time to time.
§ 5-21. Special policemen.
Nothing herein contained shall affect the authority of the Mayor to appoint special policemen during
emergencies.[1]
Editor's Note: For intermunicipal police assistance in times of emergency, see Ch. 12, Intermunicipal
Assistance, Police.
Article VII. Planning Commission, Regional
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This Article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 5-22. Participation authorized.
The Borough of Lititz does join and associate in the creation of a Regional Planning Commission, to be
known as the "Lancaster Regional Planning Commission," in conformity with the Act of August 9, 1955,
P.L. 323, as now or hereafter amended.[1]
Editor's Note: See 16 P.S. § 2009.
§ 5-23. Borough Representative.
There is created the position of Official Representative of the Borough of Lititz on said Regional
Planning Commission, which position shall be filled from time to time by the Council, said Official
Representative to serve for a one-year term.
§ 5-24. Execution of agreement authorized.
The President of Council is authorized to execute the Articles of Agreement, in the form submitted to
the Council by the Organizational Committee for Regional Planning, and the Secretary is directed to
attest the signature and place the corporate seal hereon and forward a copy of this resolution to the
acting Secretary of the Regional Planning Commission.
§ 5-25. Granting of financial and contractual authority.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 13/233
The Lancaster Regional Planning Commission is authorized to receive and expend federal, state and
other funds from private and public sources and to contract with the United States, the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and other private and public agencies with respect thereto.
Article VIII. Recreation Board
[Adopted 7-6-1964 by Ord. No. C-38, approved 7-7-1964]
§ 5-26. Establishment; membership.
For the purpose of supervising and maintaining such recreation places as may be leased, acquired
and established by the Borough of Lititz, a Recreation Board is hereby established. Such Recreation
Board shall be composed of five members, of whom two shall be members or appointees of the
Warwick Union School Board. The members of the Recreation Board shall be appointed by the Council
of the Borough of Lititz and shall serve for terms of five years, except that members of such Board first
appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one member shall expire annually
thereafter. Members of the Board shall serve without pay. Both men and women shall be eligible for
appointment. Vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by Council in the
same manner as original appointments.
§ 5-27. Officers; authority and power.
The members of the Recreation Board shall elect their own Chairman and Secretary and select all
other necessary officers, to serve for a period of one year, and may employ such persons as may be
needed. The Recreation Board shall possess all the authority invested in Borough Recreation Boards
by law. Such Board shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of all business
within its jurisdiction, subject, however, to the approval of the Council.
§ 5-28. Limitations.
The Recreation Board shall have no power to pledge the credit of the Borough of Lititz nor make any
contracts, agreements or commitments whatsoever which may be binding upon the Borough of Lititz,
unless previously approved by the Borough Council.
Article IX. Auditor, Independent
[Adopted 12-28-1976 by Ord. No. C-196, approved 12-28-1976]
§ 5-29. Auditor appointed to examine borough records.
There shall hereafter be appointed, annually, by resolution of the Borough Council before the close of
each fiscal year, an independent auditor to make an independent examination of the accounting
records of the borough for such fiscal year.
§ 5-30. Qualifications.
Such independent auditor shall be a certified public accountant registered in Pennsylvania, a firm of
certified public accountants so registered, a competent public accountant or a competent firm of public
accountants.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 14/233
[1]
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
§ 5-31. Powers and duties.
Such independent auditor shall perform the duties and exercise the powers set forth in Subdivision (k)
of Article XI of The Borough Code, Act 581 of 1965 (approved February 1, 1966), as amended.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46196. Original Section IV of Ord. No. C-196 which immediately followed
this section, adopted and approved 12-28-1976, abolishing the office of elected Borough Auditor, was
deleted during codification.
Article X. Commission of Tax Collector
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961;[1] amended in its entirely 2-22-1977 by Ord. No. C-198,
approved 2-22-1977]
Editor's Note: This Article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 5-32. Compensation established.
The compensation for the office of elected Tax Collector in the Borough of Lititz shall be 1% of all real
estate and per capita taxes[1] collected for and on behalf of said borough until December 31, 1977.
Beginning January 1, 1978, the compensation for the office of elected Tax Collector in the Borough of
Lititz shall be 1% of all real estate and per capita taxes collected for and on behalf of said borough
during the discount period [that is, within two months after the date of the tax notice] and also during
the face period [that is, during the two months following the end of the discount period] and shall be 2%
of all real estate and per capita taxes collected for and on behalf of said borough during the penalty
period [that is, on all taxes not paid within four months after the date of the tax notice].
Editor's Note: See Ch. 110, Taxation.
Article XI. Flood Control Advisory Committee
[Adopted 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. C-332, approved 7-10-1990]
§ 5-33. Title.
This Article shall be referred to as the "Flood Control Advisory Committee Ordinance of the Borough of
Lititz."
§ 5-34. Creation; membership; compensation.
The Flood Control Advisory Committee is hereby created, which Committee shall have seven
members, who shall serve without compensation.
§ 5-35. Appointment; term; vacancy; residency requirement.
All members of the Committee shall be appointed by the Council of the Borough of Lititz without
any limitation upon the number of terms a member may serve.
All members of the Committee shall serve for terms of five years; provided, however, that the
terms of the initial members of the Committee shall be appointed and so fixed that no more than
one member shall be reappointed or replaced during any calendar year. The Chairman of the
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 15/233
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
Committee shall promptly notify the Council concerning a vacancy or vacancies in the Committee.
Whenever vacancies occur other than as a result of the expiration of a member's term, the Council
shall fill such vacancy by appointment for the period of the unexpired term.
All members of the Committee shall be residents of the Borough of Lititz or owners or employees
of businesses located within the Borough of Lititz.
§ 5-36. Conduct of business.
The Flood Control Advisory Committee may adopt such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary to govern its procedures consistent with this Article and the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
The Committee shall elect its own Chairman and Vice Chairman and create and fill such other
offices as it may determine. Officers shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves.
The Committee shall keep a full record of its business in the form of official minutes.
The Committee shall make a written report of its activities annually to the Council by March 1 of
each calendar year. In addition, interim reports shall be made as often as may be deemed
necessary by the Council.
§ 5-37. Powers, duties and responsibilities.
The Flood Control Advisory Committee shall have the powers, duties and responsibilities as
follows:
To perform periodic inspections of flood areas within the borough and recommend flood
control projects to the Council to minimize or control flood problems or the improvement of
flood-prone areas.
To perform periodic inspections of existing storm sewers within the borough and recommend
flood control projects for stormwater management.
To administer, with the aid of engineering and appropriate borough officials, those flood
control projects approved by the Borough Council for flood control and stormwater
management.
To serve as liaison between the Borough Engineer and the Borough Council for work
associated with flood control projects approved by the Borough Council for flood control and
stormwater management.
To serve as a liaison between officials of contiguous municipalities and the Borough Council
when flood control projects approved by the Borough Council have an effect upon flood
control and stormwater management in such other municipalities.
To hold public hearings and other meetings which are deemed desirable for the interest of the
residents of the Borough of Lititz concerning flood control matters.
To undertake, at the request of the Council, the specific site inspection of locations of flood
problems and report to the Council concerning its findings and any recommendations
concerning appropriate remedial action.
To request from other departments and agencies of the Borough of Lititz all information
available which relates to the work of the Committee.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 16/233
(9)
(10)
B.
A.
B.
To be subject to the approval of the Borough Engineer concerning any act or recommendation
which involves engineering considerations.
To be responsible to the Council and the administration for the review and recommendation of
all matters presented to the Council and the administration concerning flood control matters.
In the performance of its functions, the Committee may enter upon any land to make examinations
and surveys with the consent of the owner of such land.
§ 5-38. Expenditure and receipt of funds.
The Flood Control Advisory Committee may employ administrative and technical services as
consultants on particular matters which will aid in carrying out the provisions of this Article,
provided that the same has been authorized by Council.
The Committee may, with the consent of the Council, accept and utilize any funds made available
by the federal government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the County of Lancaster or any
other funds granted by individuals or private agencies for the development or enhancement of
facilities or services relating to flood control which are deemed in the best interest of the residents
of the Borough of Lititz. The Council may enter into agreements or contracts regarding the
acceptance or utilization of funds or assistance as it deems necessary and advisable.
Chapter 7. Civil Service Commission Rules and
Regulations
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 12-18-2012 by Res. No. 12-18-2012,
approved 12-18-2012.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Shared regional emergency services — See Ch. 10, Art. V.
Intermunicipal police assistance — See Ch. 12.
Pensions and employee benefits — See Ch. 16.
Article I. Definition of Terms
§ 7-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases, wherever used in these rules and
regulations, shall be construed to have the meanings indicated herein:
APPLICANT
Any individual who applies in writing to the Commission in response to a legally advertised notice
of vacancy and/or examination for any position in the Borough of Lititz Police Department.
APPLICANT WITH ACT 120 TRAINING
Any individual who applies in writing to the Commission in response to a legally advertised notice
of vacancy and/or examination for any position in the Borough of Lititz Police Department who has
successfully completed training under Pennsylvania Act 120 with satisfactory test scores.
ASSOCIATION
The Lancaster County Chiefs of Police Association, Inc.
BOROUGH
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 17/233
A.
The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH SECRETARY
The Secretary of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania.
CERTIFICATION
The submission to the municipal governing body of names taken from the eligible list.
CHAIRPERSON
The Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania.
COMMISSION
The Civil Service Commission of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania.
ELIGIBLE
A person whose name is recorded on a current eligible list or furlough list.
ELIGIBLE LIST
A list of names of persons who have passed an examination for a particular position in the Police
Department.
EXAMINATION
The series of tests given to applicants to determine their qualifications for a position in the
Borough of Lititz Police Department.
FURLOUGH LIST
The list containing the names of persons temporarily laid off from positions in the Police
Department because of a reduction in the number of officers.
MEDICAL EXAMINATION
Any examination, procedure, inquiry or test designed to obtain information about medical history
or a physical or mental condition which might disqualify an applicant if it would prevent the
applicant from performing, with or without a reasonable accommodation, all of the essential
functions of the position.
MUNICIPAL GOVERNING BODY
The Council of the Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
PHYSICIAN
Shall have the meaning given to it in 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1991 (relating to definitions).
POLICE OFFICER
For purposes of these rules and regulations, an entry-level sworn full-time position in the Borough
of Lititz Police Department.
PROBATIONER
An officer in the Police Department who has been appointed from an eligible list but who has not
yet completed his or her probationary period.
QUALIFIED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL
An individual in collaboration with or under the supervision or direction of a physician, as may be
required by law, who is licensed:
As a physician assistant pursuant to the Act of December 20, 1985 (P. L. 457, No. 112),
known as the "Medical Practice Act of 1985,"[1] or the Act of October 5, 1978 (P. L. 1109, No.
261), known as the "Osteopathic Medical Practice Act";[2] or
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 18/233
B.
[1]
[2]
[3]
A.
B.
C.
D.
As a certified registered nurse practitioner pursuant to the Act of May 22, 1951 (P. L. 317, No.
69), known as "the Professional Nursing Law."[3]
REDUCTION IN RANK
A change to a different position or rank which results in a decrease in salary; provided, however,
that a decrease in salary without a change to a different position or rank shall not necessarily
constitute a reduction in rank.
REMOVAL
The permanent separation of a police officer from the Police Department.
SECRETARY
The Secretary of the Civil Service Commission of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania.
SUSPENSION
The temporary separation of a member of the Police Department from his or her position.
Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 422.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 271.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 211 et seq.
§ 7-2. Gender.
The words "he," "his," "him" and "men," when used in these rules and regulations, represent both the
masculine and feminine genders.
Article II. The Commission
§ 7-3. Civil Service Commission.
The Commission shall consist of three Commissioners who shall be qualified electors of the
Borough of Lititz and shall be appointed by the municipal governing body initially to serve for the
term of two, four and six years, and as terms thereafter expire shall be appointed for terms of six
years.
Any vacancy occurring in the Commission for any reason whatsoever shall be filled by the
municipal governing body for the unexpired term within a period of 30 days after such vacancy
occurs.
Each member of the Commission, before entering upon the discharge of the duties of their office,
shall take an oath or affirmation to support the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to perform their official duties with fidelity.
No Civil Service Commissioner shall receive compensation.
Borough Council may appoint no more than three qualified electors of the Borough to serve as
alternate members of the Commission. The term of office of the alternate members shall be six
years. When seated pursuant to § 7-5 hereof, an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all
proceedings and discussions of the Commission to the same and full extent as provided by law for
Commission members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting member during the
proceedings, and shall have all of the powers and duties set forth in this chapter and as otherwise
provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other office in the Borough. An alternate may participate
in any proceeding or discussion of the Commission but shall not be entitled to vote as a member
of the Commission unless designated as a voting alternate member pursuant to § 7-5.
§ 7-4. Offices incompatible with Civil Service Commissioner.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 19/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
No Commissioner shall at the same time hold an elective or appointed office under the United States
government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any political subdivision of the commonwealth,
except that one member of the Commission may be a member of the Council of the Borough and one
may be a member of the teaching profession in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any political
subdivision thereof.
§ 7-5. Organization of Commission; quorum.
The Commission first appointed shall organize within 10 days of its appointment and shall elect one of
its members as its Chairperson, one as its Vice Chairperson, and one as the Secretary. The
Commission shall thereafter meet and organize on the first Monday of each even-numbered year.
Each Commissioner shall be notified in writing of each and every meeting. Three members of the
Commission shall constitute a quorum. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a
quorum is not reached, the Chair shall designate as many alternate members of the Commission to sit
on the Commission as may be needed to provide a quorum. An alternate member of the Commission
shall continue to serve on the Commission in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the
alternate was initially designated until the Commission has made a final determination of the matter or
case. Designation of an alternate member pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case
basis in rotation according to declining seniority among the alternates. No action of the Commission
shall be valid unless it shall have the concurrence of at least two members.
§ 7-6. Duties of Chairperson.
The Chairperson, or in his/her absence, the Vice Chairperson, shall preside at all meetings and
hearings of the Commission, decide all points of order or procedure and perform any duties required
by law or these rules.
§ 7-7. Duties of Secretary.
The Secretary shall, at the direction of the Commission, see to it that all official correspondence of the
Commission is done and all notices required by law and these rules of procedure are sent out, keep a
record of each examination or other official action of the Commission, and perform all other duties
required by law, by these rules and by the Commission.
§ 7-8. Meetings.
Except for the biennial organization meeting, all meetings shall be held either at the call of the
Chairperson or at the call of two members of the Commission. At least 24 hours' written notice of each
meeting shall be given each member. The Commission shall have the discretion to determine whether
meetings shall be open to the public when not specifically regulated by existing law.
§ 7-9. Meeting agenda.
Regular meetings of the Commission shall be as follows:
Roll call.
Approval of minutes of previous meeting.
Unfinished business.
Hearing of cases.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 20/233
E.
F.
[1]
A.
B.
New business.
Communications and reports.
§ 7-10. Minutes and records.
The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and records of examinations and other
official actions. All records of the Commission shall be preserved and disposed of according to the
Retention and Disposition Schedule for Records of Pennsylvania Municipalities issued by the
Local Government Records Committee under the authority of the Municipal Records Act, 1968,
P.L. 961, No. 428, 53 P.S. § 9001.[1] All recommendations of applicants for appointment received
by the Commission shall be kept and preserved for a period of five years.
Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 9001 was repealed 12-19-1996 by P.L. 1158, No. 177. For current
provisions, see 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 1381 et seq.
Any and all records related to any disciplinary action filed with the Commission shall be open to
public inspection, subject to reasonable regulation. The Secretary shall keep minutes of the
Commission's proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question. If a member is
absent or fails to vote, the Secretary shall indicate that fact in the minutes. All recommendations of
applicants for appointment received by the Commission shall be kept and preserved for a period
of five years, and all records and all written causes of removal filed with the Commission, except
as otherwise provided in § 7-57, shall be open to public inspection and subject to reasonable
regulation.
§ 7-11. Clerks and supplies, etc.; Solicitor.
The municipal governing body shall furnish to the Commission on its requisition clerical assistance that
may be necessary for the Commission. The municipal governing body shall provide a suitable and
convenient room for the use of the Commission. The Commission shall order from the municipal
governing body as necessary stationery, postage, printing and supplies. The municipal governing body
shall also provide the services of a Solicitor for the Commission, to be appointed by the Commission
and paid by the municipal governing body. The municipal governing body shall have the authority to
place a reasonable limit on the amount allowed each year for the services of the Commission Solicitor.
The elected and appointed officials of every borough shall aid the Commission in all proper ways in
carrying out the provisions of this chapter relating to civil service.
§ 7-12. Amendment and enforcement of rules and regulations.
The Commission shall have power to prescribe, amend and enforce rules and regulations for carrying
into effect the provisions of this chapter and shall be governed thereby. Before the effective date of the
rules and regulations, or amendments thereto, the same shall be first approved by the municipal
governing body. When the rules and regulations, or amendments, have been approved, they shall not
be annulled, amended, or added to without the approval of Council. All rules and modifications shall be
made available by the municipal governing body for public distribution or inspection.
§ 7-13. Investigations.
The Commission shall have the power to make investigations concerning all matters relating to the
administration and enforcement of these rules and regulations. The Chairperson of the Commission is
authorized to administer oaths and affirmations in connection with such investigations.
§ 7-14. Subpoenas.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 21/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
The Commission shall have the power to issue subpoenas over the signature of the Chairperson,
or designee, to acquire and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of records and
papers pertaining to any investigation or inquiry. The fees of such witnesses for attendance and
travel shall be the same as for witnesses appearing in the courts and shall be paid from
appropriations for the incidental expenses of the Commission.
All officers and public service employees of the Borough of Lititz shall attend and testify when
required to do so by the Commission.
If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena issued by the Commission, upon
conviction of such refusal or neglect in a summary proceeding, that person shall be sentenced to
pay a fine not to exceed $100 and in default of the payment of such fine and costs shall be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days.
If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena, the Commission may apply by petition
to the Court of Common Pleas of Lancaster County for its subpoena, requiring the attendance of
such persons before the Commission or the court to testify and to produce any records and
papers necessary, and in default thereof shall be held in contempt of court.
§ 7-15. Annual report.
The Commission shall make an annual report to the municipal governing body containing a brief
summary of its work during the year and a full accounting for any expenditures of public monies. The
annual report shall be available for public inspection.
Article III. Applications and Qualifications
§ 7-16. Advertisements for vacant positions.
In seeking applicants for positions within its Police Department, the Borough of Lititz may advertise for
applicants or may limit its search and advertising to applicants with Act 120 training, at the sole
discretion of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 7-17. General provisions relating to examinations.
The Commission shall make rules and regulations, to be approved as provided in § 7-12,
providing for the examination of applicants for positions in the police force and for promotions,
which rules and regulations shall prescribe the minimum qualifications of all applicants to be
examined and the passing grades. All examinations for positions or promotions shall be practical
in character and shall relate to matters and include inquiries as will fairly test the merit and fitness
of the persons examined to discharge the duties of the employment sought by them. All
examinations shall be open to all applicants who have the minimum qualifications required by the
rules and regulations. Each applicant for an original position shall:
Be subject to the regulations adopted by the Commission;
Either before or after the written examination, be required to submit to a physical fitness or
agility examination that is job-related and consistent with business necessity;
If made a conditional offer of employment, be given a physical and psychological medical
examination as provided in § 7-33; and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 22/233
(4)
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
Be subject to a background investigation. Background investigations may be restricted to
those candidates on an eligibility list or those to be certified to Borough Council for
appointment.
Each applicant for promotion shall be subject to the regulations adopted by the Commission and
to examination and selection in accordance with these rules and regulations. Physical fitness or
agility examinations that are job-related and consistent with business necessity and physical and
psychological medical examinations may, but need not, be required for promotions.
Public notice of the time and place of every examination, together with the information as to the
kind of position or place to be filled, shall be given by publication once in a newspaper of general
circulation, at least two weeks prior to each examination, and a copy of the notice shall be
prominently posted in the office of the Commission or other public place.
The Commission shall post in its office the eligibility list, containing the names and grades of those
who have passed the examination.
§ 7-18. Eligibility for examination.
Each person desiring to apply for examination shall file with the Commission a formal application
in which the applicant shall state under oath or affirmation:
His full name and residence or post office address;
His citizenship, place and date of birth;
His condition of health and physical capacity for public services;
His business or employment and his residence for the past five years;
In cases where the municipal governing body has advertised for applicants with Act 120
training, proof that such training has been satisfactorily completed;
Other information as may be required by the Commission's rules and regulations, showing the
applicant's qualifications for the position for which the applicant is being examined.
The applicant must make an oath or affirmation that the application is completely truthful, and the
applicant is subject to the penalties of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904 relating to unsworn falsification to
authorities. The application shall be substantially in the same form as that attached hereto and
incorporated herein as Exhibit A.
The application shall contain no falsification, omission or concealment of material fact. Should any
investigation of the Commission disclose any willful misstatement, falsification or concealment with
respect to an application:
The application shall be invalid and the application applicant shall be disqualified from
examination; or
If the applicant shall have been examined and certified as eligible, the name of such applicant
shall be removed from the eligibility list; or
If the applicant shall have been appointed to a position within the Borough of Lititz Police
Department, such willful misstatement, falsification or concealment shall constitute grounds
for dismissal from the Borough of Lititz Police Department. Further, no person who shall make
any willful false application shall be permitted to make future application for any position in the
Police Department of the Borough of Lititz.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 23/233
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
§ 7-19. Discrimination.
The Borough of Lititz is an equal opportunity employer. It is the Borough of Lititz's and the
Commission's policy to grant equal employment opportunities to qualified persons without regard
to race, religion, color, national origin, gender, age, veteran status, marital status or disability. The
Borough of Lititz and the Commission will provide equal opportunities in employment and
promotion.
No question in any form of application for examination or in any examination shall be so framed as
to elicit information concerning the political or religious opinions or affiliations of any applicant, nor
shall inquiry be made concerning the opinion or affiliations, and all disclosures of opinion or
affiliation shall be ignored.
No discrimination shall be exercised, threatened or promised by any person against or in favor of
any applicant or employee because of the political or religious opinions or affiliations or race, and
no offer or promise or reward, favor or benefit, directly or indirectly, shall be made to or received
by any person for any act done or duty omitted or to be done under this chapter.
§ 7-20. Filing applications.
Applications for positions in the Police Department may be received only at the times designated by
the Civil Service Commission when available positions in the Police Department exist. They can be
obtained during normal business hours in the office of the Municipal Secretary and by such other
offices and officers as the Commission may designate. The receipt of such applications shall be
subject to the following conditions:
No application received after 12:00 noon on any day that is 14 calendar days prior to the date
fixed for the written examination in the public announcement shall be considered for such
examination; and
An application shall become invalid one year after the date upon which it was received.
§ 7-21. Age requirements.
All applicants for the position of police officer must be no less than 18 years of age before the deadline
for submitting completed applications. Each applicant shall present satisfactory evidence of date of
birth, if requested.
§ 7-22. General qualifications - all applicants.
Every applicant for any position in the Borough of Lititz Police Department shall possess a diploma
from an accredited high school or graduate equivalency diploma. In addition, every applicant must be a
United States citizen, be of good moral character, be physically and mentally fit to perform the full
duties of a police officer, and, prior to appointment, possess a valid motor vehicle operator's license
issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 7-23. General qualifications - applicants for promotion.
Promotions shall be based on merit to be ascertained by examinations to be prescribed by the
Commission. All questions relative to promotions shall be practical in character and will fairly test
the merit and fitness of persons seeking promotion. The municipal governing body shall notify the
Commission of a vacancy in the police force in the Borough which is to be filled by promotion and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 24/233
B.
C.
shall request the certification of an eligibility list. The Commission shall certify for each vacancy
the names of three persons on the eligibility list who have received the highest average in the last
preceding promotional examination held within a period of two years preceding the date of the
request for the eligibility list. If three names are not available, the Commission shall certify the
names remaining on the eligibility list. The municipal governing body shall make an appointment
from the names certified, based solely on the merits and fitness of the candidate, unless the
Council makes objections to the Commission regarding one or more of the persons so certified for
any reason provided under § 7-24 of these rules and regulations. If the Commission sustains an
objection, the provisions of § 7-26 shall be applicable. The municipal governing body shall have
the power to determine in each instance whether an increase in salary shall constitute a
promotion.
In addition to meeting the qualifications in § 7-23A above, all applicants for a promotional position
(a promotion) shall not have been suspended without pay for more than five days in the three
years prior to the deadline for submitting applications. Any suspension which the applicant has
timely appealed pursuant to a contractual grievance procedure shall be disregarded unless the
appeal is resolved prior to the creation of the eligibility list.
In addition to meeting the qualifications fixed for each applicant for a position in the Police
Department, all applicants for the position of Sergeant and Lieutenant shall have been
continuously employed in a municipal police service for at least five years on the date of
application in the case of Sergeant and at least seven years for all other officers, and completed
their one-year probationary period in the Borough Police Department.
§ 7-24. Rejection of applicant.
The Commission may refuse to examine, or if examined, may refuse certify as eligible after
examination, any applicant who is found to lack any of the minimum qualifications for examination
prescribed in these rules and regulations for the particular position for which the applicant has applied.
In addition, the Commission may refuse to examine, or if examined, may refuse to certify, any applicant
who is physically unfit for the performance of the duties of the position applied for, or who is illegally
using a controlled substance, as defined in Section 201 of the Controlled Substances Act (Public Law
91-513, 21 U.S.C. § 802), or who has been guilty of any crime involving moral turpitude, or of infamous
or notoriously disgraceful conduct, or who has been dismissed from public service for delinquency or
misconduct in office, or who is affiliated with any group whose policies or activities are subversive to
the forms of government set forth in the Constitutions and laws of the United States of America and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 7-25. Recording applications.
Applications will be received by the Municipal Secretary, who shall be designated to receive such
applications in the public advertisement. Applications may also be received by the Municipal
Secretary's official designee. The Municipal Secretary, or the Municipal Secretary's official designee,
shall record the receipt of all applications and provide the applicant with notice of the time and place for
the first portion of the testing procedure, the written examination. Any application containing material
errors or omissions may, at the discretion of the Commission, be returned to the applicant for
correction prior to the deadline for filing applications, after which no new applications or amended
applications will be accepted.
§ 7-26. Hearing for disqualified applicant.
If any applicant or person is aggrieved by refusal of the Commission to certify the applicant as eligible
after examination, or a person is aggrieved by refusal of the Commission to examine the person, the
Commission shall, at the request of the applicant or person aggrieved, within 10 days, appoint a time
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 25/233
A.
B.
C.
and place for a public hearing. At the hearing, the applicant or person aggrieved may appear with or
without counsel, and the Commission shall take testimony and review its refusal to provide
examination or certification. The deliberations of the Commission, including interim rulings on
evidentiary or procedural issues, may be held in the nature of a closed executive session. The
Commission's disposition of the matter shall constitute official action which shall occur at a public
meeting held pursuant to 65 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 7 (relating to open meetings). The decision of the
Commission shall be final.
§ 7-27. Public notice.
The Commission shall conspicuously post in the Borough Municipal Building an announcement of the
hiring or promotional testing and set forth the time and place of every examination, together with the
information as to the type of position to be filled, the requirements for that position, where applications
may be obtained, and the deadline for filing those applications. In addition, at least two weeks prior to
the close of the application, publication of the notice shall occur in at least one newspaper of general
circulation or a newspaper circulating generally in the Borough of Lititz.
§ 7-28. Investigation of applicant.
A background investigation of the character and reputation of the applicant may be made by the
Commission or its agent and may include *credit reports and reports of investigations from recognized
agencies. *Credit reports are not sufficient to disqualify an applicant. If information from credit reports
or criminal record investigations forms a part of the basis for disqualification of an applicant, the
applicant will be so notified.
Article IV. Announcement of Examinations
§ 7-29. Public notice.
Public notice of the time and place of the examination, together with information as to the position(s) to
be filled, shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. The
public notice shall be published at least two weeks prior to an examination, and a copy of the notice
shall be posted in the Municipal Building. Additional public notice by publication, posting or otherwise
may be given at any time at the discretion of the Commission.
§ 7-30. Notice of oral examination.
In addition to the public announcement of the examination, the Borough Secretary shall give written
notice to each applicant deemed eligible after successfully completing the written examination as
follows:
By mailing or otherwise delivering to each applicant who has scored among the top in the written
examination the date, time, and place of the interview.
The maximum number selected to be interviewed shall be determined by multiplying the number
of vacancies by six. Those selected will include the applicants scoring at the top of the written
examination plus others who have Act 120 certification and a passing score.
Each notice shall be mailed or otherwise delivered at least five days prior to the date fixed for the
interview.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 26/233
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
Failure to report for the oral interview in accordance with the written instructions shall disqualify
the applicant.
Article V. Medical, Psychological, and Polygraph
Examinations
§ 7-31. Medical and psychological examinations.
An applicant selected from the eligibility list shall receive a conditional offer of employment. The
offer of employment shall be conditioned upon the conditional appointee undergoing a physical
and psychological medical examination and a determination that the conditional appointee is
capable of performing all of the essential functions of the position. Physical medical examinations
shall be under the direction of a physician or other qualified medical professional. Psychological
medical examinations shall be under the direction of a psychiatrist or psychologist.
The physician or other qualified medical professional and the psychiatrist or psychologist shall be
appointed by the municipal governing body and shall render an opinion as to whether the
conditional appointee has a physical or mental condition which calls into question the person's
ability to perform all of the essential functions of the position for which the person was
conditionally appointed.
If the opinion rendered by the physician, other qualified medical professional, psychiatrist or
psychologist calls into question the conditional appointee's ability to perform all essential functions
of a position, a person designated by the municipal governing body shall meet with the conditional
appointee for the purpose of having one or more interactive discussions on whether the
conditional appointee can, with or without reasonable accommodation, perform all of the essential
functions of the position.
If, at the conclusion of the interactive discussion under Subsection C, the municipal governing
body determines that the conditional appointee does not qualify, the municipal governing body
shall give written notice to the conditional appointee and the Commission.
There shall be no physical or psychological medical examination prior to conditional appointment.
§ 7-32. Polygraph examinations.
Polygraph examinations will be completed on the individual or individuals being extended an offer of
employment by the municipal governing body.
Article VI. Examination Elements
§ 7-33. Examination for police positions.
The examination for the position of police officer shall consist of the following parts:
Step Element Passing Score Points
1 Application P/F ---
2 Written examination 70% 4-20
3 Oral interview 80
4 Background investigation P/F ---
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 27/233
B.
C.
A.
B.
Step Element Passing Score Points
_____
100
The number of points an applicant can receive on the written examination is based on the
following scale:
Score of 100 - 96 = 20 points
Score of 95 - 91 = 18 points
Score of 90 - 86 = 16 points
Score of 85 - 81 = 12 points
Score of 80 - 76 = 8 points
Score of 75 - 70 = 4 points
The examination for promotion to the positions of Sergeant and Lieutenant shall consist of the
following parts:
Step Element Passing Score Points
1 Performance rating --- 35
2 Written examination 70% 30
3 Oral interview --- 35
_____
100
§ 7-34. Passing grade.
The minimum passing grade for the written examination for the position of police officer, Sergeant
or Lieutenant shall be a score of 70%. Any candidate receiving a deficiency in a subtest of the
written examination must have Act 120 certification.
Every applicant for the position of police officer who receives a passing score on the written
examination and who is entitled by law to an additional 10 points' credit for service in the Armed
Forces of the United States shall have his or her written examination score adjusted accordingly
by 10 points. Applicants claiming veteran's preference shall submit additional satisfactory proof of
active service and honorable discharge whenever the Commission shall so demand.
§ 7-35. Notice of applicant's grade.
When the grading of the written examination is completed, the grades shall be filed in the office of the
Municipal Secretary. A list of names and scores of those who passed the examination shall be posted
at the Municipal Building.
§ 7-36. Ineligibility for future examinations for six months.
If an applicant fails to obtain a passing grade on the written examination, he or she shall not be eligible
for a subsequent examination for any position in the Police Department of the municipality for a period
of six months.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 28/233
§ 7-37. Administering examinations.
The Commission may designate the individual responsible as the examiner for the written examination.
The oral interview and evaluation of the service or performance record of any applicant shall be the
responsibility of the Commission; provided, however, that the Commission may designate, from time to
time, such persons qualified in oral examining procedures and techniques, or qualified to evaluate
performance or service records, as are considered necessary to assist in such examinations and
evaluations.
§ 7-38. Conduct of written examinations.
The Commission shall prepare a statement of instructions and rules for the conduct of written
examinations. The regularly appointed examiner shall administer each examination in accordance with
the instructions of the Commission and be responsible for enforcing the rules of conduct for written
examinations.
§ 7-39. Delegation of authority.
As an alternative to the examination and grading procedures set forth in Article VI, the Borough of Lititz
may delegate to the Lancaster County Chiefs of Police Association, Inc., the tasks of recruiting,
advertising, testing of applicants and/or applicants with Act 120 training and certification of the eligibility
list to the Borough of Lititz. This delegation will take place in accordance with a memorandum of
understanding of June 16, 2010, between the Lancaster County Chiefs of Police Association, Inc., and
member agencies.
§ 7-40. Penalty for improper conduct.
Should an applicant be found guilty of any act tending to defeat the proper conduct or the result of any
examination, his or her name shall be removed from the eligible list resulting from the examination, and
the applicant shall not be permitted to make future application for any position in the Police
Department.
Article VII. Eligible Lists
§ 7-41. Creation of eligible list.
At the completion of the examination requirements set forth in Article VI hereof (written examination,
oral examination, background investigation, physical fitness test and polygraph examination), the
Commission shall rank all passing applicants on a list, with the applicant receiving the highest score at
the top of the list and the applicant receiving the lowest passing score at the bottom of the list.
Applicants who qualify for veterans' preference points shall have those points added to their passing
score prior to being ranked on the eligibility list testing process, including any physical agility or other
examination, with the exception of any background investigation to be conducted after the
establishment of an eligibility list and physical and psychological medical examination pursuant to § 7-
33. The Commission shall rank the candidates who have satisfied the minimum requirements for
appointment on an eligibility list. The eligibility list shall contain the names of individuals eligible for
appointment listed from highest to lowest based on their scores on the examinations administered by
the Commission and any points for which the applicant was entitled by virtue of 51 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 71,
relating to veterans' preference.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 29/233
§ 7-42. Filing of eligibility list.
As soon as possible after the completion of the ranking process, the eligible list shall be filed in the
office of the Municipal Secretary and copy posted at the Municipal Building. The names on the eligible
list shall be arranged, from highest to lowest, in the order of the final score received by each eligible
applicant.
§ 7-43. Promotional requirements.
For positions of promotion, fulfilling the performance requirements set forth in § 7-23 is also required.
§ 7-44. Breaking tie scores.
When two or more eligible applicants shall receive the same final score, the order in which the names
of such persons shall appear on the eligible list shall be determined by their respective scores on that
part of the examination assigned the greatest weight. In the event that two or more qualifying
applicants also receive identical scores on that part of the examination assigned the greatest weight,
the order of the listing shall be determined by the order in which the applications were numbered for
recording purposes.
§ 7-45. Life of eligible lists.
The eligibility list will be valid for one year from the date the Commission formally adopts the eligibility
list. Prior to the expiration of the one-year period, the Commission may extend the validity of the
eligibility list for up to an additional 12 months by a majority vote of the Commission at a duly
authorized Commission meeting. In the absence of a lawful extension by the Commission, the list shall
expire.
§ 7-46. Furlough lists.
Whenever the municipal governing body shall determine the need for a reduction in the number of
police officers, the Commission shall prepare and maintain a list of the names of all such furloughed
officers, together with the position held by each such officer at the time of furlough. The names on the
furlough list shall be arranged in priority order based on the length of service of each furloughed officer.
Article VIII. Certification and Appointments
§ 7-47. Filling vacancies.
When a vacancy is to be filled in the Police Department, the municipal governing body shall submit a
written request to the Commission for certification of eligibles. In making the request, the title of the
position to be filled shall be specified.
§ 7-48. Furlough list to fill appointments.
Upon receipt of a request from the municipal governing body, the Commission shall first certify the
names of those eligible who were furloughed because of a reduction in force. In filling a vacancy from
the furlough list, the Commission shall certify the top name only. If more than one vacancy is to be
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 30/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
filled, the Commission shall certify from the top of the list a number of names equal to the number of
vacancies to be filled. No examination, other than a physical examination as directed by the Civil
Service Commission, shall be required in any case of reappointment or reinstatement.
§ 7-49. Certification from eligible lists.
If no furlough list exists or if the total number of vacancies cannot be filled from the available names on
the furlough list, the Commission shall certify for each vacancy from the eligibility list the names of
three persons, or a lesser number where three are not available, who have received the highest
average. The municipal governing body shall make a conditional appointment from the three names
certified, based solely on the merits and fitness of the candidates, unless Borough Council makes
objection to the Commission regarding one or more of the certified persons for any of the reasons
stated in § 7-24. Should the objections be sustained by the Commission, or if the conditional appointee
is determined to be unqualified in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 7-26, the Commission
shall strike the name of the person from the eligibility list and certify the next-highest name for each
name stricken from the eligibility list. As each subsequent vacancy occurs in the same or another
position, precisely the same procedure shall be followed. The number of available eligibles certified
from the eligible list shall exceed by two for each vacancy to be filled from such eligible list. If there are
fewer than three available eligibles on the eligible list, the municipal governing body may make a
selection from such lesser number of available eligibles or may request that the Commission hold
another examination.
§ 7-50. Removal of names from furlough and eligible lists.
In addition to the other reasons stated as grounds for removal in these rules, the name of any
person appearing on a furlough list or an eligible list shall be removed by the Commission if such
person:
Is appointed to a position in the Police Department; or
Declines an appointment to a permanent position in the Police Department; or
Fails to make written reply to the Commission seven calendar days from the date of mailing of
a notice of certification; or
Indicates availability for appointment and is appointed to fill a vacancy but fails to report for
duty at the time prescribed, unless, in the opinion of the municipal governing body, such
person can show good and sufficient reasons for failure to report.
The name of any person on an eligible list also shall be removed by the Commission if certified for
appointment consideration three times as the top name and he/she is not appointed. Nothing in
this section, however, shall be construed as authorizing the removal of the name of a person from
a furlough list or eligible list who refuses or accepts a position of a lower rank than that from which
furloughed or for which eligible on a Commission list.
§ 7-51. Appointment procedures.
Whenever the name of a person is certified from either the furlough list or the eligible list, the person
shall be notified immediately of such certification. The notice shall include the title of the position and
the compensation to be paid and shall request a written reply within seven days from the date of
mailing.
§ 7-52. Probationary period.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 31/233
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
All initial appointments to positions in the Police Department shall be for a probationary period of one
year from the date of appointment. During the probationary period, an appointee may be dismissed
only for a cause specified in § 7-54 or because of incapacity for duty due to the use of alcohol or drugs.
The Chief of Police shall review the adjustment, performance and general acceptability of each
probationer quarterly to determine whether such probationer is fully qualified for permanent
appointment. The Chief of Police shall make a report to the municipal governing body recommending
termination of employment of a police officer found not to be acceptable in his or her position and/or
shall submit a final probationary report, not less than 10 nor more than 15 calendar days before the
next regular meeting of the municipal governing body immediately preceding the end of the
probationary period. Each final probationary report shall include the recommendation of the Chief of
Police to retain the probationer. Each report shall be submitted in writing to the municipal governing
body. Within five calendar days after receiving a probationary report from the Chief of Police
recommending retention or rejection of a probationer, the municipal governing body shall notify the
Commission, in writing, of its decision to retain or remove the probationer. The Commission, in turn,
shall notify the probationer of such decision within five calendar days and in no event beyond the last
day of the probationary period.
§ 7-53. Appointment of Chief of Police.
In the case of a vacancy in the office of Chief of Police, the municipal governing body has full
discretion in selecting the individual to fill the position of Chief of Police. If the municipal governing
body requests the Commission to subject that person to a noncompetitive examination, and if that
person successfully passes the noncompetitive examination, then the Commission shall notify the
municipal governing body of the results of the examination and that person may only be removed
from the position of Chief of Police for reasons set forth in § 7-54.
A Police Chief may be appointed by the municipal governing body without civil service status. If
the municipal governing body takes this route, the individual appointed to Police Chief may be
returned to a prior rank within the Borough of Lititz Police Department if promoted within or
dismissed from an outside appointment, without implicating civil service hearing rights.
Article IX. Suspensions, Removals and Reduction in Rank
§ 7-54. Grounds for disciplinary action.
No person appointed to a position in the Police Department pursuant to these rules and
regulations may be suspended without pay or removed and no person promoted in rank pursuant
to these rules and regulations may be reduced in rank except for the following reasons:
Physical or mental disability affecting the officer's ability to continue in service, in which case
the officer shall receive an honorable discharge from service;
Neglect or violation of an official duty;
A violation of any law which provides that such violation constitutes a misdemeanor or felony;
Inefficiency, neglect, intemperance, immorality, disobedience of orders or conduct
unbecoming an officer;
Intoxication while on duty;
Engaging or participating in or conducting any political or election campaign while on duty or
in uniform or while using Borough property, otherwise than to exercise the person's own right
of suffrage; or
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 32/233
[1]
(7)
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
Engaging or participating in the conduct of a political or election campaign for an incompatible
office as provided in Section 1104(f) of the Civil Service Law for boroughs.[1]
Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1104(f).
No officer shall be removed for religious, racial or political reasons.
A written statement of any charges made against any officer so employed shall be furnished to the
officer within five days after those charges have been adopted by the municipal governing body.
The person so employed shall have 10 days from the date of receiving the notice in which to
submit a written request for a hearing to the Civil Service Commission under § 7-57.
§ 7-55. Furloughs.
If, for reasons of economy or other reasons, it shall be deemed necessary by the municipal governing
body to reduce the number of full-time police officers in the Department, then the municipal governing
body shall furlough the person or persons, including probationers, last appointed to the force. Such
removal shall be accomplished by furloughing in numerical order commencing with the person last
appointed until such reduction shall have been accomplished. In the event the said police force shall
again be increased, the employees furloughed shall be reinstated in the order of their seniority in the
service. The provisions of this section as to reduction in force are not applicable to Chief of Police.
§ 7-56. Notice of suspension, removal or reduction in rank.
Whenever a police officer is suspended, removed or reduced in rank, the specific charges
warranting such action shall be stated in writing by the municipal governing body. The charges
shall be stated clearly and in sufficient detail to enable the officer to understand the charges and to
allow the officer an opportunity to respond to those charges. The charges shall specify the
subsection of § 7-54 which provides the basis for the disciplinary action as well as an explanation
of the factual circumstances upon which the municipal governing body relied in finding a violation
of § 7-54.
Within five days after the municipal governing body has voted to impose the disciplinary action, a
written statement of the charges shall be delivered to the officer either by personal service or by
certified and registered mail. In addition, the charges shall notify the officer of the right to appeal
under § 7-57 of these rules and regulations. A copy of the statement of charges shall also be
served upon the members of the Commission.
§ 7-57. Hearings on suspensions, removals and reductions in
rank.
The officer who has been suspended, removed or reduced in rank may appeal the decision of the
municipal governing body by written notice to the Secretary at 7 South Broad Street, Lititz,
Pennsylvania, 17543, requesting a hearing. This request shall be received by the Commission
within 10 days after the officer received notice of the discipline. The officer may make written
answers to any charges filed not later than the date fixed for the hearing. Failure of the officer to
provide written answers to any of the charges shall not be deemed an admission by the officer.
The Commission shall grant the officer a hearing within 10 days from the officer's written request
for a hearing, unless continued by the Commission for cause at the request of the Commission,
the municipal governing body or the officer. Notwithstanding this provision, the failure of the
Commission to hold a hearing within 10 days from the filing of the charges in writing shall not
result in the dismissal of the charges filed. The Council may suspend the person, without pay,
pending the determination of the charges against the person; but in the event the Commission
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 33/233
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
A.
(1)
B.
fails to uphold the charges, then the person sought to be suspended, removed or reduced in rank
shall be reinstated with full pay for the period during which the person was suspended, removed or
reduced in rank, and the charges shall be sealed and not be available for public inspection in the
event the charges are dismissed. At any such hearing, the officer against whom the charges have
been made may be present and represented by counsel, may call witnesses and may present
testimony and documentation in defense. The municipal governing body may also be represented
by counsel, call witnesses and present evidence as is necessary to support the charges. A
stenographic record of all testimony shall be taken at every hearing and preserved by the
Commission. In the event the charges are dismissed, the record shall be sealed and not be
available for public inspection. Notice of the date, time and place for each hearing shall be given in
the following manner:
Either by personal service or certified or registered mail to each of the principals involved in
the case; and
By regular, first-class mail to all other persons who have stated an interest in the hearing;
provided, however, that any failure to give the notice required by this subsection shall not
invalidate any subsequent action taken by the Commission.
In conducting the hearing, the Commission's standard of review shall be to determine whether
sufficient evidence has been presented to support the statutory reason for the disciplinary action.
If the Commission finds that sufficient evidence has been introduced to support the charge, the
Commission shall not modify the penalty imposed by the municipal governing body unless it finds
that the penalty imposed was arbitrary, discriminatory or an abuse of the municipal governing
body's discretion. In considering the appropriateness of the discipline, the Commission shall not
substitute its judgment for that of the municipal governing body. The Commission may request
post-hearing briefs and shall issue a written decision containing specific findings of fact and
conclusions of law within 60 days of receipt of the hearing transcript.
Unless the municipal governing body or the person sought to be suspended, removed, or reduced
in rank requests that the proceedings before the Commission be open to the public, the
proceedings before the Commission pursuant to this section shall be held in the nature of a closed
executive session that shall not be open to the public. Any such request shall be presented to the
Commission before the civil service hearing commences. The deliberations of the Commission,
including interim rulings on evidentiary or procedural issues, may be held in private and shall not
be subject to request for being open to the public, the municipal governing body or to the person
sought to be suspended, removed, or reduced in rank. The Commission's disposition of the
disciplinary action shall constitute official action which shall occur at a public meeting held
pursuant to 65 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 7 (relating to open meetings). All parties concerned shall have
immediate right of appeal to the court of common pleas of the county, and the case shall there be
determined as the court deems proper. No order of suspension made by the Commission shall be
for a longer period than one year. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days from the date of entry
by the Commission of its final order and shall be by petition.
§ 7-58. Hearing procedure.
All testimony shall be given under oath administered by the Chairperson, or in the absence of the
Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson of the Commission. The Commission shall have the power to
issue subpoenas as set forth in § 7-14 hereof. The hearing shall be open to the public unless, prior
to the commencement of the hearing, a written or oral request to close the hearing is made by
either the charged officer or the municipal governing body.
Each hearing shall be conducted in substantially the same format as follows:
The Chairman shall state the general purpose of the hearing;
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 34/233
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
C.
Upon direction from the Chairman, the Secretary shall read the written charges against the
accused, together with the record of action taken against such police officer;
The Secretary shall read any written reply of the accused;
The Chairman shall afford each person making charges, or that person's counsel, an
opportunity to make further statements in support of the charges and to produce witnesses;
The Chairman shall afford the accused, or the accused's counsel, an opportunity to question
or cross-examine the person making charges and to question or cross-examine any
witnesses produced by such person;
The Chairman shall afford each person making charges an opportunity to examine the person
accused;
The Chairman shall permit each person making charges, or their counsel, to make a
summation;
The Chairman shall permit the person accused, or the accused's counsel, an opportunity to
produce any witnesses, who may be cross-examined by the person making the charges or
such person's counsel;
The Chairman shall permit the person accused or the accused's counsel to make summation;
and
The Commission, at any time during the course of the hearing, may question or crossexamine
the person making charges, the accused or any witness.
If the Commission sustains the charges, the officer who was suspended, removed or reduced in
rank may file an appeal with the Court of Common Pleas within 60 days of the date of entry by the
Commission of its final order. No order of suspension shall be made by the Commission for a
period longer than one year. In the event that the Commission fails to uphold the charges, then the
person sought to be suspended, removed or demoted shall be reinstated with full pay for the
period of suspension, removal or demotion, and no charges related to the suspension, removal or
reduction in rank shall be officially recorded in the officer's record.
Article X. Inspections
§ 7-59. Inspection in general.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, all of the records of the Commission shall be open to the
public and available for inspection during normal business hours. A member of the Commission, or any
person who may, from time to time, be designated by the Commission, shall be present at all times
during any inspection of any record of the Commission.
§ 7-60. Reports of character and reputation.
The initial application and all reports of investigations and inquiries into the character and reputation of
applicants shall be kept in the strictest confidence and shall not be open to public inspection.
§ 7-61. Examination material.
All examination materials shall be confidential and shall not be open to general public inspection.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 35/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
Article XI. Commission Forms
§ 7-62. Official forms.
The following forms and their titles become the official forms of the Commission and a part of the rules
and regulations of the Commission, a copy of which may be obtained from the Borough Secretary:
Application for Examination.
Minimum Qualifications of Applicants.
Report of Medical Examination.
Report of Psychological Examination.
Confidential Inquiry Letter.
Confidential Inquiry Form.
Instructions to Applicants.
Notice of Medical Examination.
Notice of Psychological Examination.
Notice of Oral Examination.
Rating Form - Oral Interview.
Letter of Conditional Employment.
Article XII. Amendments
§ 7-63. Amendments.
The Commission, with the approval of the municipal governing body, may, from time to time, amend
any part of these rules and regulations, insofar as such amendments do not run contrary to the
applicable Municipal Code.
Chapter 10. Intermunicipal Agreements
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regional Planning Commission — See Ch. 5, Art. VII.
Intermunicipal police assistance — See Ch. 12.
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 36.
Article I. Warwick Area Appeals Board
[Adopted 6-29-2004 by Ord. No. C-455, approved 6-29-2004]
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 36/233
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
§ 10-1. Incorporation of caption and recitals by reference.
The caption of and recitals to this article as set forth above are incorporated herein by reference.[1]
Editor's Note: The "caption and recitals" referenced herein can be found in Ord. No. C-455, the full text
of which is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-2. Agreement; inclusion by reference.
This municipality agrees that the Borough of Lititz, Warwick Township and Elizabeth Township shall join
with each other in accordance with the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act by entering
into the intermunicipal agreement which is adopted by reference with the same effect as if it had been
set out verbatim in this section and a copy of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at
which this article was enacted.
§ 10-3. Authorization to enter agreement.
This municipality is authorized to enter into the intermunicipal agreement for the purposes contained
therein. This action is to be taken by the officials or employees of the municipality designated for this
purpose, pursuant to general or specific instructions issued by the governing body.
§ 10-4. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters are specifically found and
determined:
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the intermunicipal agreement referred to in § 10-2.
The intermunicipal agreement shall commence on July 1, 2004, and shall continue for a period of
five years. Thereafter the intermunicipal agreement shall be terminable by either party at any time
upon written notification to the other party of the party's election to terminate the intermunicipal
agreement. Such termination shall become effective 90 days after the date of such written notice
by the party electing to terminate the intermunicipal agreement.
The purposes and objectives of the intermunicipal agreement are to provide for the formation of
the Warwick Area Appeals Board (the "Appeals Board") to serve as a Joint Construction Code
Board of Appeals for all participating Municipalities.
Each municipality shall bear the costs related to the administration and enforcement of the
Uniform Construction Code within that municipality. Each municipality will establish a fee structure
so that persons filing appeals shall pay the costs associated with the administration of the Uniform
Construction Code.
A new organizational structure, the Appeals Board, will be formed by the intermunicipal
agreement. The membership of the Appeals Board is established in the intermunicipal agreement.
The manner of making appointments to the Appeals Board is set forth in the intermunicipal
agreement.
The intermunicipal agreement does not contemplate the purchase of any real or personal property.
Each municipality shall acquire, manage or dispose of such personal property as it desires and
deems necessary to administer the Uniform Construction Code.
Each municipality has the power to enter into contracts for policies of insurance or other employee
benefits.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 37/233
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Article II. Warwick Regional Recreation Commission
[Adopted 2-22-2005 by Ord. No. C-462, approved 2-22-2005]
§ 10-5. Incorporation of caption and recitals by reference.
The caption of and recitals to this article as set forth above are incorporated herein by reference.[1]
Editor's Note: The caption and recitals can be found in Ord. No. C-462, the full text of which is on file in
the Borough offices.
§ 10-6. Agreement; inclusion by reference.
This Borough shall join with Elizabeth Township, Warwick Township, Warwick School District and Lititz
Community Center (collectively the "participants" and individually a "participant") in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act by entering into the intergovernmental agreement
of cooperation (the "intergovernmental agreement"), which is adopted by reference with the same
effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a copy of which shall be filed with the
minutes of the meeting at which this article was enacted.
§ 10-7. Authorization to enter agreement.
This Borough is authorized to enter into and execute the intergovernmental agreement for the
purposes contained therein. This action is to be taken by the officials or employees of the Borough
designated for this purpose, pursuant to general or specific instructions issued by Borough Council.
§ 10-8. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters are specifically found and
determined:
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Intergovernmental Agreement referred to in
§ 10-6.
The intergovernmental agreement shall become effective as of January 1, 2005, and shall remain
in effect for four calendar years until December 31, 2008. Thereafter, the intergovernmental
agreement shall be automatically renewed on a yearly basis. Any participant may withdraw at the
end of any calendar year, including as of December 31, 2008, by giving written notice of the desire
to withdraw to all other participants and to the Warwick Regional Recreation Commission (the
"Commission") one year in advance of the date of withdrawal.
The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental agreement are to enter into an
intergovernmental contract to form the Commission and to share the costs of providing
recreational services for the residents of the municipalities.
Each municipality shall share in the cost of operation of the Commission and its programs on a pro
rata basis determined by the population of the municipalities. The municipalities, the school
district, and the community center shall also make in-kind contributions by making available
without charge the use of real property of each participant and paying costs to maintain their
respective properties.
The Commission shall consist of seven members. Warwick Township shall appoint two members,
Lititz Borough shall appoint two members, and Elizabeth Township, the school district, and the
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 38/233
F.
G.
[1]
[1]
community center shall each appoint one member.
All property, real or personal, shall be managed and disposed of by the owner of such property.
The Commission shall have the right to acquire equipment for regional recreation facilities.
The Commission shall not have the power to enter into contracts for policies of insurance or other
employee benefits. Each participant has the power to enter into contracts for policies of insurance
and other employee benefits. Subject to the requirements of any grant funding, any director of the
Commission shall be an employee of the community center.
§ 10-9. Modification of agreement.
The Borough Council reserves the right to modify, supplement or amend the intergovernmental
agreement from time to time by resolution or ordinance.
Article III. Intergovernmental Insurance Cooperative
[Adopted 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. C-500, approved 11-24-2009]
§ 10-10. Incorporation of caption and preamble by reference.
The caption and preamble of this article as set forth above are incorporated herein by reference.[1]
Editor's Note: Said caption and preamble can be found in Ord. No. C-500, the full text of which is on file
in the Borough offices.
§ 10-11. Agreement; inclusion by reference.
This political subdivision hereby approves entering into the agreement, a copy of which is attached
hereto[1] and incorporated herein by reference (and which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting
at which this article was enacted), with the intent and effect that this political subdivision shall be bound
by the agreement.
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-12. Authorization to enter agreement.
The Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the governing body, acting alone or together with the
Secretary or Assistant Secretary, are hereby authorized and directed on behalf of the political
subdivision to execute and deliver the agreement and to execute and deliver such additional
instruments, and to take such further actions, as may be necessary or appropriate to carry forth the
agreement and the transactions to be effected under the agreement, including payment to the IIC of
such amounts as are due by the political subdivision pursuant to the agreement.
§ 10-13. Ratification and approval of action of officers or agents.
All actions of any officer, agent or other representative of this political subdivision heretofore taken in
the pursuit of the establishment of the IIC and/or the political subdivision's participation therein, are
hereby ratified and approved in all respects.
§ 10-14. Authorization of necessary actions.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 39/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
[1]
[1]
The governing body of the political subdivision is hereby authorized to take such other action as may
be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this article and of the agreement.
§ 10-15. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters are
specifically found and determined:
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement;
The political subdivision shall participate in the IIC for an initial term of three years. All renewal
terms shall be as further set forth therein;
The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as set forth in the preamble of this article and in
the agreement;
The manner and extent of financing the agreement are that no borrowing will be required by the
political subdivision, funds to implement the political subdivision's obligations under the agreement
same shall come from normal and usual budgeted amounts for such matters, and other provisions
governing the manner and extent of the financing of the IIC shall be as set forth in the agreement;
The IIC shall be managed by its Board of Directors pursuant to the terms of the agreement;
All property, real or personal, of the IIC, shall be acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by
the IIC in accordance with the terms of the agreement; and
The IIC created by the agreement shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits pursuant to the terms of the agreement.
Article IV. Susquehanna Municipal Trust
[Adopted 1-31-2012 by Ord. No. C-516, approved 1-31-2012]
§ 10-16. Incorporation of caption and preamble by reference.
The caption and preamble of this article set forth above are incorporated herein by reference.[1]
Editor's Note: Said caption and preamble can be found in Ord. No. C-516, the complete text of which is
on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-17. Agreement; inclusion by reference.
This political subdivision hereby approves entering into the agreement, a copy of which is attached
hereto and incorporated herein by reference (and which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting
at which this article was enacted),[1] with the intent and effect that this political subdivision shall be
bound by the agreement and shall join and participate in the Trust.
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-18. Authorization to enter agreement.
The President or Vice President of the governing body, acting alone or together with the Secretary or
Assistant Secretary, is hereby authorized and directed on behalf of the political subdivision:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 40/233
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
F.
G.
To execute and deliver the agreement; and
To execute and deliver such additional instruments, and to take such further actions, as may be
necessary or appropriate to carry forth the agreement and the transactions to be effected under
the agreement, including payment to the Trust of such amounts as are due by the political
subdivision pursuant to the agreement.
§ 10-19. Authorization of necessary actions.
The governing body of the political subdivision is hereby authorized to take such other action as may
be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this article and of the agreement.
§ 10-20. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters are
specifically found and determined:
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement.
This political subdivision shall participate in the Trust for a minimum initial term of two years, as set
forth in the agreement.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as set forth in the preamble of this article and in
the agreement.
The manner and extent of financing the agreement are that:
No borrowing will be required by the political subdivision;
Funds to implement the political subdivision's obligations under the agreement shall come
from normal and usual budgeted amounts for such matters; and
Other provisions governing the manner and extent of the financing of the Trust shall be set
forth in the agreement.
The Trust shall be managed by its own Plan Committee and Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the agreement.
All property, real or personal, of the Trust shall be acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by
the Trust in accordance with the terms of the agreement.
The Trust created by the agreement shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of
group insurance and employee benefits, including social security, pursuant to the terms of the
agreement.
§ 10-21. Effect on existing actions.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding in any court, or any
rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause of action existing prior to the enactment of this article.
Article V. Regional Emergency Services
[Adopted 8-27-2013 by Ord. No. C-528, approved 8-27-2013]
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 41/233
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
§ 10-22. Incorporation of caption and recitals by reference.
The caption of and recitals to this article as set forth above are incorporated herein by reference.[1]
Editor's Note: Said caption and preamble can be found in Ord. No. C-528, the complete text of which is
on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-23. Agreement; inclusion by reference.
This Borough shall join with Elizabeth Township and Warwick Township in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act by entering into the intermunicipal agreement which
is adopted by reference with the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a
copy of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article was enacted.[1]
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-24. Authorization to enter agreement.
This Borough is authorized to enter into the intermunicipal agreement for the purposes contained
therein. This action is to be taken by the officials or employees of the Borough designated for this
purpose, pursuant to general or specific instructions issued by the Borough Council.
§ 10-25. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters are specifically found and
determined:
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the intermunicipal agreement referred to in § 10-
23.
This Borough's participation in the Warwick Area Regional Emergency Services Program shall be
for a period of three years, which may be extended thereafter from year to year, or as otherwise
set forth in the intermunicipal agreement referred to in § 10-23.
The purpose and objectives of the intermunicipal agreement are to enter into an intergovernmental
contract to form a regional emergency services program for the purpose of sharing the costs to
provide a professional Emergency Response Director to the municipalities, which will provide
more-efficient emergency services.
Each municipality shall share in the cost of the salary and benefit package of the Director to be
hired who will administer the program and in the expenses of the program on a pro-rata basis
determined by the population of the municipalities. The contribution of the municipalities shall be
lessened if grants for the program are received from the Department.
A Warwick Emergency Services Commission composed of one member from the governing body
of each municipality, one member from each participating fire company, one member from the
Warwick Community Ambulance Association, and one member who is a citizen at large shall be
established to administer the Warwick Area Regional Emergency Services Program.
All property, real or personal, shall be acquired, managed or disposed of by each municipality. If a
grant for the purchase of equipment later becomes available, the Warwick Emergency Services
Commission shall coordinate the application for such grant and shall determine who shall hold title
to such equipment.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 42/233
G.
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
C.
[1]
D.
E.
The Warwick Emergency Services Commission shall have the power to enter into contracts for
policies of insurance and other employee benefits. The Director shall be an employee of the
Warwick Emergency Services Commission and shall receive such employee benefits as may be
provided to the Director by the Warwick Emergency Services Commission.
Article VI. Capital Funding for the Lititz Rec Center
[Adopted 1-27-2015 by Ord. No. C-538, approved 1-27-2015]
§ 10-26. Incorporation of caption and recitals by reference.
The caption of and recitals to this article as set forth above are incorporated herein by reference.[1]
Editor's Note: Said caption and preamble can be found in Ord. No. C-538, the complete text of which is
on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-27. Agreement; inclusion by reference.
This Borough shall join with Elizabeth Township, Penn Township and Warwick Township in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act by entering into the intergovernmental
agreement of cooperation (the "intergovernmental agreement") which is adopted by reference with the
same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a copy of which shall be filed with the
minutes of the meeting at which this article was enacted.[1]
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-28. Authorization to enter agreement.
This Borough is authorized to enter into and execute the intergovernmental agreement for the
purposes contained therein. This action is to be taken by the officials or employees of the Borough
designated for this purpose, pursuant to general or specific instructions issued by the Borough Council.
§ 10-29. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters are specifically found and
determined:
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the intergovernmental agreement referred to in
§ 10-27.
The intergovernmental agreement shall become effective as of January 1, 2015, and shall remain
in effect for four calendar years until December 31, 2018. Thereafter, the intergovernmental
agreement may be renewed for an additional four-year term by the consent of the municipalities.
The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental agreement are to enter into an
intergovernmental contract to provide capital funding for Lititz RecCenter to enable continued
recreational services for the residents of the municipalities.
Each municipality shall make capital contributions in accordance with Exhibit A to the
intergovernmental agreement from its general fund.[1]
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
No new organizational structure is proposed by the agreement.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 43/233
F.
G.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
All property, real or personal, shall be managed and disposed of by the owner of such property.
Each municipality has the power to enter into contracts for policies of insurance and other
employee benefits.
§ 10-30. Modification of agreement.
Borough Council reserves the right to modify, supplement or amend the intergovernmental agreement
from time to time by resolution or ordinance.
Chapter 12. Intermunicipal Assistance, Police
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 3-30-1999 by Ord. No. C-420, approved 3-
30-1999.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 5, Art. VI.
Police Pension Fund — See Ch. 16, Art. III.
Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Ch. 12, Intermunicipal Assistance, Police, adopted 4-
29-1969 by Res. No. 173, approved 5-9-1969.
§ 12-1. Agreement authorized.
This borough shall enter into an agreement (the "agreement") with the Township of Warwick, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania (the "township"), with respect, inter alia, to the provision of mutual aid by the
police officers of the municipalities, which agreement is to supplement any existing agreements
relating to police mutual aid and statutes providing for statewide municipal police jurisdiction and which
agreement sets forth appropriate and necessary covenants and agreements of the respective parties
thereto. The agreement shall be substantially in the form presented to this meeting, which agreement
and the form thereof are approved.
§ 12-2. Findings and purpose.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, 53 P.S. § 481 et seq., the following matters are
specifically found and determined:
The conditions of the agreement are that borough police officers shall have the power and
authority of a township police officer when performing police duties in the township, and township
police officers shall have the power and authority of a borough police officer when performing
police duties in the borough, and each municipality shall retain control over their respective police
officers and shall obtain such insurance to protect against liability to the extent deemed
appropriate by such municipality.
The agreement shall continue until modified, in writing, by the mutual consent of both parties
thereto or until terminated by a party giving the other 10 days' written notice of the desire to
terminate the agreement.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement are to supplement existing agreements relating to
police mutual aid and statutes providing for statewide municipal police jurisdiction.
There is no financing currently contemplated to implement the agreement.
No organizational structure is necessary to implement the agreement.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 44/233
F.
G.
[1]
No property is contemplated to be acquired under the terms of the agreement. Each municipality
shall retain ownership of its respective Police Department vehicles and equipment.
No separate entity will be created under the agreement which will be empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits.
§ 12-3. Agreement on file.
A copy of the agreement, in the form so presented to this meeting and so approved, shall be filed with
the Secretary of this borough and shall be made available for inspection at reasonable times by
interested persons requesting such inspection.
§ 12-4. Authority to execute agreement.
The Mayor, the President or Vice President of the Council and the Secretary or Assistant Secretary of
this borough, as applicable, are authorized and directed to execute, to attest and to deliver the
agreement, in behalf of this borough, in the form so approved.
§ 12-5. Authority to enforce agreement.
Proper officers of this borough and the Chief of Police are authorized and directed to execute all
documents and to do all other acts that may be necessary and proper to carry out this chapter and the
undertakings of this borough in the agreement.
Chapter 14. Municipal Claims
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz: Art. I, 6-25-1996 by Ord. No. C-386,
approved 6-25-1996. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Fees — See Ch. 55.
Taxation — See Ch. 110.
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Exhibit A
Article I. Legal Fees for Collection
§ 14-1. Approval of fee schedule.
The borough does hereby approve a schedule of attorney's fees pursuant to Act 1 as set forth on
Exhibit A attached hereto.[1]
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 14-2. Notice required prior to fee assessment.
At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney's fees in connection with the collection of a
delinquent account, the borough will mail to the owner, notice that the borough intends to impose or
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 45/233
[1]
[1]
[1]
assess attorneys' fees. Said notice shall include instructions on how the recipient of the letter may
avoid the payment of attorneys' fees.
§ 14-3. Statutory authority.
This Article is ordained and enacted pursuant to Act 1 which amends 53 P.S. § 7106(a).
Chapter 16. Pensions and Employee Benefits
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Social Security
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 16-1. Participation authorized.
The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, shall become a participant in the social security
system, and the benefits of old age and survivors insurance shall be extended to its eligible full-time
employees.
§ 16-2. Contributions authorized; payroll deductions.
The Borough Treasurer is hereby authorized to make all required payments into the Contribution Fund
established by Section 7 of Enabling Act. No. 491 of the 1951 session of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania[1] and to establish such system of payroll deductions from salaries of
covered employees as may be necessary to their coverage under said old age and survivors insurance
system.
Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 207.
§ 16-3. Amount of contributions.
Contributions to such Contribution Fund accruing for all periods of employment shall be paid 1/2 by the
covered employees and 1/2 by the Borough of Lititz.
§ 16-4. Appropriation of amounts to be paid into Contribution
Fund.
The Borough of Lititz does hereby appropriate from the proper fund or funds from which wage or salary
payments of covered employees are issued to employees of the Borough of Lititz the amounts
necessary to pay into the Contribution Fund as provided in Section 4 of the Enabling Act[1] and in
accordance with this article and with the plan or plans and agreement.
Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 204.
§ 16-5. Administration.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 46/233
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
[2]
The proper officials of the Borough of Lititz are hereby authorized and empowered to do all things in
accordance with the provisions contained in the plan and agreement necessary to the continued
implementation of said old age and survivors insurance system.
Article II. Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan
[Adopted 8-31-1999 by Ord. No. C-442, approved 8-31-1999[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Art. II, Employee Pension Plan, adopted 2-22-1966 by
Ord. No. C-61, approved 2-26-1966, as amended.
§ 16-6. Repealer.
This article specifically replaces all other ordinances or parts of ordinances establishing provisions for
the Nonuniform Pension Plan. This ordinance replaces the retirement plan for the nonuniformed
employees of Lititz Borough through the adoption of the Lititz Borough Nonuniform Retirement Plan.
§ 16-7. Establishment.
This article establishes a retirement plan for the nonuniformed employees of Lititz Borough through the
adoption to the pension document effective January 1, 1999.[1]
Editor's Note: A complete copy of the Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan is on file in the borough
offices.
§ 16-8. through 16-23. (Reserved)
Article III. Police Pension Fund
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961;[1] amended in its entirety 12-30-2008 by Ord. No. C-495,
approved 12-30-2008]
Editor's Note: This article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 16-24. Amendment and restatement.
The attached amendment and restatement of the Borough of Lititz Police Pension Plan is enacted.[1]
The agent of the employer is authorized and directed to execute the attached amendment and
restatement of the plan.[2]
Editor's Note: A complete copy of the amended and restated Police Pension Plan is on file in the
Borough offices.
Editor's Note: This section designated Sue Ann Barry as the agent of the employer.
§ 16-25. through 16-38. (Reserved)
Article IV. Firemen's Relief Association
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 47/233
[1] Editor's Note: This Article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 16-39. Official recognition; purpose.
The Borough Council officially recognizes the Lititz Firemen's Relief Association of Lititz, Pennsylvania,
as an organization formed for the purpose of maintaining an association for beneficial and protective
purposes to its members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or permanent
disability or accident from funds collected therein.
§ 16-40. Association designated to receive funds.
The aforesaid Lititz Firemen's Relief Association be and it is hereby designated by the Borough
Council of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania, as the proper association to receive such funds as are
due and payable to the borough treasury by the Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, from
the tax of 2% on premiums from foreign fire insurance companies.
§ 16-41. Annual appropriation.
There is hereby annually appropriated from the borough treasury all such sum or sums of money that
may hereafter be paid into the aforesaid borough treasury by the Treasurer of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, on account of taxes paid on premiums by foreign fire insurance companies.
Chapter 18. Planning Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz during codification 10-31-1978 by Ord. No.
C-217, approved 10-31-1978; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 108.
Zoning — See Ch. 122.
§ 18-1. Creation.
There is hereby created a Borough Planning Commission which shall have all the powers and duties
conferred upon it by law and any other powers vested in it by law or ordinance.
§ 18-2. Membership; compensation.
The Borough Planning Commission shall consist of five members who will be appointed by the Council
and shall serve without compensation, except that they shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred in
carrying out their Commission duties.
§ 18-3. Annual report; employment of personnel; funding;
contracts.
The Borough Planning Commission shall make an annual report to the Borough Council showing its
transactions and recommendations. It may employ planning technicians and other persons whose
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 48/233
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
[1]
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
B.
C.
salaries and wages, together with other necessary expenses of the Commission, shall be provided for,
at the discretion of the Borough Council, by proper appropriations and resolutions. The Commission
may also receive and expend, for the purposes of its planning work, any gifts, grants and
appropriations of money from any other source, including commonwealth, federal or local funds, and
may contract with governmental or private agencies or individuals with respect thereto.
§ 18-4. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall, at the request of the Borough Council, have the power and shall
be required to:
Prepare the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the borough and amendments
thereto, as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act No. 247 of 1968,
(53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.), as amended and supplemented, and present such plan and
amendments for the consideration of the Borough Council.
Maintain and keep on file records of its action. All records and files of the Planning
Commission shall be in the possession of the Borough Council.
The Planning Commission, at the request of the Borough Council, may:
Make recommendations to the Council concerning the adoption or amendment of an Official
Map.
Prepare and present to the Council a Zoning Ordinance and make recommendations to the
Council on proposed amendments to it, as set forth in said Planning Code.
Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision and land development and planned
residential development regulations,[1] as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 108, Subdivision of Land.
Prepare and present to the Council a Building Code and a Housing Code and make
recommendations concerning proposed amendments thereto.
Do such other acts or make such studies as may be necessary to fulfill the duties and
obligations imposed by said Planning Code.
Prepare and present to the Council an environmental study.
Submit to the Council a recommended capital improvements program.
Promote public interest in and understanding of the Comprehensive Plan and planning.
Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private agencies and individuals as to the
effectiveness of the proposals of such agencies and individuals.
Hold public hearings and meetings.
Require from other departments and agencies of the borough such available information as
relates to the work of the Planning Commission.
In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make examinations and surveys
with the consent of the owner.
In the performance of its powers and duties, any act or recommendation of the Planning
Commission which involves engineering consideration shall be subject to the review and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 49/233
[1]
[1]
comments of the Borough Engineer, which comments shall be incorporated and separately set
forth in any report, written act or recommendation of the Planning Commission.
Chapter 24. Real Estate Registry
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961.[1] Sections
24-1 and 24-7 amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Other
amendments noted where applicable.]
Editor's Note: This chapter was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 24-1. Establishment.
For the purpose of procuring accurate information with reference to the ownership of real estate in the
Borough of Lititz, there is hereby established a real estate registry in accordance with the provisions of
53 P.S. § 48001.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 24-2. Books, maps and plans to be made.
The Borough Secretary shall cause to be made books, maps or plans showing the location and the
name of the owner or owners of all real estate in the Borough of Lititz, with blank spaces for the name
of the owner of each lot and with provisions for the names of future owners and the dates of future
transfers of title. The registry books, maps and plans shall be carefully preserved and shall be so kept,
by additions from time to time, as to show the ownership of every lot or piece of real estate or
subdivision thereof within the Borough of Lititz, with succeeding transfer of title from the time of the
commencement of such registry.
§ 24-3. Title search authorized.
The Borough Secretary may cause a search to be made for any evidence of title not reported to him as
herein required and which may be requisite for the completion of such registry books, maps and plans.
§ 24-4. Owners to furnish copy of deeds.
Within 30 days after the date on which this chapter is advertised, it shall be the duty of all owners of
real estate within the Borough of Lititz and of every subsequent purchaser, devisee or person acquiring
title to real estate in any manner to furnish to the Registry Clerk hereinafter designated descriptions of
their respective properties upon blanks to be furnished by the borough and at the same time to have
their deeds stamped as evidence of the registration thereof.
§ 24-5. Sheriff to furnish copy of deeds; stamp required prior to
recording.
The Sheriff of Lancaster County shall present for registration the deeds of all properties within the
Borough of Lititz sold by him at a Sheriff sale, and the Recorder of Deeds of Lancaster County shall
not admit for record any deed for any property within the Borough of Lititz bearing a date subsequent
to the advertisement of this chapter unless the same shall first have been duly stamped as herein
provided.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 50/233
[1]
[1]
[1]
§ 24-6. Appointment of Registry Clerk and Deputy.
The Borough Secretary is designated to act as Registry Clerk, and he is authorized to appoint the
Deputy Recorder of Deeds as Deputy Registry Clerk and to compensate the Deputy Registry Clerk at
the rate of $10 per month. The Borough Secretary is authorized to procure the materials for making the
necessary books, maps and plans and to provide the forms for registering the transfers of title to real
estate and the necessary stamps to stamp transfers of title to real estate "registered."
§ 24-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons neglecting or refusing to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable to pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days; provided,
however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is without the financial means to pay
the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall be permitted to pay the
fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 27. Sewer Authority
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961.[1]
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 100.
Editor's Note: This chapter was adopted and approved 8-17-1981 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz. Ord. No. C-197, adopted and approved
1-25-1977, which ordinance authorizes an agreement and the form thereof between Lititz Sewer
Authority and the Warwick Township Municipal Authority with respect to collection, treatment and
disposal of sewage and industrial waste; an agreement of lease, dated as of 2-1-1951, by and between
Lititz Sewer Authority and the Borough of Lititz with respect to the lease of certain tracts of land and
Interests in land heretofore acquired by the Authority; and a supplemental agreement of lease, dated as
of 10-1-1952, providing for additional security for bonds already issued and outstanding under the
original indenture and additional bonds to be issued thereunder by extending the term of the original
lease and by the payment of additional rental were deleted from the Code during codification and are
on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 27-1. Intention to organize.
The corporate and municipal authorities of the Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, a
municipality, do hereby signify and express their intention and desire to organize the Lititz Sewer
Authority under the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended,[1] for the purpose of constructing,
improving, maintaining, operating, owning or leasing sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof and
sewage treatment works.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 27-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary of the Borough Council of the Borough of Lititz are hereby authorized and
directed to execute on behalf of the Borough of Lititz the Articles of Incorporation of said Lititz Sewer
Authority, which Articles of Incorporation shall be as follows:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 51/233
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE - COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
In compliance with the requirements of the Municipal Authorities Act, being the Act of May 2, 1945,
P.L. 382, as amended, the Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, desiring to incorporate
the Lititz Sewer Authority, does hereby certify:
1. The name of the Authority is Lititz Sewer Authority.
2. Said Lititz Sewer Authority is formed under the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.
3. No other authority is in existence in or for the Borough of Lititz, the incorporating municipality
herein, either under the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended, or the Act of June 28,
1935, P.L. 463, as amended,_ or under any other Act of Assembly.
4. The name of the incorporating municipality is Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania. The names and addresses of the municipal authorities are as follows:
Burgess: Victor Wagner, Lititz, Pa.
President of Council: Harry R. Way, Lititz, Pa.
Secretary of Borough Council: Elam E. Habecker, Lititz, Pa.
Councilmen: Elmer H. Bomberger, Lititz, Pa.
Frank Ditzler, Lititz, Pa.
C. H. Nissley, Lititz, Pa.
Thomas W. Steffy, Lititz, Pa.
Harry R. Way, Lititz, Pa.
5. The names, addresses and term of office of the first members of the Board of said Authority
are as follows:
Name Addresses
Term of Office
(years)
Norman Badorf Lititz, Pa. 1
Newton W. Buch Lititz, Pa. 2
Owen Hershey Lititz, Pa. 3
H. Lloyd Hess Lititz, Pa. 4
J.M. Leed Lititz, Pa. 5
In witness whereof, the Borough of Lititz has executed these Articles of Incorporation, under its
municipal seal, this 26th day of August, A. D. 1947.
BOROUGH OF LITITZ
By Harry R. Way
President of Borough Council
Attest: E. E. Habecker
Secretary of Borough Council
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
County of Lancaster
SS:
Be it remembered that on this 26th day of August, A. D. 1947, before me a notary public in and for
the County aforesaid, personally appeared Harry R. Way, President of the Borough Council of the
Borough of Lititz, and Elam E. Habecker, Secretary of the Borough Council of the Borough of Lititz,
who being severally duly affirmed according to law did dispose and say that they were personally
present at the execution of the foregoing Articles of Incorporation and saw the municipal seal of the
Borough of Lititz; that the foregoing Articles of Incorporation were duly signed, sealed and delivered,
by and as and for the act and deed of the Borough of Lititz, by the authority and at the direction of the
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 52/233
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
Borough Council of the Borough of Lititz, pursuant to an ordinance, duly enacted and approved by the
Burgess of Lititz Borough on the 26th day of August A. D. 1947; and that the names of Harry R. Way,
as president of Borough Council and of Elam E. Habecker, as Secretary of Borough Council of the
Borough of Lititz, subscribed thereto, are in their proper respective handwritings.
HARRY R. WAY
ELAM E. HABECKER
Affirmed and subscribed to before me this 26th day of August, A. D. 1947
M.E. STAUFFER
Notary Public
6. The term of existence of said Authority shall be 50 years from the date of approval of these
Articles of Amendment to the Articles of Incorporation. (See Ordinance No. C-160,[1]
entitled "Adopting a Resolution Submitted to Said Council by Lititz Sewer Authority,
Pursuant to the Provisions of the Act of Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as Amended, Proposing to Amend the Articles of
Incorporation of Said Authority by Extending the Term of Its Corporate Existence," enacted
by Council of the Borough of Lititz October 29, 1974, and approved by the Mayor on
October 29, 1974.)
Editor's Note: The provisions of this ordinance extended the term of the authority for a period of 50
years beginning 10-29-1974.
§ 27-3. Authorization to execute and file Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary of the Borough Council of the Borough of Lititz are hereby authorized and
directed to execute and file Articles of Incorporation for the Lititz Sewer Authority, as and for the act
and deed of the Borough of Lititz, and to do any and all things necessary, appropriate and proper, in
their several judgments, or in the judgment of the Borough Solicitor of the Borough of Lititz, to lawfully
effect the incorporation of said Lititz Sewer Authority.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Article 8.2, Assignment of Right-of-Way to Sewer Authority; Article 8.3,
Authorization for Lease to Operate Sewer System; and Article 8.4, Authorization for Supplemental
Lease, of the ordinance adopted and approved 8-17-1961 were deleted from the Code during
codification and are on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 32. Alcoholic Beverages
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 5-26-1998 by Ord. No. C-405, approved 5-
26-1998. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 41.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 84.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
§ 32-1. Consumption; possession of open containers.
It shall be unlawful for any person while on any public street, sidewalk or alley or while in or on any
other property owned, operated or supervised by the Borough of Lititz to either:
Consume any alcohol, liquor or malt-brewed beverages;
Be in possession of any open container of alcohol, liquor or malt-brewed beverages.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 53/233
§ 32-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof by summary
proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and costs of prosecution and, in default
of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the Lancaster County Prison for not more than
30 days, or both. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 32-3. Severability.
In the event that any provisions, section, sentence, clause or part of this chapter shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or part of
this chapter, it being the intent of the Borough of Lititz that such remainder shall be and shall remain in
full force and effect.
Chapter 33. Alarms
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 5-26-1998 by Ord. No. C-406, approved 5-
26-1998. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 55.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 59.
§ 33-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for various types of intrusion,
burglar, fire and other emergency alarm devices which require response thereto by the Police
Department, Fire Department and other municipal agencies.
§ 33-2. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who operates, maintains or owns any alarm
device, dial alarm or local alarm designed to summon the police, Fire Department and other local
municipal agencies to any location in response to an alarm signal.
§ 33-3. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
ALARM CONSOLE
The console or control panel of devices giving a visual or audio response, or both, and located
within the confines of Lancaster County Control or elsewhere.
ALARM DEVICE
Any type of alarm system actuating equipment in the alarm console providing warning of intrusion,
fire, smoke, flood or other peril.
ALARM SYSTEM
An alarm device, dial alarm or local alarm or any combination thereof.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 54/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
DIAL ALARM
That type of a device using telephone lines transmitting an alarm directly to Lancaster County
Control or other approved site.
FALSE ALARM
Any alarm actuated by inadvertence, negligence or unintentional act of someone other than any
intruder and shall include, but not be limited to, alarms caused by malfunctioning of the alarm
system or other relevant equipment. The term shall not include alarms caused by malfunction of
the alarm console.
LOCAL ALARM
Any alarm or device which, when activated, produces a signal not connecting to the alarm
console, such as a store or home burglar alarm actuating a bell or horn device.
PERSON
Deemed to include any natural person, sole proprietorship, partnership, association or corporation.
§ 33-4. False alarms.
In the case of a false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall immediately notify the Lititz
Borough Police Department in a manner to be prescribed by rules and regulation of the Lititz Borough
Police Department. In addition, in the case of false alarms, the Borough Police Chief or his designee
shall cause an investigation to be made and shall keep a record of said false alarms on file. For such
false alarms, Borough Council prescribes the following penalties:
For the third false alarm in any given calendar year, a warning shall be issued.
For the fourth false alarm in any given calendar year, the Borough Police Chief or his designee
shall notify the person occupying the premises upon which the alarm system is located that a false
alarm has been received and that any further false alarms during the same calendar year will
result in penalties as set forth in this chapter.
For the fifth false alarm received in the same calendar year, an administrative fee of $25, payable
to Lititz Borough, shall be imposed. The administrative fee hereby imposed shall be payable in lieu
of a fine hereinafter imposed by this chapter.
For the sixth false alarm received in the same calendar year, an administrative fee of $50, payable
to Lititz Borough, shall be imposed. The administrative fee hereby imposed shall be payable in lieu
of a fine hereinafter imposed by this chapter.
For the seventh and any subsequent false alarms received in the same calendar year, an
administrative fee of $100, payable to Lititz Borough, shall be imposed. The administrative fee
hereby imposed shall be payable in lieu of a fine hereinafter imposed by this chapter.
§ 33-5. Service of notice.
Notice shall be given by the Borough Police Chief or his designee to the person occupying the
premises upon which the alarm system is located by mailing a copy of the notice, certified mail, returnreceipt
requested, to such person at the address where the alarm system is located. A notice may also
be given by personal service of the notice by handing a copy of the same to the occupant of the
premises upon which the alarm system is located or to an adult resident thereof or an employee
located thereon. If the service is made by personal service, the Borough Police Chief or his designee
shall file a proof of service which shall be under oath and which shall designate the person and title
upon whom service was made.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 55/233
[1]
[1]
§ 33-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating the terms of this chapter or any person who shall fail to pay the
administrative fee for false alarms in excess of four in the same calendar year shall, upon conviction
thereof by summary proceedings, be subject to a fine of not more than $300 and costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the Lancaster County Prison for
not more than 30 days, or both.
§ 33-7. Severability.
In the event that any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this chapter shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provision, section, sentence, clauses or part of
this chapter, it being the intent of the Borough of Lititz that such remainder shall be and shall remain in
full force and effect.
Chapter 34. Bicycles
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961;[1]
amended in its entirety 12-30-1975 by Ord. No. C-177, approved 12-30-1975. Sections 34-3 and 34-
5D amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Other amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 55.
Editor's Note: This chapter was originally adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1,
which ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 34-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BICYCLE
A device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride and having two tandem
wheels, either of which is 20 inches or more in diameter.
§ 34-2. License required.
No person shall operate a bicycle on streets, lanes or alleys of the borough unless such bicycle has
been licensed and a license tag attached thereto as provided herein.
§ 34-3. License fee.
Application for a bicycle license and license tag, entitled "bicycle registration application," shall be
made to the Mayor or his delegate, and upon receiving the properly completed application therefor plus
a license fee in the amount as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees, the Mayor or his delegate is
authorized and directed to issue a bicycle license, which shall be effective for as long as said bicycle
belongs to the applicant, except as provided in §§ 34-5C and D and 34-6.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 34-4. Refusal of license.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 56/233
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
[1]
D.
A.
B.
C.
The Mayor or his delegate shall not issue a license for any bicycle when there are reasonable
grounds to believe that the applicant is not the owner or entitled to the possession of said bicycle.
The Mayor or his delegate shall have the right to inspect any bicycle before licensing same and
shall refuse a license for any bicycle which is determined to be in unsafe mechanical condition.
§ 34-5. Use of license.
Upon issuing a bicycle license, the Mayor or his delegate shall also issue a license tag bearing the
license number assigned to the bicycle and the name of the borough. Such license tag shall be
serially numbered and shall be provided by the borough.
Such license tag shall at all times be firmly attached to the rear of the bicycle for which issued in
such position as to be plainly visible from the rear.
No person shall remove from a bicycle or alter such license tag except upon a transfer of
ownership or in the event the bicycle is dismantled and no longer operated upon any street, lane
or alley of this borough.
In the event a license tag is stolen or lost or becomes illegible, another one shall be issued by the
Mayor or his delegate upon payment of a fee as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 34-6. License valid only for specified owner and bicycle.
Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the licensee shall remove the license tag and
shall surrender same to the Mayor or his delegate.
§ 34-7. Records.
The Mayor or his delegate shall maintain a record of:
The number of each license, the date issued and the name, date of birth and address of the
person to whom issued.
The number on the frame of the bicycle for which issued.
A record of all bicycle license fees collected by him.
§ 34-8. Revenue.
All fees received by the Mayor or his delegate under the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the
Borough Treasury prior to each regular meeting of the Council.
Chapter 36. Construction Code, Uniform; Property
Maintenance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Warwick Area Appeals Board — See Ch. 10, Art. I.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 57/233
[1]
A.
B.
(a)
(1)
A.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 50.
Fees — See Ch. 55.
Smoke detectors — See Ch. 59, Art. II.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 103.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 108.
Zoning — See Ch. 122.
Article I. Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 12-27-2006 by Ord. No. C-481,[1] approved 12-27-2006]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 36, Construction Codes, Uniform, adopted 6-
24-2004 by Ord. No. C-456, approved 6-24-2004.
§ 36-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Lititz Construction Code Ordinance."
§ 36-2. Intent.
By Act 45 of 1999, the Pennsylvania Legislature provided for the adoption of a Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code and directed the Department of Labor and Industry to promulgate
regulations for the Uniform Construction Code. In 2002, the Department of Labor and Industry
adopted final regulations governing certification and training of persons to administer the Uniform
Construction Code, and on January 10, 2004, the Department issued final regulations for the
administration of the Uniform Construction Code. The Uniform Construction Code incorporates the
International Building Code/2003, the International Residential Code/2003, the International
Existing Building Code/2003, the standards incorporated into such publications by reference, and
other publications as set forth in the Labor and Industry Regulations. The Borough Council desires
to adopt and administer the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code and establish administrative
and enforcement regulations.
In accordance with Section 302(a) of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, this article does
not adopt the International Property Maintenance Code and shall not be considered as a property
maintenance code. All Borough regulations governing the maintenance of properties shall be in
ordinances separate and distinct from the Borough of Lititz Construction Code.
§ 36-3. Adoption of standards.
The Borough hereby adopts the standards which the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
has made part of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code identified in § 403.21 of the Labor and
Industry Regulations as the Borough of Lititz Construction Code with the following additions to the
International Building Code/2003:
Labor and Industry Regulations amendments.
Labor and Industry Regulations § 403.21(c) concerning items incorporated into the UCC is
amended to incorporate the provisions of the Borough Building Code in existence as of May
11, 1998, and is amended to include the following regulations:
Private garage fire separation. Private garages shall be separated from the dwelling by
means of 5/8 inch type "X" gypsum board applied to all walls and ceilings of the garage.
Doors from the garage to the dwelling shall be a minimum of 1 3/4 inch solid wood or a
listed 20 minute fire-rated steel door. Attic access openings or stairs shall be covered
with a minimum of one layer of 5/8 inch type "X" drywall.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 58/233
(2)
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
Subsection (b) under § 403.28, Uncertified Buildings, of Part XIV of the Uniform Construction
Code be adopted in its entirety as an addendum to the Uniform Construction Code previously
adopted by the Borough, pertaining to uncertified buildings within the Department's
jurisdiction, to utilize the standards of Subsection (b) for the issuance of certificates of
occupancy to uncertified buildings.
[Added 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. C-493, approved 11-25-2008]
International Building Code amendments.
Section 202, Definitions, shall be amended by inserting the following definitions in
alphabetical order:
BOROUGH COUNCIL. The governing body of the Borough.
BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL. A Borough official certified by Labor and Industry under
Section 103 of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act. The term includes an individual
certified in a category established under Chapter 401 of the Labor and Industry Regulations
to manage building code enforcement activities, supervise building inspectors or plans
examiners, issue building permits, occupancy permits, notice of violations and orders to
vacate, and initiate prosecutions.
CONSTRUCTION CODE OFFICIAL. A Borough official or a third party agency appointed by
the Borough to serve as the Borough construction code official or a third party agency
certified by Labor and Industry under Section 103 of the Pennsylvania Construction Code
Act in an appropriate category established under Section 701(b) of the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act to perform plan review of construction documents, inspect
construction or administer and enforce codes and regulations in that category under the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act or related statutes which an applicant retains to
perform plan review.
DEP. The Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
INTERMUNICIPAL AGREEMENT. The agreement among Borough of Lititz, Elizabeth
Township and Warwick Township as of June 29, 2004, establishing the Warwick Area
Appeals Board.[1]
LABOR AND INDUSTRY. The Department of Labor and Industries of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
LABOR AND INDUSTRY REGULATIONS. All regulations adopted by Labor and Industry to
implement the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act.
PENNSYLVANIA CONSTRUCTION CODE ACT. Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et
seq., as amended.
THIRD PARTY AGENCY. A person, firm or corporation certified by Labor and Industry as a
construction code official and which may be contracted to perform plan review of
construction documents, inspect construction or administer and enforce codes under the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act.
BOROUGH. The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE. The Code adopted pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act and the Labor and Industry Regulations.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 10, Intermunicipal Agreements, Art. I, Warwick Area Appeals.
Section 1612.3 is amended by inserting "Borough of Lititz" and "May 19, 1980," in the
respective blanks.
Section 3410.2 is amended by inserting the date of January 1, 1991, for residential dwellings
and January 1, 1991, for nonresidential structures.
The Borough hereby adopts the listed versions of the following codes as the official codes of the
Borough to be effective as of December 31, 2006. To the extent that these Code(s) are updated or
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 59/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
[2]
(8)
(9)
(10)
(1)
(2)
A.
amended in the future, the Borough hereby automatically adopts the updated version(s) of the
Code(s) in their entirety as required by the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code as of the
effective date of the updated Code(s) as the official codes of the Borough.
2006 International Building Code.
2006 International Residential Code.
2006 International Existing Building Code.
2006 International Fire Code.
2006 International Mechanical Code.
2006 International Plumbing Code.
2006 International Fuel Gas Code.
2006 International Property Maintenance Code.[2]
Editor's Note: See Art. II, Property Maintenance, of this chapter.
2006 International Energy Conservation Code.
2006 ICC Electrical Code.
§ 36-4. Administration and enforcement.
The Borough hereby adopts the provisions of Chapter 1, Administration, of the International Building
Code/2006 and the provisions of the Labor and Industry Regulations set forth below to govern
administration and enforcement of the Construction Code. The administrative provisions of other codes
which Labor and Industry has made part of the UCC, including but not limited to the International
Residential Code/2003, are not part of the Borough of Lititz Construction Code. The provisions of this
Construction Code govern if there is a conflict with the provisions of the Codes set forth in Section
403.21 of the Labor and Industry Regulations or the Labor and Industry Regulations relating to
administration or enforcement. Changes from the International Building Code/2003, Chapter 1, and the
Labor and Industry Regulations to the Borough of Lititz Construction Code are as follows:
International Building Code amendments.
In Section 101.1, insert "Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania."
Section 101.2 shall provide as follows:
101.2 Scope. These regulations shall control all matters concerning the construction,
alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, location, occupancy and maintenance of all
buildings and structures and shall apply to existing or proposed structures, except as such
matters are otherwise provided for in other ordinances or statutes, including, but not limited
to, the Borough Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,
Stormwater Management Ordinance[1] or in the rules and regulations authorized for
promulgation under the provisions of this construction code. Whenever there is a conflict
between the provisions of this construction code and any other Borough ordinance, including
but not limited to the Zoning Ordinance, it is the intent of the Borough Council that the more
stringent requirement shall apply. All construction which the Pennsylvania Construction
Code Act or the Labor and Industry Regulations exempt from compliance with the Uniform
Construction Code are exempt from the provisions of this construction code. Items
exempted from compliance with the Uniform Construction Code by Sections 403.1(b) and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 60/233
[1]
(3)
(4)
(5)
403.1(e) of the Labor and Industry Regulations do not have to comply with the construction
code but shall comply with all other applicable Borough ordinances.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 122, Zoning, Ch. 108, Subdivision and Land Development, and Ch.
103, Stormwater Management, respectively.
Section 101.3 shall be amended by adding the following sentence to the existing section: "It is
the further intent of the Borough Council that all construction within the Borough shall comply
with the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act and all applicable regulations to
implement the Americans with Disabilities Act promulgated by federal and state regulatory
agencies and with the Code Requirements for Housing Accessibility, and this Code shall be
interpreted in a manner which fulfills this intent. It is also the further intent of the Borough
Council to comply with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act and the
Labor and Industry Regulations."
Section 101.4.5 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 103, Department of Building Safety, shall be deleted in its entirety and a new Section
103, Administration, shall be inserted which shall provide as follows:
SECTION 103
ADMINISTRATION
103.1 Building Official. The Borough Council shall appoint a person or persons to serve as
a Building Code Official and a Construction Code Official as those terms are defined in the
Labor and Industry Regulations. Both the Building Code Official and the Construction Code
Official shall be considered the Building Official as such term is defined and used in this
construction code.
103.2 Powers and duties of building code official and construction code official. The
Building Code Official shall have all powers set forth in the Labor and Industry Regulations
and shall have the powers and duties of the Building Official set forth in this construction
code. The Construction Code Official shall have the powers set forth in the Labor and
Industry Regulations and may also have the powers of the Building Official set forth in this
construction code. The respective duties and responsibilities of the Building Code Official
and the Construction Code Official shall be determined by the Borough Council and shall be
within the limitations of any certifications required or issued by Labor and Industry.
103.2.1 The Building Code Official shall serve at the pleasure of the Borough Council.
The Building Code Official shall provide supervision of the Construction Code Official,
receive uniform construction code permit applications, address citizen inquiries,
concerns and complaints, issuing building permits, occupancy permits, and manage
code enforcement activities, including, but not limited to, issuing notice of violations and
orders to vacate, and initiation of prosecutions.
103.2.2 The Construction Code Official shall serve at the pleasure of the Borough
Council. The Construction Code Official shall perform plan review of construction
documents, issue construction code permits, inspect construction, provide the Building
Code Official with reports of inspections and recommendations upon issuance of
certificates of occupancy, and administer and enforce this construction code. The
Construction Code Official may be a third party agency.
103.2.3 An applicant for a construction code permit shall submit two complete copies of
the application to the Building Code Official. The Building Code Official shall transmit a
complete copy of the construction code permit application to the Construction Code
Official for plan review, issuance of the construction code permit, and inspection of
construction. The Construction Code Official shall notify the applicant when plan review
has been completed, and the applicant shall pay plan review and estimated inspection
fees to the Construction Code Official prior to issuance of the construction code permit.
The Construction Code Official shall notify the Building Code Official when the work is
complete and has successfully had its final inspection. The Building Code Official shall
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 61/233
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(8)
issue the certificate of occupancy after receipt of notification from the Construction Code
Official that the work has been finally inspected and all fees have been paid.
103.2.4 As an alternative to the procedure set forth in Section 103.2.3 above, an
applicant for a construction code permit shall submit one complete copy of the
application to the Building Code Official together with plans which a third party agency
has reviewed and has certified to meet all requirements of this construction code and the
fee imposed by the Borough for administrative processing of an application when the
applicant has a third party agency review the plans. If the documents are in satisfactory
form, the Building Code Official shall issue a construction code. The permit holder shall
arrange for all inspections with the Construction Code Official who shall notify the
Building Code Official when the work is complete and has successfully had its final
inspection. The Building Code Official shall issue the certificate of occupancy after
receipt of notification from the Construction Code Official that the work has been finally
inspected and all fees have been paid.
103.3 Organization. The Borough Council shall appoint such other officers, technical
assistants, inspectors and other employees as shall be necessary for the administration of
this construction code.
Section 104.4 shall be amended by inserting the following language after the first sentence:
"The Building Official shall have the right to reject any report performed by any individual or
agency unless the permit holder has requested and obtained the prior approval of the Building
Official for such individual or agency to perform such inspection. Any individual or agency
performing such inspection and providing such report shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Building Official that such individual or agency has obtained all necessary certifications
from Labor and Industry."
Section 104.8 shall provide as follows:
104.8 Liability. The Borough and the Building Official shall have all immunities and rights
granted by the Pennsylvania Judicial Code, including, but not limited to Chapter 85.
Sections 105, Permits, 106, Construction Documents, and 111, Service Utilities, of Chapter 1
of the International Building Code/2003 shall not be a part of the Borough Construction Code.
The Borough hereby adopts and incorporates Sections 403.41, 403.42, 403.42a, 403.43,
403.44, 403.47, 403.48, 403.61, 403.62, 403.62a, 403.63 and 403.66 of the Labor and
Industry Regulations to govern applications for and issuance of construction code permits for
nonresidential and residential construction with the changes set forth below:
Sections 403.42(a) and 403.62(a) shall be amended by inserting the following at the end
of the existing sections: "It shall be the joint responsibility of the owner, lessee, if any, and
the contractor to determine that a Construction Code permit (and all other required
permits and approvals) has been obtained before performing any work. It shall be
unlawful for any contractor or subcontractor to perform any work for which a Construction
Code permit is required unless the owner and contractor obtain and post a Construction
Code permit as required by this Construction Code."
Sections 403.42a(b) and 403.62a(b) shall be amended by inserting the following at the
end of the existing sections "At the time of filing an application for a construction code
permit, the applicant shall present to the Building Code Official adequate evidence that
the applicant has obtained from all governmental authorities having jurisdiction, all
permits, licenses, approvals and/or variances required in connection with the proposed
use, occupancy, construction, enlargement, alteration or demolition. Such agencies shall
include but not be limited to the Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board, Lancaster County
Conservation District, Borough of Lititz Municipal Authority (where public sewer or water
service is proposed), Sewage Enforcement Officer (where on-lot sewage disposal is
proposed), State Police Fire Marshal, DEP, Labor and Industry and the Pennsylvania
Departments of Community and Economic Development and Transportation. No
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 62/233
(c)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(a)
(12)
(a)
(b)
(13)
(14)
application for a construction code permit is complete without a copy of any required
zoning permit and proof of any required subdivision and/or land development approval,
and stormwater management plan approval.
Sections 403.43(h) and 403.63(h) shall be amended by inserting the following at the end
of the existing sections: "The applicant shall post a copy of the Construction Code permit
at a location on the property clearly visible to members of the public."
A new Section 108.1.2 shall be inserted which shall provide as follows:
108.1.2 Time of payment of fees. An applicant for a permit under this construction code
shall pay the Borough's administrative fee to the Borough at the time of application. If the
applicant has not retained a third party agency for plan review, prior to the issuance of a
construction code permit, the applicant shall pay to the Construction Code Official the plan
review fee and the estimated fee for all inspections required. If additional inspections
become necessary during the course of construction, the applicant shall reimburse the
Construction Code Official for all such costs within 15 days after the date of an invoice for
such costs. An applicant shall pay to the Construction Code Official all fees and costs
incurred for all inspections required during the course of construction prior to the issuance of
a certificate of use and occupancy for the structure for which a construction code permit has
been issued.
Section 108.4 shall be revised to provide:
108.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work
on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the
necessary construction code permits shall be subject to an additional fee for expedited
processing which shall be equal to the fee which should have been paid at permit
application. The expedited processing fee shall be paid in full in addition to the normal
application fee prior to the issuance of a construction code permit.
Section 108.6 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Sections 109.3, 109.4, 109.5, and 109.6 of the International Building Code/2003 shall be
deleted and the Borough hereby adopts Sections 403.45, 403.64, and 403.86 of the Labor
and Industry Regulations governing inspections with the changes set forth below:
Sections 403.64(g) shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 110, Certificate of Occupancy, of the International Building Code/2003 is deleted. The
Borough adopts Sections 403.46 and 403.65 of the Labor and Industry Regulations governing
certificates of occupancy. Sections 403.46 and 403.65 of the Labor and Industry Regulations
are amended as follows:
Section 403.46(b) is amended by adding the following subsections:
(10) A statement that the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be deemed
permission to occupy the structure or commence a use if any other ordinance requires
the issuance of a permit or certificate prior to use and occupancy.
Section 403.65(b) is amended by adding the following subsections:
(9) A statement that the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be deemed
permission to occupy the structure or commence a use if any other ordinance requires
the issuance of a permit or certificate prior to use and occupancy.
Section 112, Board of Appeals, shall be amended in its entirety to provide as follows:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 63/233
(15)
112.1 Board of Appeals. The Borough hereby appoints the Warwick Area Appeals Board
as the Board of Appeals under the Borough of Lititz Construction Code. Members of the
Warwick Area Appeals Board shall be selected in accordance with the intermunicipal
agreement.
112.2 Authority of Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall hear and rule on
appeals, requests for variances and requests for extensions of time. An application or
appeal shall be based upon, and the board of appeals in making its decisions shall consider,
those factors set forth in the Labor and Industry Regulations.
112.3 Membership of Board of Appeals. A member of the Board of Appeals shall be
qualified by training and experience to pass on matters pertaining to building construction.
Members of the governing body may not serve on the Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals
member may not cast a vote or participate in a hearing in any appeal, request for variance
or request for extension of time in which the member has a personal, professional or
financial interest.
112.4 Operation of board. The Board of Appeals may establish policies and procedures
necessary to carry out its duties in accordance with the intermunicipal agreement. The
Board shall annually select one of its members to serve as Chairperson and one of its
members to serve as Vice Chairperson. The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its
meetings and file a written decision on all appeals under this construction code. The Board
of Appeals shall provide notice of and conduct its meetings in accordance with the Sunshine
Act, 65 Pa. C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
112.5 Procedures for applications and appeals. Any person desiring to file an application
or appeal to the Board of Appeals may file such appeal with the Building Code Official. All
applications and appeals to the Board of Appeals shall be in writing and shall specify the
section of this construction code from which relief is sought or the action of the Building
Official which is the subject of the appeal. The written application or appeal shall state all of
the grounds for the application or appeal and shall include any necessary plans or
specification to provide the Board of Appeals with information to evaluate the application or
appeal and shall include the fee. No application appeal will be considered complete without
the necessary appeal fee. Any appeal from a determination of the Building Official shall be
filed within 20 calendar days of the determination.
112.5.1 Hearings. An applicant or appellant who desires to present testimony to the
Board of Appeals shall request a hearing in the application or appeal. If the applicant or
appellant does not request a hearing, it will be assumed that the Board of Appeals may
render its determination based on the written information submitted with the application or
appeal and any additional information available to members of the Board of Appeals.
112.5.2 Parties. The Borough shall be considered a party to all appeals or applications
filed with the Board of Appeals. Other persons affected by the appeal or application who
have made timely appearances of record may also be recognized as parties to the appeal
or application.
112.5.3 Decision. The Board of Appeals shall render its decision in writing within any
time periods imposed in state laws or Labor and Industry Regulations. The Board of
Appeals shall provide the applicant or appellant, the Building Official and the Borough
with copies of the appeal.
Section 113, Violations, shall provide as follows:
113.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy, or to permit the erection,
construction, alteration, extension, repair, removal, demolition, use or occupancy of, any
building or structure or equipment regulated by this construction code, or cause same to be
done, in conflict with or in violation of this construction code. It shall also be unlawful for any
person to place inaccurate or misleading information on an application or plan or to omit
relevant information from an application or a plan submitted to the Borough.
113.2 Notice of violation. The Building Official may serve a notice of violation on any
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 64/233
(16)
person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, removal,
demolition, use, permission to use, occupancy, or permission for occupancy of a building or
structure or equipment in violation of the provisions of this construction code, or in violation
of a detailed statement or a plan approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this construction code. Such notice shall order
discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be a defense to an enforcement action that the
building official did not serve or that the defendant did not receive a written notice of violation
prior to the institution of the enforcement action.
113.2.1 If an inspection reveals a violation of this construction code, the Construction
Code official shall discuss the inspection results with the permit holder at the completion
of the inspection.
113.2.2 When a violation relates to an unsafe building, structure, or equipment, the
Building Official shall proceed in accordance with Section 403.84 of the Labor and
Industry Regulations.
113.3 Prosecution of violation. If the Building Code Official has served a notice of violation
and the notice of violation is not complied with within the time specified by the Building
Official, or if the Building Code Official determines that there is insufficient time to serve a
notice of violation or that such notice of violation will have no practical or beneficial effect,
the Building Code Official shall notify the Borough Council of the violation and shall request
the Borough Council to authorize institution of enforcement proceedings against the violator
and/or authorize the Borough Solicitor to institute the appropriate proceedings at law or in
equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require the removal or termination of
the unlawful use of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this construction
code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Building Code Official may institute summary enforcement proceedings without prior
authorization of the Borough Council.
113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this construction
code or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy, or permit the use or
occupancy of, any building or structure or equipment regulated by this construction code in
violation of the provisions of this construction code or of an approved plan or of a directive of
the Building Official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
construction code or who shall permit the use, occupancy, erection, construction, alteration,
extension, removal, demolition or repair of the building or structure or equipment in violation
thereof, shall, upon being found guilty in an enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Borough, pay a penalty of not less than $200 and not more than $1,000 for each violation,
plus all costs of prosecution, which fines and penalties may be collected as provided by law.
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and each section of
this construction code which is violated shall be deemed a separate offense. The Building
Official may request the Police Department to make arrests for any offense against this
construction code or orders of the Building Official affecting the immediate safety of the
public.
113.5 Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the Borough Solicitor or the Building Official from instituting appropriate action to
prevent the unlawful construction or to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent
illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to stop an illegal act, conduct,
business, or use of a building or structure on or about any premises.
Section 114.3 shall provide as follows:
114.3 Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the
structure after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person
is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall commit a violation of
this construction code and shall be subject to penalties or fines as provided in Section 113.4
and remedies as provided in Section 113.5.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 65/233
(17)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(1)
B.
(1)
A.
Section 115, Unsafe Structures and Equipment, of the International Building Code/2003 is
deleted. The Borough adopts Section 403.84 of the Labor and Industry Regulations governing
unsafe buildings, structures, or equipment.
International Residential Code.
Table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Code/2003 is hereby completed by inserting
the following information:
Ground snow load: 30 pounds per square foot.
Wind speed (mph): 80 miles per hour.
Seismic design category: zero.
Weathering: severe.
Frost line depth: 36 inches.
Termite: moderate to heavy.
Decay: slight to moderate.
Winter design temperature: 10°.
Ice shield underlayment required: yes.
Flood hazard: May 19, 1980.
Air freezing index: 750.
Mean annual temperature: 50°.
Article II. Property Maintenance
[Adopted 12-27-2006 by Ord. No. C-480, approved 12-27-2006]
§ 36-5. Modification of standards.
The Property Maintenance Code,[1] is amended by adding/modifying the following provisions:
Section PM-107.3 is amended to add the following:
PM-107.3.4 Service Fees for Reoccurring Violations. When a property has been declared
a "public nuisance" due to refuse accumulation, insect, vermin or rodent infestation, lack of
required utilities, facilities, equipment or other property maintenance violations, deemed a
detriment to the occupants of a property or the public-at-large and/or cause a blighting
condition, the Borough Code Official will notify the responsible party. In the event of a
reoccurrence of the violation within a twelve-month period, the following service charges will
be assessed against the responsible party:
(1) First reoccurrence: $100
(2) Second reoccurrence: $150.
(3) Third through sixth reoccurrence: $200 per occurrence.
(4) Seventh or subsequent reoccurrence: $300 per occurrence.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 66/233
[2]
(2)
(3)
Repeat offender service fees shall be payable to the Borough within 15 days of receipt of the
Borough invoice setting forth the service fee. Failure to timely pay said fee will result in the
Borough instituting appropriate action against the offender to recover both the service fee
and any related administrative fees.
PM-107.3.5 Public Safety Official Notice and Quick Ticket Citation Procedures. In
addition to other enforcement mechanisms available to the Borough under this chapter, the
Borough Code Official is authorized to issue public safety official notices for Property
Maintenance Code violations and quick ticket citations for code violations regarding high
weeds and grass, garbage and rubbish, animal waste and health code violations. The fines
for the above-referenced violations shall be payable within 15 days. Repeat offenders shall
be subject to additional penalties. Failure to pay the citation within 15 days may result in a
summary citation being issued through the local district judge's office. The forms of the
Public Safety Official Notice and Quick Ticket Citation are attached to this article.[2] The
forms of the Public Safety Official Notice and the Quick Ticket Citation may be changed by
resolution by Borough Council from time to time.
Editor's Note: Said forms are on file in the Borough offices.
Add the following definition to PM-302.1:
Blighted Property/Public Nuisance. Blighted property/public nuisance is defined as any
one of the following:
(1) Any premises which because of physical condition or use is regarded as a public
nuisance and has been declared as a public nuisance in accordance with the local
housing, building, plumbing, fire or related codes;
(2) Any premises which because of physical condition, use or occupancy is considered
an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells,
shafts, basement, excavations, unsafe fences or structures;
(3) Any dwelling which because it is dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, insect or vermin
infested or lacking in the facilities and equipment required by this chapter, and has
been designated by the Borough Code Official as unfit for human habitation or
occupancy;
(4) Any structure which is a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to the safety of
person or property;
(5) Any structure from which the utility, plumbing, heating, sewage or other facilities
have been disconnected, destroyed, removed, or rendered ineffective so that the
property is unfit for its intended use;
(6) Any vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of ground in a predominantly built-out
neighborhood, which by reason of neglect or lack of maintenance, has become a
place of accumulation of trash and debris or a haven for rodents and other vermin;
(7) Any unoccupied property which has been tax delinquent for a period of two years
prior to the effective date of this article, and those in future having a two-year tax
delinquency; and
(8) Any property which is vacant but is not tax delinquent, which as not been
rehabilitated within one year of the receipt of notice to rehabilitate from either the
Borough Code Official of Borough Council.
PM-303.8.2 The existing PM-303.8.2 is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:
PM-303.8.2 Unlicensed or uninspected vehicles. Only one currently unregistered or
uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises in the Borough
and in no event, for more than 10 days. Motor vehicles that do not have current license,
current inspection or current registration must be stored within a completely enclosed
structure, unless a vehicle storage permit is issued by the Code Official. A vehicle storage
permit may be issued only after an inspection is conducted by the Code Official. A vehicle
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 67/233
[1]
A.
B.
storage permit shall be valid for 90 days and may be extended by the Code Official for an
additional 90 days if special circumstances exist. The permit fee for a vehicle storage permit
shall be $75 and such fee may be adjusted from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council. However, no motor vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly,
disrepair or in the process of being stripped or dismantled.
This provisions of this section shall not apply to the storage of motor vehicles on premises
which otherwise comply with applicable zoning regulations, such as automobile repair
garages or motor vehicles towing establishments. Such establishments shall be permitted to
store unlicensed or uninspected motor vehicles for a period of not more than 60 days.
Editor's Note: See § 36-3C(8) for adoption of standards.
Chapter 38. Burning, Open
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 3-27-1973 by Ord. No. C-140, approved 3-
30-1973. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 59.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 66.
Junkyards — See Ch. 72.
§ 38-1. Bonfires or rubbish fires.
The following regulations shall apply to all bonfires or rubbish fires within the Borough of Lititz:
No person shall ignite or feed an open fire to burn any paper, refuse or matter of any kind or make
a bonfire in any public or private place outside of any building.
No person shall burn any paper, refuse or matter of any kind except in an incinerator which is a
refuse device specifically designed for the destruction of refuse by burning and is equipped with a
stack and with an auxiliary source of fuel such as gas, oil or electricity. The subject incinerator may
be the small domestic type which does not require a permit from the commonwealth, provided that
its stack gas emission does not exceed standards established by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources. Commercial-type incinerators are permitted, provided that they have a
current operating permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources,
Bureau of Air Quality and Noise Control.
§ 38-2. Outdoor grill fires.
Outdoor grill-type fires maintained solely for the cooking of food are permitted.
§ 38-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of § 38-1 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100 and costs of prosecution for the first violation nor more
than $200 and costs of prosecution for the second and subsequent violations or, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the Lancaster County Prison for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 41. Curfew
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 68/233
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 10-29-1968 by Ord. No. C-85, approved 10-
30-1968; amended in its entirety 9-29-2015 by Ord. No. C-540, approved 9-29-2015. Subsequent
amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 84.
§ 41-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Lititz Borough Curfew Ordinance."
§ 41-2. Legislative intent.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Lititz, recognizing the problem of crimes committed by and
against juveniles during the nighttime and believing that it can be dealt with more effectively by
regulating the hours during which minors less than 18 years of age may remain in public places and
certain establishments without adult supervision and defining more clearly certain duties and
responsibilities upon those who have the custody and responsibility for the care of such minors, hereby
enacts this chapter for the purpose of promoting the general welfare and protecting the general public
through reduction of juvenile violence and crime within the Borough of Lititz, promoting the safety and
welfare of the Borough's citizens under the age of 18 whose youth and inexperience renders them
particularly vulnerable to becoming participants in criminal activity and in being victimized by
perpetrators of crime, and fostering and strengthening parental responsibility for children.
§ 41-3. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AFTER HOURS
The period of time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday
nights and 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday nights.
EMERGENCY
Unforeseen circumstances, or the status or condition resulting therefrom, requiring immediate
action to safeguard life, limb or property. The term includes but is not limited to fires, natural
disasters, automobile accidents or other similar circumstances.
ESTABLISHMENT
Any privately owned place of business operated for profit, including any place of amusement or
entertainment to which the public is invited.
MINOR
Any person less than 18 years of age. For the purpose of this chapter, any person shall be
deemed to be 18 years of age on the date of his or her 18th birthday and not before this time.
OPERATOR
Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation owning, operating, managing or
conducting any establishment. Whenever used in any provision prescribing a penalty, the word
"operator" shall include the members, partners, officers and managers of any firm, association,
partnership or corporation.
PARENT
The biological or adoptive parent of a minor, a legal guardian or an adult person 21 years of age or
over and who is authorized by a minor's parent or legal guardian to be responsible, either
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 69/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
F.
G.
H.
temporarily or permanently, for the custody or care of any minor or for the control of such minor.
PUBLIC PLACE
Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, vacant lot or any private building,
structure or area to which the public is invited or in which the public is allowed to remain.
REMAIN
To be at or stay at a place.
§ 41-4. Conduct of minors.
It shall be unlawful for a minor to remain in or upon any public place or to remain in any motor vehicle
operating or parked therein or thereon or to remain in or upon an establishment in Lititz Borough after
hours, except as follows:
The minor is accompanied by a parent.
The minor is involved in an emergency.
The minor is engaged in an activity related to his or her employment or his going to or returning
home from such activity without detour or stop.
The minor is on the sidewalk directly abutting a place where he or she resides with a parent.
The minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious or civic organization, by a
public organization or agency, or by another similar organization or entity, which activity is
supervised by adults, and/or the minor is going to or returning from such an activity without detour
or stop.
Errands:
The minor is on an errand at the direction of a parent and the minor has in his or her
possession a written statement signed by the parent containing the following information:
The name, signature, address and telephone number of the parent authorizing the
errand.
The telephone number where the parent may be reached during the errand.
The name of the minor.
A brief description of the errand.
The minor's destination(s) and the hours the minor is authorized to be engaged in the
errand.
No minor or parent shall falsify the documents described above.
The minor is involved in interstate travel through or beginning or terminating in the Borough of
Lititz.
The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such
as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly.
§ 41-5. Conduct of parents.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 70/233
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
No parent shall knowingly permit any minor to remain in or upon any public place or establishment
after hours, unless the minor is engaged in activity permitted in § 41-4 of this chapter. "Knowing" shall
mean knows or has reason to know.
§ 41-6. Conduct of operators of establishments.
No operator of an establishment shall knowingly permit any minor to remain upon the premises of such
establishment after hours.
§ 41-7. Rules and regulations.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized, from time to time, to promulgate such rules and regulations,
including the extension of hours for special occasions, as in his or her opinion shall be necessary or
useful in the enforcement of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall, however, be subject to the
approval of the Borough Council of Lititz Borough.
§ 41-8. Offenses.
Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 41-9. Violations and penalties.
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent
offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that,
based on any response and other circumstances, no exception set forth in § 41-4 applies.
Any minor or parent who violates the provisions of this chapter for the first time may be issued a
citation. The minor may be taken into temporary custody, in which case his or her parents or other
appropriate person shall be notified, and the minor shall be released into the custody of the
appropriate parent or parents of the minor or to a brother or sister 18 years of age or older. If no
such person is available after reasonable efforts have been made to locate such person, then the
minor shall be released to such agencies or institutions as are established for juvenile welfare.
Any minor who violates any provision of this chapter after having received a prior violation/notice
OR any parent who knowingly permits a minor to violate any of the provisions of this chapter is
guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine or
imprisonment as follows:
First offense: up to $25 plus court costs for a parent. For a minor, community service as
directed by the court or enrollment in the Warwick Youth Aid Panel.
Second offense: up to $50 plus court costs.
Third offense: up to $100 plus court costs.
Fourth offense: up to $300 plus court costs. Parents are subject to imprisonment up to 90
days and minors to referral to the juvenile court system.
Fifth and subsequent offenses: up to $600 plus court costs. Parents are subject to
imprisonment up to 90 days and minors to referral to the juvenile court system.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 71/233
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
Any operator convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter for the first time shall be fined
$50 plus court costs and shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Any
operator convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter for the second or subsequent time
shall be fined $300 plus court costs and shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
90 days.
§ 41-10. Annual review.
This chapter and the need for it shall be reviewed annually. By February 1 of each year, the Mayor
and/or the Chief of Police of the Borough of Lititz shall review the chapter and report and make
recommendations to the Lititz Borough Council concerning the effectiveness of and the continuing
need for this chapter. The report shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
The practicality of enforcing the chapter and any problems with enforcement identified by the Lititz
Borough Police Department.
The impact of this chapter and support programs on juvenile crime statistics.
The number of juveniles taken into custody for curfew violations.
The number of official citizen complaints filed regarding the enforcement of this chapter.
Chapter 46. Dogs and Other Animals
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 12-30-2003 by Ord. No. C-453, approved
12-30-2003[1]. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 46, Dogs and Other Animals, which consisted of
the following: Art. I, Dogs, adopted 10-29-1974 by Ord. No. C-159, approved 10-29-1974; and Art. II,
Animals at Large, adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which ordinance adopted
the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
Article I. Dogs
§ 46-1. Dogs restricted from running at large.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog to allow such dog to run at large at
any time, either upon any of the streets, alleys or public grounds in the Borough of Lititz or upon the
property of anyone other than the owner, custodian or keeper of such dog.
§ 46-2. Owner's responsibility at home.
It shall be the duly of the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog and the duty of the parent or guardian
of any minor owner of any dog to keep the dog securely tied or penned in an enclosure in such a
manner that the dog cannot break loose and run at large over the streets, alleys or public grounds in
the Borough of Lititz or upon the property of anyone other than the owner, custodian or keeper of such
dog.
§ 46-3. Owner's responsibility in public.
It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog, while traveling on the streets, alleys
or public grounds in the Borough of Lititz, to have the dog on a leash at all times and to prevent the
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 72/233
dog from entering upon the property of any person in the Borough of Lititz without the property owner's
consent.
§ 46-4. Public annoyance; maintenance of pens in sanitary
condition.
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or other entity whatsoever to harbor, care
for, shelter or maintain any breed of dog or dogs in such a manner as to disturb or unduly annoy the
public through the dog's noise, barking, smell, mischief or other harmful propensities. All dog pens or
other areas in which dogs are kept shall be maintained in a sanitary condition free of offensive,
obnoxious or foul odors.
§ 46-5. Apprehension of dogs; notice of seizure; redemption by
owner.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Borough of Lititz who witnesses any dog running at large
in conflict with the provisions of or who receives information of any dog so running at large to seize
such dog and to convey it to the place designated by the Borough Council as a pound. Notice of such
seizure shall be sent to the owner of such dog in the manner prescribed by law, and such dog may be
redeemed by the owner thereof within the time specified by law, upon payment of the charges incurred
by reason of such detention. Rates for such charge shall be determined from time to time by the
Borough Council.
§ 46-6. Dog defecation on public and private property restricted
and disposal required.
Any person having ownership, possession, custody or control of any dog which commits a nuisance
(i.e., defecation) in any area other than the private property of the owner of such dog shall be required
to immediately remove any and all feces from the ground surface and to place it in a nonleaking
container or bag and to properly dispose of the container or bag in a trash or litter receptacle.
§ 46-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity whatsoever violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof by summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine not to
exceed $300 for any single violation of this article, together with the costs of prosecution. Each day's
continuance of the offense following notice thereof shall constitute a new violation. Upon default of
payment of the fine imposed and the costs, the defendant shall be imprisoned in the Lancaster County
Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that if the District Justice determines
that the defendant is without the financial means to pay the fines and cost immediately or in a single
remittance, such defendant shall be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such
periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
Article II. Animals at Large
§ 46-8. Animals restricted from running at large.
No horses, cattle, sheep, swine or any other animals are permitted to run at large unless someone has
charge of them, keeping them off the railroad, pavements and footwalks or from doing any damage
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 73/233
[1]
A.
[1]
(a)
(1)
A.
whatsoever within the limits of the borough.
§ 46-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, corporation, partnership or other entity whatsoever violating any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed the maximum
fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such costs and prosecution,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that if the District Justice
determines that the defendant is without the financial means to pay the fines and costs immediately or
in a single remittance, such defendant shall be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and
over such periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
Chapter 50. (Reserved)
[Former Ch. 50, Electrical Standards, adopted 12-29-1998 by Ord. No. C-411, approved 12-29-1998,
was superseded 12-27-2006 by Ord. No. C-481, approved 12-27-2006. For current provisions, see Ch.
36, Construction Code, Uniform; Property Maintenance, Art. I, Uniform Construction Code.]
Chapter 55. Fees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 1-29-1985 by Res. No. 373,[1] approved 1-
29-1985. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Editor's Note: This resolution supersedes former Ch. 55, Fees, adopted 12-29-1981 by Res. No. 336,
approved 12-29-1981, as amended.
§ 55-1. Schedule of fees.
[Amended 8-27-1985 by Res. No. 385]
The following schedule of fees is hereby established with respect to licenses, permits and activities
required or regulated under the provisions of various chapters of the Code of the Borough of Lititz.
Applications for and the issuance of such licenses and permits shall be subject to the provisions of the
specific chapter of the Code which is indicated for each type of license or permit. The business, activity
or operation for which the license or permit is required shall be subject to all regulations set forth in the
chapter to which reference is made.
§ 55-1.1. Chapter 34, Bicycles.
Bicycle registration application: $2.
§ 55-1.2. Chapter 36, Construction Code, Uniform.
[Amended 3-31-1992 by Ord. No. C-352, approved 3-31-1992; 8-31-2004 by Res. No. 663, approved
8-31-2004; 11-29-2005 by Res. No. 678]
UCC BUILDING PERMIT FEES
Residential (International Residential Code – IRC – regulated).
Additions/alterations:
Construction inspection, per discipline: $30 for each inspection.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 74/233
[2]
[3]
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(2)
[1]
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
Plan review and consulting: $40 per hour in one-fourth-hour increments.
Reinspections: $30 per trip to job site.
Residential (International Residential Code – IRC – regulated).
New construction:
Construction inspection, per discipline: $50 for each inspection.
Plan review and consulting: $200 per dwelling unit.
Reinspections: $50 per trip to job site.
Additions/alterations:
Plan review and inspections for construction value up to $7,500: $150.
Plans review and inspections for construction value greater than $7,500: $20 per
$1,000 of construction value.
Commercial (International Residential Code – IBC – regulated).
New construction:
Plan review: $0.10 per square foot.
Additional reviews:
Hood and duct system plan review: $300 per system.
Elevators: $200 per bank.
Fire sprinkler system: $350 for the first 100 heads, plus $1 each for any additional
heads.
Fire detection or alarm system: $150 for the first 15,000 square feet, plus $0.01 each
for any additional square feet.
Alternative fire suppression system: $75 per hour of review time.
Other activity:
Inspections: $0.20 per square feet of all areas.
Code consulting: $125 per hour.
All UCC building permits issued will be subject to an administrative fee equal to 10% of the
total plans review and inspection fees, as established within this section.
All building permits issued will also be subject to a per permit state fee of $2 as required by
Act 13 of 2004, payable to the Borough of Lititz.
Uniform Construction Code appeal fee: $500.
§ 55-1.3. Chapter 72, Junkyards.
Annual license fee.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 75/233
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
A.
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(c)
(1)
(2)
A.
Application prior to and including July 1: $200.
Application after July 1: $100.
§ 55-1.4. Chapter 87, Peddlers, Canvassers and Solicitors.
License fee.
Principal:
Per day: $10.
Per week: $25.
Per month: $50.
Per year: $250.
Helper:
Per day: $5.
Per week: $12.
Per month: $25.
Per year: $125.
§ 55-1.5. Chapter 100, Sewers.
Article III.
Connection to sewer system.
[Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. C-323, approved 12-13-1988; 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345,
approved 6-25-1991; 7-26-2005 by Ord. No. C-468, approved 7-26-2005]
Connection fee: actual costs of labor, equipment and materials.
Customer facilities fee: actual costs of labor, equipment and materials.
Tapping fees (per EDU):
The capacity-related tapping fee for the sewer system shall be $2,061.90 per EDU
based on an EDU of 237 gallons per day for the sewer system.
The connection-related tapping fee for the sewer system shall be $497.70 per EDU
based on an EDU of 237 gallons per day for the sewer system.
The total sewer tapping fee shall be $2,559.60 per EDU based on an EDU of 237
gallons per day for the sewer system.
Notwithstanding any other definition of an EDU as set forth in Ord. No. C-345 or the
Code of Ordinances of Lititz Borough, for the purposes of calculating sewer tapping
fees, an EDU shall be calculated on the basis of 237 gallons per day per EDU.
Sewer rental charges. In addition to the sewer service charge, for all connections to the sewer
system imposed in Subsection A(3) below, effective for bills dated December 10, 2010, and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 76/233
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
(1)
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
B.
thereafter, there shall be imposed the following sewer usage charges for usage of 100 cubic
feet and over per quarter:
[Amended 7-29-1986 by Ord. No. C-300, approved 7-29-1986; 7-31-2007 by Ord. No. C-485,
approved 7-31-2007; 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. C-510, approved 10-26-2010; 1-29-2019 by
Ord. No. C-570, approved 1-29-2019]
3 Months' Usage Increments and Ranges Rate per 100 Cubic Feet
100 cubic feet and over $2.47
Sewer service charges.
[Amended 7-29-1986 by Ord. No. C-300, approved 7-29-1986; 7-31-2007 by Ord. No. C-485,
approved 7-31-2007; 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. C-510, approved 10-26-2010; 1-29-2019 by
Ord. No. C-570; 1-29-2019 by Ord. No. C-570, approved 1-29-2019]
The sewer service charge per meter for all connections per quarter shall be $82.09, plus
an additional charge as specified below for each additional EDU over one serviced by the
same meter.
If more than one dwelling unit is served by the same meter, the increase charge shall be
$61.56 for each additional EDU over one serviced by the same meter.
An administrative fee of $25 shall be imposed upon the customer where the Borough posts a
ten-day notice on the customer's property regarding a delinquent sewer bill.
[Added 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. C-391, approved 12-30-1996]
§ 55-1.6. Shows and exhibitions.
License fee for each and every exhibition: $50.
§ 55-1.7. Chapter 105, Streets and Sidewalks.
Permit issuance fees. Issuance fees to defray costs incurred by the Borough in reviewing and
processing the application and plans, including the preliminary review of the site location identified
in the application, and in issuing and processing the permit shall be as follows:
Issuance fee: $50.
General permit inspection fees. General inspection fees to defray costs incurred by the Borough in
spot inspection of permitted work or subsequent inspections after the permitted work has been
completed and to monitor compliance with the permit and this chapter shall be as follows:
Underground facilities (for example, pipelines, buried cable with pedestals, conduit and
manholes). This fee is calculated on the total linear feet of the facility or facilities being
permitted within the right-of-way, regardless of whether the surface is opened.
Physically connected longitudinal facility or facilities (first 100 feet or fraction thereof) in:
Type Fee
Pavement $60.00
Shoulder $40.00
Outside roadway $20.00
Additional physically connected longitudinal facilities (each 100 feet or fraction thereof) in:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 77/233
[1]
[2]
(c)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
TTyyppee FFeeee
Pavement $30.00
Shoulder $20.00
Outside roadway $10.00
Lateral facility or facilities (each crossing) in:
Fee.
Location Fee
Pavement $30.00
Shoulder $20.00
Outside roadway $10.00
If one lateral involves two or more highway areas, only the higher area fee will be
assessed.
Surface openings of less than 25 square feet (for example, service connections performed
independently of underground facility installation, pipeline repairs) (each opening) in:
Fee.
Location Fee
Pavement $30.00
Shoulder $20.00
Outside roadway $10.00
If one opening involves two or more highway areas, only the higher area fee will be
assessed.
Test holes drilled in roadway (each hole): $5.
Additional fees. If the Borough anticipates that the cost of reviewing the required application
information or inspecting the permitted work will exceed the above issuance or inspection fees by
a significant amount, the following additional fees will be assessed:
Additional issuance fee. The Borough will estimate the additional amount of salary, overhead
and expenses and prepare a reimbursement agreement for execution by the applicant.
Borough review of the permit application will commence on the effective date of the
agreement.
If the Borough determines that the permitted work is of sufficient magnitude or importance to
warrant assignment of one or more persons to inspect the permitted work on a more than
spot inspection basis, the permit will so indicate and the permittee shall be charged for all
salary, overhead and expenses incurred by the Borough for inspection.
The Borough will provide an itemized invoice for additional fees owed to the Borough.
Refunds. The Borough will refund the general permit inspection fees on unused permits. In order
to be eligible to receive such a refund, the permittee shall deliver the request with the permittee's
copy of the permit to the issuing district permit office on or before the permit expiration date.
§ 55-1.8. Chapter 108, Subdivision of Land.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 78/233
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(c)
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
B.
Subdivision plans.
[Amended 11-24-2009 by Res. No. 755, approved 11-24-2009]
Sketch plan: $150.
Lot add-on: $250.
Subdivision:
Up to 10 lots: $300.
Up to 40 lots: $400.
Over 40 lots: $500.
Construction plan filing: $75.
Actual costs for Borough Engineers to review water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer facilities will
be assessed to the applicant.
Actual costs for the review of and submittal of DER planning modules will be assessed to the
applicant.
Third review. If subdivision plans are not corrected as recommended upon third review, actual cost
of consultant's review, charges plus advertising will be assessed to the applicant.
§ 55-1.9. Chapter 118, Water.
Article II.
Connection to water system.
[Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. C-323, approved 12-13-1988; 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 346,
approved 6-25-1991; 2-26-2002 by Ord. No. C-440, approved 2-26-2002]
Connection fee: Actual costs of labor, equipment and materials.
Customer facilities fee: Actual costs of labor equipment and materials.
Tapping fees:
[Amended 7-26-2005 by Ord. No. C-469, approved 7-26-2005]
The water capacity tapping fee shall be $273.60 per EDU based on an EDU
valuation of 171 gallons per day per EDU.
The distribution component tapping fee shall be $530.10 per EDU based on an EDU
value of 171 gallons per day.
The total water tapping fee shall be $803.70 per EDU based on an EDU value of 171
gallons per day.
Notwithstanding any other definition of an EDU as set forth in Ord. No. C-440 or the
Code of Ordinances of Lititz Borough, for the purposes of calculating water tapping
fees, an EDU shall be calculated on the basis of 171 gallons per day.
Application fee to test fire-protection lines: actual labor cost.
Article III.
Deposit for meter test.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 79/233
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
[1]
(3)
[2]
(4)
D.
One-inch meter or smaller: $15.
Larger than one-inch meter: actual cost of service.
Article IV.
Service charge to restore service: $50.
Shutoff at request of customer: $25.
Restoration of service: $25.
Administrative costs for posting a ten-day notice: $25.
[Added 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. C-391, approved 12-30-1996]
Article VI.
Water service charges. In addition to the water service charge for all connections to the water
system per quarter imposed in Subsection D(2) below, effective for bills dated December 10,
2010, and thereafter, there shall be imposed the following water usage charges for usage of
100 cubic feet and over per quarter:
[Amended 7-29-1986 by Ord. No. C-299, approved 7-29-1986; 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. C-392,
approved 5-8-1990; 2-26-2002 by Ord. No. C-440, approved 2-26-2002; 12-30-2003 by Ord.
No. C-451, approved 12-30-2003; 7-31-2007 by Ord. No. C-485; approved 7-31-2007; 10-26-
2010 by Ord. No. C-510, approved 10-26-2010; 1-29-2019 by Ord. No. C-570, approved 1-
29-2019]
3 Months' Usage Increments and Ranges Rate per 100 Cubic Feet
100 cubic feet and over $1.00
Water service charges.
[Amended 7-29-1986 by Ord. No. C-299, approved 7-29-1986; 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. C-392,
approved 5-8-1990; 7-31-2007 by Ord. No. C-485, approved 7-31-2007; 10-26-2010 by Ord.
No. C-510, approved 10-26-2010; 1-29-2019 by Ord. No. C-570, approved 1-29-2019]
The water service charge per meter for all connections per quarter shall be $26.35, plus
an additional charge as specified below for each additional EDU over one serviced by the
same meter.
If more than one dwelling unit is served by the same meter, the increase charge shall be
$19.76 for each additional EDU over one served by the same meter.
(Reserved)[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(3), Water service charges, added 5-8-1990 by Ord. No.
C-329, approved 5-8-1990, which enacted a rate increase effective September 10, 1992, was
repealed 9-29-1992 by Ord. No. C-359, approved 9-29-1992. The water service charges
which became effective on September 10, 1990, shall hereby continue in full force and effect
until further modified by action of the Borough Council.
(Reserved)[2]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(4), Minimum water service charge, added 5-8-1990 by
Ord. No. C-329, approved 5-8-1990, which enacted a rate increase effective September 10,
1992, was repealed 9-29-1992 by Ord. No. C-359, approved 9-29-1992. The water service
charges which became effective on September 10, 1990, shall hereby continue in full force
and effect until further modified by action of Borough Council.
§ 55-1.10. Chapter 122, Zoning.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 80/233
(a)
(b)
(1)
A.
(1)
B.
(1)
C.
D.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(3)
E.
Appeal or application to Zoning Hearing Board. Except as provided in § 55-1.9A(1) above, the
fees for an appeal or application to the Zoning Hearing Board required by the Lititz Borough
Zoning Ordinance and/or the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code shall be as follows:
[Amended 3-29-1994 by Ord. No. C-373, approved 3-29-1994]
A nonrefundable administrative filing fee and an assessment for the costs involved for notice,
advertising and postage incidental thereto and an assessment for stenographic costs
incidental thereto, in the following categories:
Four hundred dollars for all appeals and applications to the Zoning Hearing Board other
than those historic cases that revert to § 122-41, Building permit required in historic
district, only.
[Amended 11-24-2009 by Res. No. 755, approved 11-24-2009]
Thirty-five dollars for those historic cases that revert to § 122-41, Building permit required
in historic district, only.
Petition for amendment to the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map. The fees for a hearing on a
petition to amend the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map before the Lititz Borough Council shall be
as follows:
A nonrefundable filing fee of $75, plus a deposit in the amount of $35 for the estimated cost of
advertising and postage incidental thereto. Any balance of the deposit remaining will be
refunded to the petitioner, and any advertising costs in excess of the deposit will be charged
to the petitioner. The total fee plus deposit equals $110.
Petition for a curative amendment to the Zoning Ordinance. The fees for a hearing on a petition for
a curative amendment to the Zoning Ordinance which has been submitted to the Borough Council
shall be as follows:
A nonrefundable filing fee of $600, plus a deposit in the amount of $100 for the estimated cost
of advertising and postage incidental thereto plus the deposit in the amount of $300 for the
estimated stenographic costs incidental thereto. Any balance of the deposits remaining will be
refunded to the petitioner, and costs in excess of the deposits will be charged to the petitioner.
The total fee plus deposits equals $1,000.
Transcription of record. In the event of an appeal from a decision of the Zoning Hearing Board or
the Borough Council, the cost of transcribing the record shall be paid by the person taking such
appeal.
Zoning permit fees (required for all UCC related permits and all other non-UCC permits).
[Added 8-31-2004 by Res. No. 663, approved 8-31-2004; approved 11-29-2005 by Res. No. 678]
Cost/value of improvements for residential and commercial (new/additions/alterations):
Up to $5,000: $30.
Each $1,000 or fraction thereof in excess of $5,000: additional $3.
Residential accessory structures (includes sheds up to 144 square feet, fences and other
landscape structures and walls):
$500 or less: no fee.
$501 to $3,000: $30.
$3,001 and above: $3 per additional $1,000.
Patios/walks/decks less than 30 inches above grade:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 81/233
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(a)
(b)
(15)
(a)
(b)
(16)
F.
A.
$500 or less: no fee.
$501 to $3,000: $30.
$3,001 and above: $3 per additional $1,000.
Electrical/mechanical/plumbing:
Cost up to $1,500: $20.
Cost over $1,500: $30.
Grading/excavating/earthmoving/paving: 1% of contract price.
Curb and sidewalk (exterior or street side): no fee.
Replacement of water/sewer on homeowner side: $15.
Spas and hot tubs: $25.
Pools.
(Seasonal, up to 15 feet in diameter): $25.
All other above ground pools: $50.
In-ground pools: $100.
Sign fee (plus UCC inspection fee if applicable): $25.
Temporary or modular building(s), requires building permit: $20.
Demolition permit (permit not required for small structures as determined by Code Official):
$200 per structure.
Permit extension (valid for one year): $25.
Over two failed inspections per job (residential and commercial): $50 per fail.
Certificate of occupancy:
Commercial and residential new construction: $60.
Commercial additions: $60.
Property maintenance fee:
Rental property maintenance inspection (commercial and residential): $50 per inspection.
Determination of rental properties to meet UCC requirements: (billed to property owner).
Zoning hearing: $400.
[Added 8-31-2004 by Res. No. 663, approved 8-31-2004; amended 11-29-2005 by Res. No. 678;
11-24-2009 by Res. No. 755, approved 11-24-2009]
§ 55-1.11. Chapter 89, Plumbing.
Plumber's license fee: $25.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 82/233
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(4)
A.
§ 55-1.12. Chapter 115, Vehicles and Traffic.
Motor vehicle fees:
Parking ticket (overtime meter): $2.
Parking violation: $5.
§ 55-1.13. Chapter 46, Dogs and Other Animals.
[Added 4-27-2007 by Res. No. 704; amended 3-27-2012 by Res. No. 782, approved 3-27-2012]
Stray animal pickup fee:
Per animal/incident for animals not transported by Critter Catchers but held temporarily at
either the holding pen at Lititz Borough PD and/or the LB Public Works Building: $20. The fee
will be collected from the pet owner at the time of pickup.
Effective January 1, 2012, The Borough of Lititz entered into a contract with Critter Catchers,
Inc., Lititz, Pennsylvania (627-4108), for the transportation, care, and disposition of stray
and/or found dogs located in the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania.
Any dog found running at large inside the Borough will be subject to being picked up and
transported by Critter Catchers, Inc. (627-4108), to a temporary holding facility located at the
Northern Lancaster County Regional Police Department (NLCRPD) located 870 Durlach
Road, Clay Township, Pennsylvania, for a period up to 48 hours. Critter Catchers and/or
police will attempt to locate the dog's owners by reasonable means. Dog owners are
expected to have their pets licensed through Lancaster County. If the owners cannot be
located inside 48 hours, the animal will be transported to the Berks County Humane League.
Owners of pets will be responsible to pay Critter Catchers according to the following fee
structure (dogs will not be returned unless payment is received by Critter Catchers and/or
other vendor):
All work initiated between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. shall be billable at a rate
of $95 per dog.
All work initiated between the hours of 8:01 p.m. and 5:59 a.m. shall be billable at a rate
of $130 per dog.
All work related to the exceptional circumstance requirement (injured animal requiring
drug administration or care, and animals requiring actions to suppress aggressive or
threatening behaviors) shall be provided in a separate detailed billing to the NLCRPD by
the vendor for payment.
In addition, pet (dog) owners will be sent a warning letter (first offense) by the Lititz Borough
Police Department stating that their pet was found running at large; second and subsequent
violations will require a summary nontraffic citation be filed through the local Magistrate for
violation of Borough Ordinance C-453. Fines range up to $300 according to the number of
offenses, plus related court/administrative costs.
§ 55-1.14. Requests for information.
[Added 1-27-2009 by Res. No. 737]
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 83/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
[1]
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
The Borough adopts the following fee schedule with regard to information requests under the Act:
[1]
Copies/photocopies: $0.25 per page.
Certification of a record: $5 per record. The certification fee does not include notarization
fees.
Specialized documents (includes, but is not limited to, blueprints, color copies, nonstandard
size documents): actual cost.
Facsimile/microfiche/other media: actual cost.
Conversion to paper: If the record is only maintained electronically or in other nonpaper
media, duplication fees shall be limited to the lesser of the fee for duplication on paper or the
fee for duplication in the original media unless the requester specifically requests for the
record to be duplicated in the more expensive media.
Postage fees: actual cost of mailing.
Editor's Note: "The Act" refers to Act 3 of 2008, the Right-to-Know Law.
To the extent that the Open Records Office subsequently amends its guidelines for covered
agencies accessing fees under the Act and such amendments are not consistent with the fee
schedule adopted by the Borough, the Borough's fee schedule related to the Act shall
automatically amend to be consistent with the Open Records Office's amended guidelines.
Ordinances.
[Added 11-24-2009 by Res. No. 755, approved 11-24-2009]
Zoning: $40.
Subdivision: $40.
Stormwater: $25.
§ 55-1.15. Chapter 94, Rental Units, Article I, Residential Rental
Unit Regulation.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Res. No. 805, approved 8-6-2013, effective 7-1-2013]
The following fees are adopted in reference to rental inspections:
Residential rental unit licensing:
Application for rental license: $40 per unit per year.
Inspection of residential rental units:
Inspection fee: $50.
Reinspection fee: $35.
No-show inspection fee: $50.
Inspection appeal fee: $500.
Violations and penalties:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 84/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
[1]
Fine to allow occupancy after license revoked: $500; each month is a separate violation.
Fine for failure to obtain a rental license within 30 days of NOV: $500.
Fine for violations of any other provisions of Article I of the chapter: $1,000.
§ 55-1.16. Chapter 103, Stormwater Management.
[Added 5-27-2014 by Res. No. 819, approved 5-27-2014]
A fee of $15 is adopted in reference to an exemption from the stormwater management site plan
preparation and submission requirements as permitted under Section 302 of the Stormwater
Management Ordinance, Ord. No. C-532, dated April 29, 2014.
Chapter 59. Fire Prevention
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz during codification 10-31-1978 by Ord. No.
C-221, approved 10-31-1978; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction code; property maintenance — See Ch. 36.
Installation of fire protection lines — See Ch. 118.
Article I. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former Art. I, General Standards, as amended, was superseded 12-27-2006 by Ord. No.
C-481, approved 12-27-2006. For current provisions, see Ch. 36, Construction Code, Uniform; Property
Maintenance, Art. I, Uniform Construction Code.
§ 59-1. through § 59-9. (Reserved)
Article II. Smoke Detectors
[Added 10-27-1987 by Ord. No. C-312, approved 10-27-1987]
§ 59-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY
The occupancy or use of a building or structure or any portion thereof by persons for whom
sleeping accommodations are provided, including but not limited to one- and two-family dwellings,
lodging or rooming houses, dormitories, apartment buildings, hotels and single-family attached
and detached dwellings.
§ 59-11. Requirements.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each new and existing occupied residential occupancy unit
to install smoke detectors in each such residential occupancy unit as hereinafter provided. Said smoke
detectors shall be capable of sensing visible and invisible particles of combustion and providing a
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 85/233
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
suitable audible alarm thereof; further, they shall be installed by 150 days after adoption of this article
in the manner hereinafter provided. Failure to install smoke detectors as and where required by said
date will subject the property owner to the penalties set forth in § 59-9 of the Code of the Borough of
Lititz, Pennsylvania.
§ 59-12. Location.
At least one smoke detector shall be installed to protect each sleeping area. A "sleeping area" is
defined as the area or areas of the residential occupancy unit in which the bedrooms (or sleeping
rooms) are located. Where bedrooms or rooms habitually used for sleeping are separated by other
use areas (such as kitchens or living rooms, but not bathrooms or closets), they shall be
considered as separate sleeping areas for the purpose of this section.
At least one smoke detector shall be installed at the head (top) of each stairway leading up to an
occupied area.
§ 59-13. Installation; maintenance; removal or destruction.
In new residential occupancy units, smoke detectors shall be wired directly (hard wired) to the
building's electrical system. In all existing residential occupancy units, it is preferred that the
smoke detectors be wired directly (hard wired) to the building's electrical system; however, a
monitored battery-powered unit is acceptable.
It shall be the responsibility of the homeowner(s) and landlord(s) and tenant(s) to maintain smoke
detectors. Such maintenance shall include keeping smoke detectors serviceable by replacing
batteries when necessary or by keeping them connected to an electrical source so that they
remain capable of transmitting an audible signal in the presence of smoke. The removal or
destruction of any smoke detector by any person, except an owner for the purpose of immediate
replacement, is strictly forbidden.
§ 59-14. Certification required at change of occupancy.
At every change of occupancy of every residential occupancy unit occasioned by or incidental to a
sale, lease or sublease of said unit, it shall be the duty of the grantor thereof (i.e., the seller, lessor or
sublessor, as the case may be) to certify, before occupancy, to the new occupant that all smoke
detectors, as required by this article or other applicable laws, are installed and in proper working
condition.
Chapter 60. Fireworks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 10-28-2014 by Ord. No. C-535, approved
10-28-2014. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 59.
§ 60-1. Permit required; applicability; compliance with
regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firms or corporations, amusement parks, fair
associations, or any other organizations or groups of individuals to have or to hold displays of
consumer fireworks and/or display fireworks, as those terms are defined in the Act of May 15,
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 86/233
B.
C.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
A.
B.
C.
1939, P.L. 134, as amended by 35 P.S. § 271, and again amended the statute with Act 204 of
2004, 35 P.S. § 275.2 et seq., within the limits of the Borough of Lititz unless a permit therefor is
first granted by the Borough as hereinafter provided.
This permit requirement applies to any fireworks display occurring totally or partially in the
Borough limits by either a public or private entity.
Any such fireworks display must conform to NFPA (National Fire Protection Association) 1123
Code for Fireworks Display (current edition).
§ 60-2. Application for permit.
Any person, persons, firms or corporations, amusement parks, fair associations, or any other
organizations or groups of individuals desiring to explode any fireworks, as defined in the abovestated
Act, in a public display must complete an application for a fireworks display permit and
submit the completed application to the Borough at least 90 days in advance of the proposed
display.
Applications for a fireworks display permit will be available at the Borough Office during normal
business hours and must be completed and signed by the applicant or an officer or authorized
agent of the applicant.
The permit application will contain, at a minimum, the following:
Name, address, telephone number and fax number (if applicable) of the applicant, and, if the
applicant is an organization, the name, address, telephone number and fax number (if
applicable) of the contact person for the organization;
Name of the individual or organization that will be responsible for providing the fireworks and
detonation;
Proposed site and date and time of the fireworks display;
Number and kinds of fireworks to be discharged, including, but not limited to, shell size and
expectant NFPA fall-out zones;
The manner and place of storage of such fireworks prior to display; and
Site plan explaining all structures, structures occupied, overhead transmission lines, streets,
parking areas, and areas where spectators for the display will be gathered. The site plan shall
include information on the launch site and assembly viewing sites. The site plan shall also
contain a symbol defining North and a sketch of the general area where the fireworks will be
set off and the area they will be directed.
§ 60-3. Review and approval by Borough representative; required
notifications.
A site inspection of the proposed site for the fireworks display shall be conducted by a designated
representative of the Borough ("Borough representative").
The Borough representative shall determine whether or not the display is a fire hazard to any and
all structures in the immediate area of the display.
The Borough representative shall designate the area where the display will originate from and
allow fireworks to be detonated from that area only and shall notify the applicant and the Borough
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 87/233
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
prior to the display as to whether the presence of firefighters and firefighting equipment will be
required at the display.
The approval of the application by the Borough representative will be required prior to the
issuance of a fireworks display permit by the Borough.
The permit holder shall submit a sketch of the launch site/layout to the Fire Chief at least 14 days
prior to the event.
Any and all holders of fireworks display permits will be required to notify the Fire Department at
least 48 hours in advance of the display and further notify the Lancaster County Communications
Center (911) at least two hours in advance of the display, notifying them when and where
fireworks will be displayed. Permit holders will be required to notify the Lancaster County
Communications Center (911) at the conclusion of the display as well.
The Fire Department will not allow fireworks displays if there is a ban on open burning and/or a
declared drought emergency in effect at the time of the notification telephone calls.
§ 60-4. Insurance and liability.
Applicants shall, at the time of the application, provide a certificate of insurance to the Borough
with a minimum limit of insurance of $1,000,000 and naming the Borough as an additional insured.
Applicants/permittees shall agree to hold harmless and indemnify the Borough, its officers, agents
and/or employees from any and all liability arising from or related to the display for which the
permit is issued. This language shall appear on the permit as issued.
The applicant/permittee shall post a bond in the amount of at least $2,500 for possible damages
arising from the proposed display.
§ 60-5. Permit issuance; fee; transferability.
The Borough Secretary, or his or her designee, will issue fireworks display permits after approvals
by the Borough representative have been certified on the application. Permits issued will be valid
for one calendar year beginning on January 1 of each year and concluding on December 31 of
each year.
The cost of the permit will be $250 for each display held by the permittee, payable to the Borough
prior to the issuance of the permit.
Permits are not transferable.
§ 60-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, association, corporation or other entity violating this chapter shall be guilty of a summary
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine in an amount not less than $500 and not
exceeding $1,000.
Chapter 62. Flood Plain Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz: 3-29-2016 by Ord. No. C-544,[1] approved
3-29-2016. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 88/233
[1]
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
Building construction — See Ch. 36.
Sewers — See Ch. 100.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 108.
Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 62, Flood Hazard Control, which consisted of
Art. I, Compliance with Flood Insurance Program, adopted 8-29-1972 by Res. No. 210, approved 8-29-
1972, and Art. II, Building Permits and Subdivision Review, adopted 8-29-1972 by Res. No. 211,
approved 8-29-1972.
Article I. Statutory Authorization
§ 62-1.01. Authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage of the Pennsylvania Flood
Plain Management Act of 1978, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
floodplain management regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Borough Council of Lititz does hereby order as follows.
Article II. General Provisions
§ 62-2.01. Intent.
This chapter is intended to be a supplement to the general provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of
the Borough adopted April 27, 2010.
The provisions of the chapter are to be read and interpreted, where possible, in a fashion
consistent with the provisions of the Borough's Zoning Ordinance and in particular with regard to
Section 215 of the Zoning Ordinance. To the extent the provisions cannot be interpreted in a
consistent fashion, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling regarding floodplain issues. It
is not the intent of this chapter to supersede or repeal any of the regulations or provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance.
This chapter has been enacted pursuant to Pennsylvania Act 166, the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act, and the rules and regulations of Section 60.3(d) of the National Flood Insurance
Program, as administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). As such, the
provisions contained herein are intended to be in compliance with those regulations as they exist
on the date of this enactment.
The intent of this chapter is to:
Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize
flood damage in the future.
Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural drainage.
Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units, and its
residents, by preventing excessive development in areas subject to flooding.
Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
§ 62-2.02. Applicability.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 89/233
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to undertake, or cause to
be undertaken, any construction or development anywhere within the Borough unless a permit has
been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or structures.
§ 62-2.03. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect in identified floodplain
areas. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that
those provisions are more restrictive.
§ 62-2.04. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall be declared
invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the remaining portions of the
chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter
are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 62-2.05. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams
and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside any
identified floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding
or flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough or any officer or employee thereof
for any Flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
Article III. Administration
§ 62-3.01. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Codes Compliance Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this chapter and is
referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may: (A) fulfill the
duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations, (B) delegate duties and responsibilities
set forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and
other employees, or (C) enter into a written agreement or written contract with another agency or
private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations. Administration of any
part of these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities
pursuant to the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in
the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain Administrator duties are to
be fulfilled by the Borough Manager.
§ 62-3.02. Permits required.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 90/233
A.
[1]
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is undertaken within any area of the
Borough.
§ 62-3.03. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been determined that the
proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the application for the
permit to determine if all other necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-
537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);[1] and the U.S.
Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this determination
has been made.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq., and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.,
respectively.
In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator
shall review the history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss concerns can
be addressed before the permit is issued.
During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized official shall
inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He/she
shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as are necessary.
In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to enter
any building, structure, premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does not comply with the permit
application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the permit and
report such fact to the Borough Council for whatever action it considers necessary.
The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records associated with the
requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to, finished construction elevation data,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a biennial report to FEMA
concerning community participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments of the Floodplain
Administrator can be delegated from the person identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies
with the person identified in this chapter as the Floodplain Administrator/manager.
The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC
and the 2009 IRC or the latest edition thereof adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 62-3.04. Application procedures and requirements.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 91/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
C.
Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the Floodplain Administrator on forms
supplied by the Borough. Such application shall contain the following:
Name and address of applicant.
Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is to occur.
Name and address of contractor.
Site location including address.
Listing of other permits required.
Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a breakout of flood-related
cost and the market value of the building before the flood damage occurred where
appropriate.
A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the proposed construction, as well as
any existing buildings or structures.
If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially within any identified
floodplain area, applicants for permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and conform with
the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances;
All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement;
Building materials are flood-resistant;
Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used; and
Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service
facilities have been designed and located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other pertinent information as may
be required by the Floodplain Administrator to make the above determination:
A completed permit application form.
A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100
feet or less, showing the following:
North arrow, scale, and date;
Topographic contour lines, if available;
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and other improvements,
including the location of any existing or proposed subdivision and development;
The location of all existing streets, drives, and other accessways; and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 92/233
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
[1]
[2]
(e)
(f)
(g)
(4)
D.
The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, identified floodplain areas,
and, if available, information pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, drawn at suitable scale
showing the following:
The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based upon North
American Vertical Datum of 1988;
The elevation of the base flood;
Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa. Code, the 2009 IBC or the
2009 IRC or latest edition thereof adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
The following data and documentation:
Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures and
corresponding elevations.
If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces and other factors associated with a base flood.
Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, to show that
the cumulative effect of any proposed development within any identified floodplain area
(see § 62-4.01) when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will
not cause any increase in the base flood elevation.
A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which states that
the proposed construction or development has been adequately designed to withstand
the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the base flood. Such
statement shall include a description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures
which have been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the development.
Detailed information needed to determine compliance with § 62-6.03F, Storage, and
§ 62-6.04, development which may endanger human life, including:
The amount, location and purpose of any materials or substances referred to in
§§ 62-6.03F and 62-6.04 which are intended to be used, produced, stored or
otherwise maintained on site.
A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of the proposed
structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed in
§ 62-6.04 during a base flood.
The appropriate component of the DEP's "Planning Module for Land Development."
Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements of the
DEP, to implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the municipality based upon
the estimated cost of the proposed construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 62-3.05. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the
Lancaster County Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a permit. The
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 93/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by the Floodplain Administrator for
possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
§ 62-3.06. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any
other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer, etc.) for
review and comment.
§ 62-3.07. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to
the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the
application without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any
such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to Floodplain Administrator for
consideration.
§ 62-3.08. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard, or similar document, which
shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show
the number of the permit and the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 62-3.09. Start of construction.
Work on the proposed new construction project and/or development shall not begin prior to the
issuance of a permit.
Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within 180 days after the date of
issuance of the permit. Work shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance
of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the
Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of permit does not refer to zoning approval.
The actual "start of construction" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the applicant, who sets
forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request
and the original permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the
extension is granted.
§ 62-3.10. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 94/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized municipal representative
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
Be in writing;
Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the performance of any act it
requires;
Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may require; provided, however,
that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other method authorized
or required by the laws of this state;
Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of this
chapter or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the Borough shall be guilty of a summary
offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine to the Borough of not less than $25 nor more than
$1,000 plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby
reserved including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of
a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or
remedy such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated, in
noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the Borough Council to be a public nuisance
and abatable as such.
§ 62-3.11. Appeals.
Any Person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain Administrator concerning the
administration of the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Borough Zoning Hearing Board.
Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or action of
the Floodplain Administrator and shall include any fees as may have been established by
resolution of the Borough Council.
The Codes Compliance Officer shall schedule the matter for a hearing to be held within 60 days of
the receipt of the completed application. Notice of the time and place at which the appeal will be
considered shall be given to all parties, in accordance with standard Borough Zoning Hearing
Board established procedures, as provided by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act
247.
Any Person aggrieved by any decision of the Borough Zoning Hearing Board may seek relief
therefrom by appeal to the Lancaster County Court of Common Pleas, as provided by the laws of
this commonwealth including the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, Act 247, and the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
Article IV. Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 62-4.01. Identification.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 95/233
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
B.
C.
The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the Borough, classified as special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRMs) dated April 5, 2016, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the
Flood Insurance Study.
The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and amendments, are
hereby adopted by the Borough and declared to be a part of this chapter.
§ 62-4.02. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the FIRM as floodway and which
represent the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more than one
foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas which have been identified in other
available studies or sources of information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway
has been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated
through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels
within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
Within any floodway area, no new construction or development shall be allowed, unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the DEP Regional Office.
The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the
FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided.
The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been
provided and a floodway has been delineated.
AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE zone on the FIRM included
in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided but no
floodway has been determined.
No permit shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any
AE Area/District without floodway unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development would not, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE.
No new construction or development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the DEP Regional Office.
The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS
prepared by FEMA and for which no base flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable sources shall be
used when available. Where other acceptable information is not available, the base flood elevation
shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain
area which is nearest the construction site.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 96/233
(1)
D.
A.
B.
C.
In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine the elevation with
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by the municipality.
The AO and AH Area/District shall be those areas identified as Zones AO and AH on the FIRM
and in the FIS. These areas are subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance shallow
flooding where average depths are between one and three feet. In Zones AO and AH, drainage
paths shall be established to guide floodwaters around and away from structures on slopes.
§ 62-4.03. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the the Borough Council where studies or
information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision. However,
prior to any such change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by
submitting technical or scientific data. See § 62-6.01B for situations where FEMA notification is
required.
§ 62-4.04. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be
made by the Borough Planning Commission and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination
may appeal to the Borough Council. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 62-4.05. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are
proposed or have occurred, the community shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to
boundary changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to
annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
Article V. Permitted Uses
§ 62-5.01. Uses permitted by right.
The following uses are permitted by right in any special flood hazard area in compliance with the
requirements of this article:
Up to 1/2 of any required yard setback area on an individual residential lot may extend into the
special flood hazard area.
Municipal parks, including paved paths, trails, courts and recreational accessories (including, but
not limited to, backstops, goal cages and posts, benches, tables and signs), which shall be
appropriately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Open space uses that are primarily passive in character, including construction to establish such
areas, shall be permitted to extend into the special flood hazard area, including:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 97/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, forest preserves, fishing areas, passive areas of public
and private parklands, and reforestation.
Stream bank stabilization.
Floodplain restoration.
Forestry operations reviewed by the Lancaster County Conservation District.
Special flood hazard area crossings:
Agricultural crossings by farm vehicles and livestock.
Driveways serving one or two single-family detached dwelling units.
Driveways serving more than two single-family detached dwelling units, or roadways,
recreational trails, railroads and utilities.
Agricultural uses conducted in compliance with methods prescribed in the latest version of the
Pennsylvania DEP's Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Manual.
Public sewer and/or water lines and public utility transmission lines running along the corridor.
Development of elevated and floodproofed buildings on sites that have secured relief from liability
from the Pennsylvania DEP under its Act 2 Land Recycling Program, except that no such
development shall be permitted in the floodway. Such applications are not required to obtain a
variance; however, they shall be required to meet the technical provisions of Article VI herein, the
elevation and floodproofing requirements as stated in § 62-6.02 herein, and the design and
construction standards as stated in § 62-6.03 herein.
§ 62-5.02. Uses prohibited in special flood hazard area and
riparian buffer area.
Any use or activity not authorized within § 62-5.01 herein shall be prohibited within any special flood
hazard area or riparian buffer area, and the following activities and facilities are specifically prohibited,
except for as part of a redevelopment project in compliance with § 62-5.01 herein:
No new construction, alteration or improvement of buildings, manufactured homes and any other
type of permanent structure, including fences, shall be permitted in the special flood hazard area,
except structures necessary for a use permitted in § 62-5.01 and for improvements or alterations
to an existing structure as permitted in Article VII herein.
No new construction, alteration or improvement of buildings and any other type of permanent
structure, including fences, shall be permitted within a riparian buffer area.
Placement of fill within the special flood hazard area is prohibited, except as required for activities
permitted by § 62-5.01 and Article VII herein.
No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse,
except as permitted in § 62-5.01, and with appropriate approvals by Pennsylvania DEP Regional
Office and the Lancaster County Conservation District.
Clearing of all, existing vegetation, except where such clearing is necessary to prepare land for a
use permitted under § 62-5.01 herein, and where the effects of these actions are mitigated by
reestablishment of vegetation. Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides and/or other chemicals in
excess of prescribed industry standards.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 98/233
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
Roads or driveways, except where permitted as corridor crossings in compliance with § 62-5.01
herein.
Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any area not designed to accommodate adequately the type
and volume.
Parking lots.
Any kind of outdoor storage of items or materials that would become buoyant in flood conditions.
These shall include but not be limited to vehicles, trailers, tires, lumber, plastics and fiberglass.
Outdoor storage of any apparently abandoned material or vehicles that could be deemed to be
landfill, dump and/or a junkyard or salvage operation, regardless of the materials or quantity
associated with the accumulation.
Subsurface sewage disposal areas.
Sod farming.
Stormwater basins, including necessary berms and outfall facilities.
§ 62-5.03. Floodplain restoration activities.
Benefit. It is the expressed intent of the Borough to permit floodplain restoration activities within
the special flood hazard areas because of the multiple benefits that will be derived from such
activities, including but not limited to enhanced conveyance of floodwaters, reduced depth of
flooding, creation of wetlands, groundwater recharge, sediment and nutrient reduction in
waterways, stormwater management, stabilized stream banks, stream quality enhancement,
aquatic improvements and aesthetics.
Permitted activities. The following stream-restoration activities shall be permitted:
Efforts to control erosion and sedimentation.
Implementation of floodplain management techniques.
Creation of groundwater recharge systems using natural features.
Reattachment of the stream to the floodplain. (This effort may result in the removal of large
amounts of sedimentation and embankments that have been deposited over a number of
decades.)
Placement of in-stream habitat structures to improve or provide fishery habitats.
Ponds and/or created wetlands.
Planting of riparian buffer.
Removal of invasive species.
Permitted uses.
Floodproofing and flood-hazard reduction measures and/or structures designed to protect
existing buildings or other existing infrastructure.
Water-oriented structures (excluding buildings); docks, piers, boat launch ramps, hatcheries,
water-monitoring devices, etc.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 99/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
Permitted uses, criteria for approval. The application package must demonstrate that the
improvements that are proposed in conjunction with the floodplain restoration project proposal,
design and implementation package will meet the following:
That the proposed use(s) will not increase the height or frequency of flooding.
That the improvement has been properly designed so as to withstand the maximum volume,
velocity and force of any floodplain water and is floodproof and flotation-proof.
That the use or structure will not create a health, safety or sanitation risk.
That an adequate plan is in place to assure proper maintenance of the structure or use. (An
escrow account may be required.)
That the use or structure will not create or lead to a surface water or groundwater quality
issue or problem.
Prohibited uses and activities.
The outdoor storage of any apparently abandoned material or vehicles that could be deemed
to be a landfill, dump and junkyard or salvage operation, regardless of the materials or
quantity associated with the accumulation.
The storage or accumulation of any cut brush, tree branches, grass clipping or other
harvested product that would serve to divert the flow of floodwaters or which may float and
migrate downstream during a flood event.
Approvals. Stream restoration work shall only be permitted following submission of studies and
plans as may be necessary to obtain required permits from local, county, state and federal
regulatory agencies, including but not limited to the Lancaster County Conservation District,
Pennsylvania DEP, United States Army Corps of Engineers, FEMA, etc.
Letter of map revision. In certain cases, submissions may need to include submission to FEMA
relative to the issuance of a letter of map revision based on the anticipated benefits of the project
and the related changes to the existing flood map(s). In those cases, the Borough will cooperate
with the applicant in the submission process. However, it will be the applicant's responsibility to
provide, at its cost, all of the plans, reports and applications that are required for such filing.
Article VI. Technical Provisions
§ 62-6.01. General.
Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by
the municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first been obtained from the
Pennsylvania DEP Regional Office.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
unless it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
development shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse, if
deemed necessary by the Floodplain Administrator.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 100/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
B.
When a variance is granted and the Borough proposes to permit the following encroachments: any
development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within the floodway; or any
development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will
cause a rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or relocation of a
stream, the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to permitting the encroachments
to occur.
Upon receipt of the administrator's conditional approval of map change and prior to approving
the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased base flood elevations and/or
revised floodway reflecting the post-project condition.
Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide as-built
certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map revision upon receipt of such certifications in
accordance with 44 CFR 67.
Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within any identified floodplain area
shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other
applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 62-6.02. New construction elevation and floodproofing
requirements.
Residential structures.
In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on the FIRM, any new
construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with § 62-
4.02C of this chapter.
In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) at or above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405 as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
Nonresidential structures.
In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement of a
nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or
above, the regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water; and
Has structural components with the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 101/233
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
C.
D.
(1)
E.
In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the FIRM, any new construction
or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in
accordance with § 62-4.02C of this chapter.
In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have their lowest floor
elevated or completely floodproofed above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as
the depth number specified on the FIRM.
Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification
standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood- Proofing Regulations" published by the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other
equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied
by a statement certified by a registered professional engineer or architect which states that
the proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance with the above
referenced standards.
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405 as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
Space below the lowest floor.
Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basements) is prohibited.
Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements) which will be used
solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other than
a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "fully
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided
that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a
substantial improvement, as defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation
that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need not be elevated or
floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall be limited to the
parking of vehicles, or to the storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the principal
use or activity.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 102/233
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(8)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
(1)
C.
Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
The structure will have a low damage potential.
The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least obstruction to the flow of
floodwaters.
Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as furnaces, heaters, washers,
dryers, etc., are prohibited.
Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater
for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, or
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 62-6.03. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and development proposed within any
identified floodplain area:
Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all points;
Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall not be permitted;
Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring, or
settling;
Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless substantiated data justifying
steeper slopes are submitted to, and approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.
Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of stormwater
runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and
provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the
discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be
located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration
of floodwaters.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 103/233
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
I.
(1)
(2)
J.
Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the discharge of untreated
sewage into floodwaters.
No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within any identified floodplain
area except in strict compliance with all state and local regulations for such systems. If any
such system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination
from it, during a flood.
The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA #348, "Protecting Building
Utilities From Flood Damages," and the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be
utilized.
Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems shall be
located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a
flood.
Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than one foot below the
regulatory flood elevation.
Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in times of flooding, could be
injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and not listed in § 62-6.04, Development which may
endanger human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or floodproofed to
the maximum extent possible.
Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures shall be designed, located, and
constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
Anchoring.
All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering
practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or components located
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
Floors, walls and ceilings.
Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be installed to
accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without
causing structural damage to the building.
Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant
variety.
Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will withstand inundation.
Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
made of metal or other water-resistant material.
Paints and adhesives.
Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of marine or
water-resistant quality.
Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or waterresistant
variety.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 104/233
(3)
(1)
(2)
K.
L.
M.
(1)
(2)
N.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
Electrical components.
Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation.
Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.
Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units, and other electrical,
mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood
elevation.
Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration
occurs.
Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and specifications contained in 34 Pa.
Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as amended and not limited to the following provisions, shall
apply to the above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent that they are
more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this chapter.
International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof adopted by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof adopted by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania: Secs. R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and Appendix
J.
§ 62-6.04. Development which may endanger human life.
In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and the regulations adopted
by the Department of Community and Economic development as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or, will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances, shall be subject to the provisions of this
section, in addition to all other applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances
are considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone.
Ammonia.
Benzene.
Calcium carbide.
Carbon disulfide.
Celluloid.
Chlorine.
Hydrochloric acid.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 105/233
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
A.
Hydrocyanic acid.
Magnesium.
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
Phosphorus.
Potassium.
Sodium.
Sulphur and sulphur products.
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.
Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in Subsection A above, shall be
prohibited. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved residential structure of the kind described in § 62-6.04A, above, shall be elevated to
remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation and built in accordance
with §§ 62-6.01, 62-6.02 and 62-6.03.
Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
nonresidential structure of the kind described in § 62-6.04A above, shall be built in accordance
with §§ 62-6.01, 62-6.02 and 62-6.03, including:
Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet
above base flood elevation; and
Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during the course of a base flood.
Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards for completely dry
floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations (U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers. June 1972 as amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent watertight
standard.
§ 62-6.05. Special requirements for subdivisions and
development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres,
whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain areas where base flood elevation data are not available
shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision and letter of map
revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
§ 62-6.06. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Within any floodway area/district, manufactured homes shall be prohibited. If a variance is
obtained in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the provisions of § 62-6.06C shall
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 106/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
apply.
Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured homes, and any
improvements thereto, shall be:
Placed on a permanent foundation;
Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least 1 1/2 feet above base
flood elevation;
Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
Have all ductwork and utilities including HVAC/heat pump elevated to the regulatory flood
elevation.
Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with the manufacturers'
installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the
above information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International Residential Building
Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for
Manufactured Housing, 1984 edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code Chapter 401
through 405 shall apply.
Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the 2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or
the latest edition thereto adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and 34 Pa. Code, as
amended where appropriate and/or applicable to units where the manufacturers' standards for
anchoring cannot be provided or were not established for the proposed unit(s) installation.
§ 62-6.07. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 62-6.06.
Article VII. Prohibited Activities
§ 62-7.01. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of Community and
Economic development to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following
activities shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
The commencement of any of the following activities: or the construction, enlargement, or
expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
Hospitals.
Nursing homes.
Jails or prisons.
The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision, or substantial improvements or expansion to an existing manufactured home
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 107/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
park or manufactured home subdivision.
Article VIII. Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain
Areas
§ 62-8.01. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements to be made to lawfully
existing structures. However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions of
§ 62-8.02 shall apply.
§ 62-8.02. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an existing structure
located within any identified floodplain area:
No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any identified
floodplain area that would cause any increase in BFE. In A Area/District(s), BFEs are determined
using the methodology in § 62-4.02C.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure to
an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement
and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa. Code, as amended, and the 2009
IBC and the 2009 IRC or most recent revision thereof adopted by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure, to
an extent or amount of less than 50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to
the greatest extent possible.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind that meets the definition of
"repetitive loss" shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Article IX. Variances
§ 62-9.01. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in an exceptional hardship to a
prospective builder, developer or landowner, the municipality may, upon request, grant relief from the
strict application of the requirements.
§ 62-9.02. Variance procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough in accordance with the procedures
contained in § 62-3.11 and the following:
No variance shall be granted for any construction. Development, use, or activity within any
floodway area/district that would cause any increase in the BFE.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 108/233
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
G.
(1)
H.
No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any AE
Area/District without floodway that would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
No variance shall be granted for any requirements pertaining specifically to development which
may endanger human life (§ 62-6.04).
If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.
In granting any variance, the Borough shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards
it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the
objectives of this chapter.
Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough shall notify the applicant in writing that:
The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
That there is good and sufficient cause.
That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
That the granting of the variance will:
Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; nor
Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict with any other
applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the
Borough. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to the FEMA.
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and constructed
so as to have the capability of resisting the one-percent annual chance flood.
Article X. Definitions
§ 62-10.01. General.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
§ 62-10.02. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE, STRUCTURE OR BUILDING
A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to,
the principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 109/233
A Flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also
called the "100-year flood" or "one-percent annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE
The volume of water resulting from a base flood as it passes a given location within a given time,
usually expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)
The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that
indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a Flood that has a one-percent or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT
Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides.
BUILDING
A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof. Included shall
be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEP
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, or any agency successor thereto.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the
construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other
structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities; filling,
grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials;
and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which
the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD
A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS)
The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood
profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA
A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an
adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 110/233
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
FLOODPLAIN RESTORATION
The process of fully or partially restoring the floodplain of a watercourse as closely as possible to
its original conditions before having been influenced by anthropogenic activities. Typically includes
the removal of legacy sediment, reestablishing the hydrologic connection of the stream, floodplain
and groundwater, and reestablishing native plant communities and aquatic and terrestrial habitat,
and providing additional flood storage and water quality benefits.
FLOODPROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE
The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls
of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES
Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA
This term is an umbrella term that includes all of the areas within which the community has
selected to enforce floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the special
flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study, but may include
additional areas identified by the community. See §§ 62-4.01 and 62-4.02 for the specifics on what
areas the community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished, floodresistant
partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and
incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of a
building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of
the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 111/233
A.
B.
C.
The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are
placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MINOR REPAIR
The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine
maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion
thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change
of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway
requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of
any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping,
electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after April 5, 2016, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction started after February 22,
1983, and before April 5, 2016, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was
issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
PERMIT
Written authorization from the Codes Compliance Officer to alter, improve, construct and/or make
use of an area of land as regulated by this chapter.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate,
municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974,
or on or after the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated August 15, 1979,
whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant with the regulations of the
National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31,
1974, or before the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated August 15, 1979,
whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with the regulations of the
National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which is:
Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections;
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck,
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 112/233
D. Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION
The base flood elevation (BFE) or estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS
Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA)
An area in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days after the date of the permit and
shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time
extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE
A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs, or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by
lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage or repetitive
loss regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any
project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary,
or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and
which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 113/233
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC)
The statewide building code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to
new construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality, a third party or the
Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the Code
adopted the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain construction. For
coordination purposes, references to the above are made specifically to various sections of the
IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE
A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION
The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5),
(c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
WATERCOURSE
A stream of water; river; brook; creek; or a channel or ditch for water, whether natural or
manmade, having a defined bed and banks with perennial or intermittent flow.
Article XI. Enactment
§ 62-11.01. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on April 5, 2016, and shall remain in force until modified, amended or
rescinded by Lititz Borough, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
§ 62-11.02. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any section, sentence, clause, part or provision
hereof shall be held to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision of the court shall not affect or impair the remaining sections, sentences, clauses, parts or
provisions of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board that this chapter would
have been enacted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or provision
had not been included herein.
Chapter 66. Garbage, Rubbish and Sanitation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and Sanitation Advisory Committee — See Ch. 5, Art. V.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 46.
Housing maintenance and occupancy — See Ch. 69.
Junkyards — See Ch. 72.
Weeds — See Ch. 120.
Article I. Dumping, Collecting and Storing
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 114/233
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
F.
G.
H.
[2]
I.
[Adopted 4-9-1963 by Ord. No. C-17, approved 4-9-1963]
§ 66-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
Definitions.
PERSON
Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or corporation.
WATERS OF THE BOROUGH
Includes any and all streams, dammed water, ponds, springs and all other bodies of surface
and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the
boundaries of this Borough.
The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 66-2. Unlawful actions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do, authorize, aid or abet any of the following described actions,
such regulations or restrictions being intended to promote the general health, safety, welfare, morals
and cleanliness of the Borough:
To place, or cause to be placed, thrown or maintained, in or near any of the streets, alleys or
waters of the Borough, any matter that will decay or become offensive or will render offensive any
of the drains, streets, alleys, waters or sewers within the Borough.
To maintain or permit to be maintained on any property owned or occupied by any person within
the Borough any condition productive of a breeding place for vectors or a nuisance detrimental to
the public health and which may be so declared by the Borough Council.
To permit any body of water that has or may become stagnant to remain on the premises owned
or occupied by any person within the Borough.
To run, cast or deposit, either by means of a drain or otherwise, upon any street or alley in the
Borough or into the waters of the Borough any kitchen slops, wash water, soap suds or any
nauseous or offensive liquid or substance, regardless of source.
To keep hogs within the limits of the Borough.
To permit any animals or fowl to run at large within the Borough.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 46, Dogs and Other Animals.
To keep or suffer to remain on the premises owned or occupied or used by any person any
offensive or unwholesome matter of any kind or to permit same on any vacant lot or on the streets
and alleys within or on the boundaries of this Borough or in the waters of the Borough.
To permit the existence of any plant growth which is harmful to health or throws off any unpleasant
or noxious odor or conceals any filthy deposit.
To allow grass, weeds or plant growth which is inedible and/or not planted for an ornamental
purpose to exceed six inches in height.[2]
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 120, Weeds.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 115/233
[3]
J.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
To dump any garbage, rubbish or junk on any private property or permit private property to be
used for public dumping or for the accumulation of any garbage, rubbish or junk.[3]
Editor's Note: As to junkyards generally, see Ch. 72, Junkyards.
§ 66-3. Notice to abate nuisance within specified time limit.
[Amended 4-29-1969 by Ord. No. C-93, approved 5-9-1969]
Upon receipt of a notice from the Borough Manager that a condition exists upon property owned or
occupied by him in violation of this article, it shall be the duty of such person to abate the nuisance
created hereby within the time limit specified in such notice.
§ 66-4. Control of collection and dumping.
[Amended 3-27-1973 by Ord. No. C-138, approved 3-27-1973]
The collection and removal of garbage and rubbish from within the Borough of Lititz shall be a Borough
function. All garbage and rubbish must be disposed of outside the Borough limits.
§ 66-5. Storage containers.
[Amended 3-27-1973 by Ord. No. C-138, approved 3-27-1973]
Any persons having garbage and/or rubbish to dispose of shall keep it, with all liquid drained
therefrom, pending collection, in watertight metal or plastic cans with lids and/or bags and being of
such size as to be easily handled by one person.
§ 66-6. Time of collection.
[Amended 3-27-1973 by Ord. No. C-138, approved 3-27-1973]
Any person having garbage or rubbish to dispose of shall place it in containers, as described in
§ 66-5 of this article, at the curb in front of his home or place of business not later than 6:00 a.m.
on the day of collection and leave it there until 6:00 p.m. or until collected, as follows:
Monday: west side of Broad Street and western section of the Borough.
Tuesday: east side of North Broad Street, north side of East Main Street and northeastern
section of the Borough.
Wednesday: east side of South Broad Street, south side of East Main Street and
southeastern section of the Borough.
The Borough Council may, from time to time, by resolution, provide other and different times and
places for its collection.
§ 66-7. Alternate collection from commercial establishments.
[Amended 3-27-1973 by Ord. No. C-138, approved 3-27-1973]
The Borough Council may, in its discretion, allow other methods of collection and removal of garbage
and rubbish by or from restaurants, hotels and other large producers of garbage and rubbish.
§ 66-8. Fees; violations and penalties.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 116/233
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
Fees.
Charge for failure to comply within time limit. In case any person shall neglect, fail or refuse to
comply with the notice of violation of this article within five days, the Borough Manager may
cause such garbage, trash and rubbish and/or weeds or vegetation to be removed, trimmed
or cut. There is hereby imposed a charge of $10 plus the actual cost of labor involved for
each time the Borough shall cause such garbage, trash or other rubbish and/or grass, weeds
or vegetation to be removed, trimmed or cut; and the owner or occupant, as the case may be,
of the premises shall be billed after same has been completed.
Quarterly garbage fee. The quarterly garbage fee, to appear on the water and sewer bill, shall
be $55, effective with the billing of March 10, 2008.
[Added 3-8-1988 by Res. No. 427, approved 3-8-1988; amended 1-31-1989 by Res. No. 442,
approved 1-31-1989; 12-11-1990 by motion; 1-29-2008 by Res. No. 717 by approved 1-29-
2008]
Liens. Should any bill or bills for the removing of such nuisance be unpaid on or before November
1 of each year, a penalty of 10% shall be added to such bill or bills, and a lien shall be filed against
the premises in the same manner as municipal claims are filed.
Fines and penalties. Any person who or which shall violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with
any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed
the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such costs and
prosecution, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that if the District
Justice determines that the defendant is without the financial means to pay the fines and costs
immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall be permitted to pay the fines or costs
in installments and over such periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
Fees. The Borough Council may, by resolution, establish fees or assessments on the services of
the authorized collector of garbage in the Borough. The billing from the Borough for these services
may, at the Borough's election, appear on other bills sent to the owner or persons thereof, such as
the water and sewer bill. In the event of failure to pay said bill within 30 days, the Borough shall
assess a penalty of 5% for the overdue payment. Interest on any unpaid bills shall accrue at the
rate of 10% per annum.
[Added 2-26-1985 by Ord. No. C-284, approved 2-26-1985]
Article II. Storage of Unenclosed Material
[Adopted 9-28-1971 by Ord. No. C-125, approved 10-1-1971]
§ 66-9. Accumulation of unenclosed materials prohibited;
exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, corporation, partnership, unincorporated association or
any entity whatsoever to store or to accumulate or to permit the accumulation of materials capable of
being scattered by wind or any of the natural elements, except when stored or accumulated entirely
within a building completely enclosed on all sides, or when entirely enclosed within a fine wire mesh or
other type of enclosure designed to prevent scattering of the materials.
§ 66-10. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 117/233
A.
In the event that any person or persons, corporation, partnership, unincorporated association or any
entity whatsoever shall violate any of the provisions of this article, the Mayor or Borough Manager shall
give them 10 days' written notice of said violation. Any person who, after said 10 days' written notice,
fails to comply with this article shall, upon conviction thereof by summary proceedings, be sentenced to
pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days; provided,
however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is without the financial means to pay
the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall be permitted to pay the
fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
Article III. Solid Waste Disposal
[Adopted 12-30-1986 by Ord. No. C-305, approved 12-30-1986]
§ 66-11. Definitions; word usage.
The following terms shall have the following meanings in this article.
COUNTY
The County of Lancaster.
EXISTING CONTRACT
Any agreement or contract fully executed prior to the effective date of this article for the
collection, disposal or transportation of municipal waste generated within this municipality.
FACILITY
The waste-to-energy incinerator to be constructed by or on behalf of the LCSWMA pursuant
to the plan.
FULL SYSTEM OPERATION OR FULLY OPERATIONAL
That date which is 60 days from the date upon which the county and other municipalities
representing, in the aggregate, not less than 60% of the population of the county, as
determined by the 1980 decennial census of the United States, execute the intermunicipal
agreement and enact waste flow ordinances.
LCSWMA
The Lancaster County Solid Waste Management Authority, its assigns, its successors in
interest and its predecessor in interest, the Lancaster Area Refuse Authority.
MUNICIPALITY
The Borough of Lititz, located within the County of Lancaster, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, cooperative enterprise, trust,
municipal authority, federal institution or agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other
governmental agency or any other entity or any group of such persons which is recognized by
law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine,
penalty, imprisonment or denial or grant of any license, the term "person" shall include the
officers and directors of a corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PLAN
The municipal waste management plan for the county adopted by the county or municipalities
therein and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
POINT OF ENTRY INTO THE SYSTEM
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 118/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
Any delivery site within the system designated by the LCSWMA for delivery of regulated
municipal waste.
RECYCLING
The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of metals, glass, paper, yard waste and
other materials which would otherwise become municipal waste.
REGULATED MUNICIPAL WASTE
Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste and other material, including solid
or semisolid material resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities, and any other solid waste which is
within the definition of "municipal waste" set forth in Section 103 of the Pennsylvania Solid
Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, 35 P.S. § 6018.103 (Purdon
Supplement, 1985), and which LCSWMA, the county or any contractor ("contractor") selected
by the county or LCSWMA to construct and/or operate a resource recovery facility or facilities
to be located within the municipal boundaries of the county by ordinance or regulation is
willing to accept at the facility, but excluding:
Any liquid waste or sludge.
Any waste which is defined by existing or future federal or state law or regulation as
hazardous waste or residual waste.
Infectious waste, pathological waste or other waste for which treatment or handling
requirements different from those normally applicable to municipal waste apply.
Polychlorinated biphenyls.
Any waste which may be marketable and which is intentionally segregated for purposes
of recycling.
Materials specifically excluded under applicable county or LCSWMA ordinances, rules or
regulations.
SOURCE SEPARATION
The segregation and collection, prior to delivery to a point of entry into the system, of
materials for the sole purpose of recycling.
SYSTEM
The overall solid waste management and disposal system and every aspect thereof owned or
operated by or on behalf of the LCSWMA, including, without limitation, equipment, transfer
stations, resource recovery facilities and landfills, owned or operated or to be acquired,
constructed or operated by the LCSWMA or any agent, designee or contractor thereof in
implementation of the plan.
TRANSFER FACILITY
Any solid waste facility which is now or hereafter may be established by the LCSWMA or the
county for the purpose of accepting solid waste for processing and economical consolidation
for subsequent delivery to the facility or another solid waste disposal site.
All other words and phrases shall have the same meanings as set forth in the Pennsylvania Solid
Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. (Purdon
Supplement, 1985), as it may hereinafter be amended or supplemented by legislation regarding
municipal waste planning.
§ 66-12. Collectors' licenses; compliance with rules and
regulations required; administration.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 119/233
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
Licensing. No person who is not duly licensed by the LCSWMA to deliver waste to the county
system may collect or transport municipal waste located or generated within this municipality. This
prohibition shall become effective 120 days from the effective date of this section of this article.
Compliance with rules, regulations and ordinances. In carrying on activities related to solid waste
collection or transportation within this municipality, all municipal waste collectors and all municipal
waste transporters shall comply with all rules, regulations and ordinances pertaining to the
collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste as may be hereinafter enacted by this
municipality or by the county pursuant to a parallel County Waste Flow Ordinance and all rules
and regulations enacted by the LCSWMA pursuant to authority given it under 53 P.S. § 315
(Purdon, 1974, and Purdon Supplement, 1985), as hereafter amended.
Administration. Licenses hereunder shall be issued, revoked and administered by the LCSWMA.
§ 66-13. Designation of disposal sites; recycling exempted.
Delivery to LCSWMA/county sites. All municipal waste collectors and transporters shall deliver
and dispose of all regulated municipal waste collected or generated within the municipality at a
transfer station or disposal facility owned and operated by or on behalf of the LCSWMA, subject to
such reasonable regulations for the operation thereof as may be established by the county or the
LCSWMA.
Disposal at other sites. The disposal of regulated municipal waste collected or generated within
the municipality may occur at other sites only as permitted by rule, regulation, ordinance or order
duly issued by the county or by the written agreement of the county, the LCSWMA and the
municipality. The disposal of regulated municipal waste at an existing facility from sources
reflected on the notice to the municipality, the county and the LCSWMA, as provided in § 66-16C
of this article, shall be permitted.
Recycling. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit source separation or recycling or to affect
any sites at which source separation or recycling may take place.
§ 66-14. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
Compliance with county and LCSWMA regulations. The collection, transportation and disposal of
municipal waste present or generated within the municipality shall be subject to such further
reasonable rules and regulations as may from time to time be promulgated by the county pursuant
to its Waste Flow Ordinance and such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the LCSWMA
pursuant to 53 P.S. § 315 (Purdon, 1974, and Purdon Supplement, 1985), as hereafter amended,
including, without limitation, regulations governing applications and standards for licensing, fees to
be charged for such licensing, the terms of licenses, procedures, recordkeeping, transportation
routes and other matters.
County authorization to adopt regulations. Rules and regulations adopted by the county pursuant
to the parallel County Waste Flow Ordinance to be adopted pursuant to the intermunicipal
agreement described in § 66-21 hereof shall be deemed rules and regulations adopted under this
article, and the county is hereby authorized to adopt such rules and regulations.
Consistency of regulations with this article and other laws. No rules or regulations adopted
pursuant to this article shall be contrary to or less stringent than the provisions of this article, the
plan, the County Waste Flow Ordinance, the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act or
regulations adopted thereunder or such other laws, regulations or requirements as may be
enacted by the United States of America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources or the Pennsylvania Environmental Quality Board
governing municipal waste planning, collection, storage, transportation, processing or disposal.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 120/233
A.
B.
A.
B.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
C.
A.
§ 66-15. Existing contracts.
Noninterference with existing contracts. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to
interfere with or in any way modify the provisions of any existing contract in force in the
municipality on the effective date of this article.
New contracts and renewals of existing contracts. No renewal of any existing contract upon the
expiration of the original term thereof and no new contract for municipal waste collection,
transportation, processing or disposal shall be entered into after the effective date of this article,
unless such renewal or such contract shall conform to the requirements of this article, the County
Waste Flow Ordinance, rules and regulations promulgated thereunder and the terms of licenses
issued thereunder.
§ 66-16. New or expanded facilities restricted; recycling
exempted; existing facilities.
Prohibition of private waste processing and disposal facilities. No person other than LCSWMA, the
United States of America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a county, a municipality, an
authority created by the foregoing or a person acting on behalf of the foregoing shall use or permit
to be used any property owned or occupied by that person within the municipality as a municipal
waste processing or disposal facility, either for municipal waste generated within the municipality
or elsewhere, without the express written approval of the municipality, the county and LARA.
Recycling. The prohibition set forth in § 66-16A of this article shall not interfere with the operation
of any program for recycling.
Existing facilities.
The prohibition set forth in § 66-16A of this article shall not interfere with the operation of any
privately or publicly owned solid waste facility which has been issued a solid waste permit
before the effective date of this article, provided that:
The owner or operator of the facility provides written notice to the county and the
municipality of the facility permit number, address, ownership and existing sources of
waste no later than 60 days after the effective date of this article;
The facility accepts regulated municipal waste from no sources within the county other
than those then authorized by the facility's solid waste permit and then being accepted,
as reflected on the notice provided the county and municipality pursuant to this section;
and
The facility shall not be expanded in capacity, with the exception of facilities owned or
operated by or on behalf of another county, which facilities may expand if such expansion
is consistent with a municipal waste management plan approved by the Department of
Environmental Resources.
Notices under this section shall be submitted to the Business Manager on behalf of the
municipality. The county may, by resolution, designate the LCSWMA or another authority or
agency as the entity which will receive notice pursuant to this section.
§ 66-17. Unlawful conduct to constitute nuisance.
Unlawful conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 121/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
A.
B.
A.
Accumulate or cause to be accumulated municipal waste in an amount greater than 20 tons,
other than waste which has been source separated for the purpose of recycling.
Violate, cause or assist in the violation of any provision of this article, any rule, regulation or
order promulgated hereunder or any rule, regulation or order promulgated by the LCSWMA or
the county consistent with this article.
Process, treat, transfer or dispose of or cause to be processed, treated, transferred or
disposed of regulated municipal waste generated within the municipality at any solid waste
facility other than a solid waste facility owned or operated by or on behalf of the county or the
LCSWMA or at an existing solid waste facility as permitted by § 66-16C of this article without
the express written consent of any municipality within which the facility is located, the county,
and the LCSWMA.
Collect or transport municipal waste present or generated within the county without a valid
license for disposal issued by the LCSWMA.
Hinder, obstruct, prevent or interfere with the municipality, the county, the LCSWMA or their
personnel in the performance of any duty under this article or in the enforcement of this
article.
Act in a manner that it contrary to the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act, regulations
promulgated thereunder, the plan, this article, the county ordinance, rules or regulations
promulgated thereunder or the terms of licenses issued thereunder.
Public nuisance. Any unlawful conduct set forth in § 66-17A hereof shall constitute a public
nuisance.
§ 66-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who engages in unlawful conduct as defined in this article shall, upon conviction thereof in
a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and
not less than $150 and, in default of payment thereof, shall be committed to the county jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days.
§ 66-19. Revocation of license; denial of subsequent application.
Upon finding that any person has engaged in unlawful conduct as defined in this article:
The LCSWMA, the municipality or the county may revoke any license issued by LCSWMA to that
person in accordance with § 66-12 of this article; and
The LCSWMA may deny any subsequent application by that person for a license pursuant to § 66-
12 hereof.
§ 66-20. Additional remedies.
Restraining violations. In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, the municipality, the
county or the LCSWMA may institute a suit in equity where unlawful conduct or public nuisance
exists, as defined in this article, for an injunction to restrain a violation of this article or rules,
regulations, orders or the terms of licenses promulgated or issued pursuant to this article. In
addition to an injunction, the court may impose penalties as authorized by § 66-18 hereof and
revoke any licenses as authorized by § 66-19 hereof.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 122/233
B.
[1]
A.
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
B.
Concurrent remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this article shall be deemed
concurrent. The existence or exercise of any remedy shall not prevent the municipality, the county
or the LCSWMA from exercising any other remedy provided by this article or otherwise provided at
law or equity.
§ 66-21. Intermunicipal agreement.
Entry into intermunicipal agreement. In order to implement the intent and terms of this article, the
municipality, pursuant to the authority of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, Act of July 12,
1972, No. 180, codified at 53 P.S. §§ 481 to 490 (Purdon, 1974, and Purdon Supplement, 1984),
and Article IX, Section 5, of the Constitution of the Common-wealth of Pennsylvania, hereby
enters into the intermunicipal joint cooperation agreement between this municipality, the county
and other municipalities within the County of Lancaster, which is attached hereto as Exhibit A[1]
and incorporated herein, together with such changes consistent with this article, if any, as may be
approved by the officials of the parties executing the same, such execution to be conclusive
evidence of such approval ("intermunicipal agreement").
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
Terms and implementation of intermunicipal agreement. As fully set forth in the intermunicipal
agreement and this article:
Conditions and terms of agreement. In the agreement:
The county agrees to:
Arrange for the provision of municipal waste disposal facilities for the economical
and environmentally sound disposal of municipal waste generated within the
participating municipalities;
Coordinate recycling activities and marketing; and
Assure continuing municipal waste planning for the county and the participating
municipalities by entering into an agreement with the LCSWMA.
The county and participating municipalities representing, in the aggregate, not less than
60% of the population of the county each agree to enact a waste flow ordinance in a form
substantially similar to this article and to assure otherwise that all acceptable municipal
solid waste be delivered to the county system.
The County agrees to:
Enact rules and regulations;
Cause the LCSWMA to enact additional rules and regulations and to administer a
licensing program; and
Enforce this article and the parallel Municipal and County Waste Flow Ordinances.
The county agrees to assure reasonable solid waste disposal fees for residents of the
participating municipalities.
The parties agree to cooperate in the joint enforcement of the intermunicipal agreement
and all ordinances enacted pursuant to the intermunicipal agreement, and this
municipality thereby agrees cooperatively to exercise, to delegate to the county and to
allow delegation of such powers, duties and responsibilities as set forth in the
intermunicipal agreement.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 123/233
(2)
(a)
(b)
[2]
(c)
(3)
(4)
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(c)
(5)
(6)
C.
Duration of term of the agreement. The term of the intermunicipal agreement shall commence
upon the date on which the county and other municipalities representing at least 60% of the
population of the county have executed the intermunicipal agreement and shall terminate 40
years following that date, unless terminated earlier for cause.
Purpose and objectives of agreement. The purpose of the intermunicipal agreement is to
provide a mechanism to;
Finance, construct and operate a municipal waste disposal system to serve this
municipality and other municipalities within the county;
Administer a countywide recycling program; and
Provide continuing municipal waste planning, as more fully set forth in the recitals to the
intermunicipal agreement and this article.[2]
Editor's Note: The recitals (preambles) to the intermunicipal agreement and this Article
are on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
Manner and extent of financing the agreement Enforcement of this article shall be financed by
the county's general revenues, except insofar as the municipality elects to enforce this article;
administration of this article, the recycling program and planning shall be financed by the
LCSWMA with revenues received from the operation of the county system; and construction
and operation of the county system shall be financed by debt instruments issued by the
LCSWMA and operating revenues.
Organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement.
The LCSWMA shall be formed from LARA by amendment of LARA's Articles of
Incorporation.
The LCSWMA shall:
Construct and operate or arrange for the construction and operation of the county
system; and
Administer and enforce this article and parallel ordinances adopted by the county
and other municipalities pursuant to the intermunicipal agreement.
The county and the municipality shall enforce said Waste Flow Ordinances with
assistance from the LCSWMA.
Management and acquisition of property. All property within the county system shall be
acquired, managed and disposed of by the LCSWMA in accordance with its separate
agreement with the county and the powers and duties imposed upon the LCSWMA by law.
Execution. Appropriate officers of the municipality are authorized and directed to execute the
intermunicipal agreement on behalf of the municipality.
§ 66-22. Operations and charges.
The municipality has been advised by the county that the plan proposes to provide for solid waste
processing and disposal facilities which will be operated efficiently and economically by the LCSWMA
and in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations and also that the LCSWMA will impose
reasonable charges, which will be uniform among all classes of the users of the plant or plants from
participating municipalities which execute the intermunicipal agreement within 90 days of the date
upon which the Department of Environmental Resources grants preliminary approval to the plan.
Charges may differ for different categories of waste and for different points of entry into the system.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 124/233
§ 66-23. Construal of provisions.
The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally construed so as best to achieve and to
effectuate the goals and purposes hereof. This article shall be construed in pari materia with the Act of
July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, known as the "Solid Waste Management Act," 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et
seq. (Purdon Supplement, 1985).
§ 66-24. When effective.
Sections 66-15 and 66-21 of this article shall become effective immediately, as provided by law, and
the remainder of this article shall become effective on the date upon which the system becomes fully
operational.
Article IV. Recycling
[Adopted 12-11-1990 by Ord. No. C-335, approved 12-11-1990]
§ 66-25. Definitions.
Any term, if not defined in this article, shall have the meaning as from time to time set forth in the
LSCSWMA rules and regulations. In addition, as used in this article, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
ACT 97
The Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.S. 380, No. 97, as now or hereafter
amended.[1]
ACT 101
The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, Act of July 28, 1988, P.L.
528, No. 101, as now or hereafter amended.[2]
ALUMINUM
All food and beverage cans made of the light in weight, ductile and malleable metallic substance
or element commonly known as "aluminum." This description excludes aluminum foil, trays, plates
and miscellaneous aluminum products.
COMMENCEMENT DATE
January 1, 1990, the date upon which the municipality's mandatory recycling program and the
contract collection services begin.
COMMINGLED
Recyclable materials which have been segregated from regulated municipal waste but which have
not been separated into different types of recyclable materials and which have been placed in a
recycling container for the purpose of collection.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES
Events that are sponsored by public or private agencies or individuals, including but not limited to
fairs, bazaars, socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more individuals
per day.
CONTRACT
The agreement between the municipality and a licensed hauler under which collection services
are to be provided to residential units for contract waste and for recyclable materials other than
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 125/233
A.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
B.
leaves.
CONTRACTOR
The person providing contract waste and recyclable materials collection services under the
contract.
CONTRACT WASTE
Those portions of regulated municipal waste which are to be collected and disposed of under the
contract. "Contract Waste" consists exclusively of refuse and oversized refuse items.
CURBSIDE
The correct location for the placement of refuse containers and recycling containers for the
purpose of collection by the contractor, which shall be adjacent to the residential unit and no more
than five feet from the public street used by collection vehicles.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Those source-separated recyclable materials designated in § 66-30 of this article.
EXISTING CONTRACT
Any contract for the storage, collection, transportation, processing or disposal of regulated
municipal waste or recyclable materials generated or located within the municipality which was
legally entered into prior to the effective date of this article and, when entered into, was legally
enforceable.
EXTRA REFUSE CONTAINERS
Refuse containers which are in excess of the three refuse containers per collection site limit.
EXTRA SERVICE TAG
A label which must be affixed to tires, white goods, oversized refuse items, yard waste and extra
refuse containers in order for such items to be collected by the contractor.
FACILITY
Any specific site or person designated by LCSWMA as the specific place or site or person to
which solid waste or source-separated recyclable materials or any portion of solid waste or
source-separated recyclable materials must or may be delivered or, in the absence of a
specific site or person being designated by LCSWMA, any approved site for the delivery of
any category of solid waste or source-separated recyclable materials.
A site will be deemed an approved site for the purposes of this definition so long as that site:
Is in possession of all applicable local, state and federal permits;
Is operating in accordance with all applicable local, state and federal laws and
regulations; and
Provides LCSWMA with such data and information as LCSWMA requests, including,
without limitation:
The quantity, type, source and date of receipt of solid waste and source-separated
recyclable materials that were generated in Lancaster County and delivered to the
site;
Proof that the site is in compliance with Subsection B(1) and (2) above; and
In the case of source-separated recyclable materials, proof that all such materials
received at the site are, in fact, recycled.
GLASS, CLEAR
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 126/233
Consists only of clear food and beverage containers made of glass, of one gallon or less capacity,
and comprised of the hard, brittle and transparent or partially transparent substance produced by
fusion of silican and silicates or sand containing soda and lime and/or other chemicals and
substances usually included in the manufacture of glass.
GLASS, COLORED
Consists only of green or brown food and beverage containers made of glass, of one gallon or
less capacity, and comprised of the hard, brittle and transparent or partially transparent substance
produced by fusion of silica and silicates or sand containing soda and lime and/or other chemicals
and substances usually included in the manufacture of glass.
LCSWMA
Lancaster County Solid Waste Management Authority, a municipal authority organized and
existing under the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.[3]
LCSWMA FACILITY
Any facility owned or operated by or on behalf of LCSWMA.
LICENSED HAULER
A person who is in possession of all pertinent permits and licenses which may be required by the
municipality and LCSWMA, for the collection, transportation, storage or disposal of solid waste or
recyclable materials.
MULTIFAMILY UNIT
A property with seven or more residential units, including, without limitation, apartment complexes,
condominium complexes, retirement homes and mobile home parks, excluding farms.
MUNICIPALITY
The Borough of Lititz.
MUNICIPALITY'S POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
The rules and regulations adopted and revised from time to time by the municipality which govern
and pertain to the municipality's recycling program and the collection, storage or transportation of
regulated municipal waste within the municipality.
NEWSPRINT
Paper which has been used for the production of daily, weekend and special edition publications
commonly known as "newspapers."
NONRESIDENTIAL UNITS
All commercial, municipal and institutional establishments, all community activities and all farms,
excluding residential units and multifamily units.
OVERSIZED REFUSE ITEMS
Refuse which will not fit into refuse containers but which is not bulky waste, including small
furniture, carpet, portable televisions and the like, but excluding tires and white goods.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, institution, cooperative enterprise,
municipality, municipal authority, governmental entity or agency or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Any material which would be regulated municipal waste but for source separation and which will
be processed into raw materials or products which are beneficially reused.
RECYCLING
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 127/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
The separation, collection, recovery and sale or reuse of metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics
and other materials which would otherwise be disposed of or processed as waste or the
mechanized separation and treatment of solid waste and creation and recovery of reusable
materials or energy.
RECYCLING CONTAINER
For residential units, the term "recycling container" shall refer to the container supplied by the
municipality. For multifamily units and nonresidential units, the term "recycling container" shall
refer to a receptacle which is constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass and has handles of
adequate strength for lifting.
REFUSE
All regulated municipal waste except the following categories of solid waste:
Construction/demolition waste.
Bulky waste.
Putrescible waste.
Uncompatible waste.
Special handling waste.
Household hazardous waste.
Source-separated recyclable materials.
Unacceptable waste.
Oversized refuse items.
REFUSE CONTAINER
A receptacle which is constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass, having handles of adequate
strength for lifting and having a tightfitting lid capable of preventing entrance into the container by
vectors, or a polyethylene bag which is specifically designed for storage and collection, is
protected against animal damage and overloading so as to prevent littering or attraction of insects
or rodents and has a holding strength capable of withstanding normal stresses until it is collected.
With respect to residential units, the weight of a "refuse container" and its contents shall not
exceed 30 pounds nor shall its capacity exceed 32 gallons.
REGULATED MUNICIPAL WASTE
Any solid waste generated or collected within the municipality which is garbage, refuse, industrial
lunchroom or office waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or institutional
establishments and from community activities and any sludge which is not residual or hazardous
waste from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater
treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include designated recyclable
materials.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT
Any single-family detached, semidetached or townhouse dwelling or a dwelling unit within a
multifamily building containing three or fewer dwelling units, excluding farms. When used in this
article or the municipality's policies and procedures, the term "residential unit" shall also refer to
any multifamily unit or nonresidential unit that requests and receives approval from the
municipality to use the collection services provided under the contract.
SCAVENGING
The uncontrolled or unauthorized removal of recyclable materials from the curbside.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 128/233
[1]
[2]
[3]
A.
B.
C.
SOURCE-SEPARATE OR SOURCE SEPARATION
The process of separating or the separation of recyclable materials from other solid waste at the
location where generated for the purpose of recycling.
STEEL AND BIMETALLIC CANS
The ferrous metal food or beverage containers commonly known as "tin cans."
YARD WASTE
All garden residues, grass clippings, shrubbery and tree prunings less than 1/4 inch in diameter
and similar material, but excluding leaves.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 66-26. Mandatory recycling.
All persons within the municipality shall source-separate designated recyclable materials.
§ 66-27. Duties of owner and occupant.
Each person who owns or occupies a residential unit, multifamily unit or nonresidential unit within the
municipality shall ensure that regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable materials
generated at such residential unit, multifamily unit or nonresidential unit are source-separated and
collected, transported and disposed of in accordance with this article, the municipality's policies and
procedures and the LCSWMA rules and regulations.
§ 66-28. Residential units.
Collection services for contract waste and for designated recyclable materials other than leaves shall
be provided to residential units by the contractor. Leaves shall be collected by the municipality. Each
person who owns or occupies a residential unit shall prepare designated recyclable materials and
contract waste for collection in accordance with the municipality's policies and procedures. With
respect to regulated municipal waste which is not contract waste, persons who own or occupy
residential units may elect to provide proper collection, transportation and disposal by either
themselves transporting such materials to a facility or utilizing a licensed hauler to collect and transport
such materials to a facility.
§ 66-29. Multifamily and nonresidential units.
Each person who owns or occupies a nonresidential unit or multifamily unit shall provide proper
collection, transportation and disposal for regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable
materials by utilizing a licensed hauler to collect and transport such materials to a facility. With
respect to contract waste and designated recyclable materials, a person who owns or occupies a
multifamily unit or nonresidential unit may either request municipality approval to receive the
services under the contract or utilize a LCSWMA licensed hauler.
Each person who owns or occupies a multifamily unit or nonresidential unit approved to receive
services under the contract shall comply with the municipality's policies and procedures
established for residential units and, notwithstanding the provisions of § 66-30B and C of this
article, shall source-separate the recyclable materials designated in § 66-30A.
Each person who owns a multifamily unit or nonresidential unit that does not receive services
under the contract shall provide:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 129/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
Recycling containers at easily accessible locations for source separation of designated
recyclable materials:
Written instructions to all persons occupying each multifamily unit and nonresidential unit to
ensure that all designated recyclable materials are source-separated.
Collection and transportation of source-separated designated recyclable materials at a
frequency of not less than once per month.
Each person who owns or occupies a multifamily unit or nonresidential unit shall source-separate
and prepare leaves for collection in accordance with the municipality's policies and procedures.
§ 66-30. Designated recyclable materials.
Each person who owns or occupies a residential unit shall source-separate the following
recyclable materials:
Clear glass.
Colored glass.
Aluminum.
Steel and bimetallic cans.
Newsprint.
Yard waste.
Tires.
White goods.
Each person who owns or occupies a multifamily unit shall source-separate the following
recyclable materials:
Clear glass.
Colored glass.
Aluminum.
Steel and bimetallic cans.
Newsprint.
Yard waste.
Tires.
White goods.
Each person who owns or occupies a nonresidential unit shall source-separate the following
recyclable materials:
Clear glass.
Colored glass.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 130/233
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Aluminum.
Steel and bimetallic cans.
Newsprint.
Yard waste.
High-grade office paper.
Corrugated cardboard.
Tires.
White goods.
§ 66-31. Approved haulers.
With respect to contract waste and designated recyclable materials other than leaves generated at
residential units, no person other than the contractor shall collect, transport, store, process or
dispose of such waste. With respect to regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable
materials other than leaves which are generated at multifamily units or nonresidential units, no
person other than a licensed hauler shall collect, transport, store, process or dispose of such
waste. Collection of leaves will be arranged by the municipality in accordance with the
municipality's policies and procedures. Each licensed hauler that collects or transports regulated
municipal waste or designated recyclable materials generated in any residential unit,
nonresidential unit or multifamily unit shall submit to the municipality, on forms provided by the
municipality, monthly reports concerning the sources, types, weight, etc., of materials collected.
No person who generates, owns or possesses designated recyclable materials or regulated
municipal waste shall, by contract for collection services or otherwise, cause, permit or assist in
the collection, transportation, storage, processing or disposal of such waste by any person other
than the contractor, with respect to contract waste or designated recyclable materials other than
leaves generated at residential units, and a licensed hauler, with respect to regulated municipal
waste other than contract waste generated at residential units and regulated municipal waste or
designated recyclable materials other than leaves generated at multifamily units or nonresidential
units.
No licensed hauler who collects, transports or disposes of designated recyclable materials or
regulated municipal waste shall, by contract for such services or otherwise, cause, permit or assist
in the storage, collection, transportation, processing or disposal of designated recyclable materials
in a manner which treats such materials as regulated municipal waste or which is otherwise
inconsistent with source separation or recycling. Any delivery of designated recyclable materials to
a LCSWMA facility in accordance with the LCSWMA rules and regulations shall be deemed to
satisfy the requirements of this Subsection C.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections A and B above, any person who occupies a
residential unit may transport to a facility the regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable
materials which were generated at such person's residence.
All regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable materials generated or collected in the
municipality shall be transported directly to a facility in accordance with the LCSWMA rules and
regulations and without any intervening transfer, unloading, processing, sorting, salvaging,
scavenging or reuse of any portion of any load of such regulated municipal waste and designated
recyclable materials from the time of its collection until the time of its delivery to the facility.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 131/233
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
§ 66-32. Illegal dumping.
No person shall store, process or dispose of any regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable
materials except at a facility. Notwithstanding the foregoing, yard waste may be composted (in
accordance with the municipality's guidelines) on the property on which such waste was generated.
§ 66-33. Collection service fees.
Fees for services provided by the municipality shall be charged to all residential units within the
municipality. The amount of fees and the schedule for payment of fees shall be as published from time
to time by the municipality.
§ 66-34. Scavenging.
From the time of placement for collection of any designated recyclable materials other than leaves, all
such designated recyclable materials shall be the property of the generator or the licensed hauler who
has contracted to provide collection, as provided in the contract. It shall be a violation of this article for
any person, other than such licensed hauler, to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up
any such designated recyclable materials.
§ 66-35. Existing contracts.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair the obligations of any existing contract.
No renewal or modification of any existing contract and no new contract for the storage, collection,
transportation, processing or disposal of regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable
materials shall be entered into after the effective date of this article unless such renewal or
modification or new contract shall conform to the requirements of this article and the municipality's
policies and procedures.
No contract which is entered into, renewed, extended, modified or assigned after the effective date
of this § 66-35 shall provide for collection services to be performed after the commencement date
for contract waste or designated recyclable materials generated at residential units. This provision
shall not apply to the contract between the municipality and the contractor. With respect to any
contract which violates this Subsection C, such contract shall be deemed void and the hauler that
is a party to such contract shall reimburse to the applicable residential units any funds which have
been paid for such collection services and shall not collect or attempt to collect any funds for such
collection services.
§ 66-36. Powers of municipality; refund of fees.
The municipality shall have the power to establish service fees, record and reporting requirements
and standards and procedures for the issuance, administration and revocation of licenses, as
deemed necessary, including, without limitation:
Application procedures, fees, standards and conditions for licenses;
The fixing of a monetary bond, with or without surety, to secure the compliance by any
licensed hauler with any such requirements, standards or procedures; and
Any other matters deemed necessary or convenient by the municipality.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 132/233
B. In the event of suspension or revocation of any license which is issued by the municipality or
LCSWMA, the person whose license is suspended or revoked shall refund to each customer any
prepaid fees.
§ 66-37. Unlawful activity.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or cause or permit or assist in the violation of any provision
of this article or any provision of the municipality's policies and procedures. All unlawful conduct shall
also constitute a public nuisance.
§ 66-38. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article or any provision of the municipality's policies and
procedures shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced for each violation to
pay a fine of not more than $300 and costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment of such fine
and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than three days. Each violation of any provision of
this article or of any provision of the municipality's policies and procedures, and each day that such a
violation shall exist, shall constitute a separate violation and offense.
§ 66-39. Liability.
For purposes of the obligations established by this article or the municipality's policies and procedures
and for purposes of any fine, penalty, imprisonment or other sanction, the terms "person," "residential
unit," "multifamily unit" and "nonresidential unit" shall include officers and directors of any corporation
or other legal entity having officers and directors, and refer to and impose joint and several liability
upon both the persons residing in or occupying any such residential, multifamily or nonresidential units
and the owner, landlord, condominium owner's association and/or agent of an owner, landlord or
condominium owner's association of such premises.
§ 66-40. Injunctive relief.
In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, the municipality may institute proceedings to
restrain any violation of or to require compliance with this article and/or the municipality's policies and
procedures.
§ 66-41. Concurrent remedies.
The penalties and remedies set forth in this article are in addition to, not in lieu of, any fines, penalties
or remedies provided in the municipality's policies and procedures. The existence or exercise of any
remedy shall not prevent the municipality from exercising any other remedy provided under this article
or the municipality's policies and procedures, or available at law or equity.
§ 66-42. Prior ordinances in effect.
This article is in addition to, and not in lieu of, Ord. No. C-17, adopted and approved 4-9-1963; Ord.
No. C-93, adopted 4-29-1969 and approved 5-9-1969; Ord. No. C-125, adopted 9-28-1971 and
approved 10-1-1971; Ord. No. C-138, adopted and approved 3-27-1973; Ord. No. C-224, adopted and
approved 10-31-1978; and Ord. No. C-305, adopted and approved 12-30-1986.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 133/233
A.
B.
C.
Chapter 68. Holding Tanks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 2-26-1980 by Ord. No. C-247, approved 2-
26-1980. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Authority — See Ch. 27.
Sewers — See Ch. 100.
§ 68-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for the use and maintenance of holding tanks
designed to receive and retain sewage, whether from residential or commercial uses, and it is hereby
declared that the enactment of this chapter is necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of
the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this municipality.
§ 68-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this
chapter shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY
Councilmen of Lititz Borough, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK
A watertight receptacle which receives and retains sewage and is designed and constructed to
facilitate ultimate disposal of the sewage at another site. "Holding tanks" include but are not limited
to the following:
CHEMICAL TOILET
A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a holding tank.
RETENTION TANK
A holding tank to which sewage is conveyed by a water-carrying system.
VAULT PIT PRIVY
A holding tank designed to receive sewage where water under pressure is not available.
IMPROVED PROPERTY
Any property within the township upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous
or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPALITY
Lititz Borough, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any property located in the
Borough.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation or other group or entity.
SEWAGE
Any substance that contains any of the waste products or excrement or other discharge from the
bodies of human beings or animals and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 134/233
[1]
A.
B.
inimical to the public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic water
supply or for recreation.
§ 68-3. Authority to have power.
The Authority[1] is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the Borough the control and
methods of holding tank sewage disposal and the collection and transportation thereof.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 27, Sewer Authority.
§ 68-4. Rules and regulations.
The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and regulations concerning
sewage which it may deem necessary from time to time to effect the purposes herein.
§ 68-5. Conformance with other provisions.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Authority shall be in conformity with the provisions
herein, all other ordinances of the Borough, all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 68-6. Rates and charges.
The Authority shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect rates, assessments and
other charges in the area served by its facilities at reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by
applicable law.
§ 68-7. Collection, transportation and disposal of sewage.
The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property utilizing a holding tank
shall be done solely by or under the direction and control of the Authority, and the disposal thereof
shall be made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the Department of Environmental
Resources of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 68-8. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this chapter or any ordinance of this Borough, the
provisions of any applicable law and the rules and regulations of the Authority and any
administrative agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Permit only the Authority or its agent to collect, transport and dispose of the contents therein.
§ 68-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of § 68-8 shall, upon conviction thereof by summary
proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $300 and costs and,
in default of said fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment in the county prison for a period not in
excess of 30 days.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 135/233
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
§ 68-10. Additional remedies.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violation of § 68-8 above shall constitute
a nuisance and shall be abated by the municipality or the Authority by either seeking appropriate
equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
Chapter 69. (Reserved)
[Editor's Note: Former Ch. 69, Housing Maintenance and Occupancy, adopted 11-14-1972 by Ord. No.
C-132, approved 11-15-1972, as amended, was superseded 12-29-1999 by Ord. No. C-414, approved
12-29-1998. For current provisions, see Ch. 92, Property Maintenance.]
Chapter 70. Hydronic Heaters
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 7-29-2008 by Ord. No. C-489, approved 7-
29-2008. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 38.
§ 70-1. Findings; purpose.
Residences and commercial and industrial establishments located within the Borough are entitled
to clean air and environmental conditions free of unreasonable dust, obnoxious odors and smoke,
as well as an environment free from the storage and use of combustible fuels in adjacent or
exposed exterior areas within densely populated areas.
Research conducted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), including a
project summary dated February 1998 and titled "Emissions from Outdoor Wood-Burning
Residential Hot Water Furnaces" suggests that such devices cause air emission problems that
can impact residents, neighbors, business owners, workers and visitors. In addition, according to
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), these devices produce a large
amount of smoke and this smoke can cause health problems for humans.
This chapter is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to safeguard the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Lititz pursuant to the authority vested in
the Borough under Section 46202(6) of the Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 46202(6), among other
applicable laws by regulating a source of air pollution arising from the use of hydronic heaters, as
hereinafter defined.
§ 70-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HYDRONIC HEATERS
A fuel-burning device that:
Is designed to burn wood or other manufacturer-approved solid fuels;
The manufacturer specifies for outdoor installation and use or installation in structures not
normally occupied by humans (e.g., garages), or to heat structures that have an approved
Lititz Borough use and occupancy permit; and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 136/233
C.
[1]
A.
B.
Heats building space and/or water via the distribution, typically through pipes, of a fluid
heated in the device, typically water or a water/antifreeze mixture.
§ 70-3. Installation and use.
The installation and/or use of hydronic heaters is hereby prohibited within the Borough of Lititz.
§ 70-4. Removal of existing units required.
This chapter shall require the removal of any hydronic heaters in use within the Borough within 60 days
of the effective date of this chapter.[1]
Editor's Note: This chapter became effective five days after its adoption.
§ 70-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and, in default of payment of said fine, to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 72. Junkyards
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 9-28-1965 by Ord. No. C-51, approved 10-
8-1965. Sections 72-4 and 72-7 amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I. Other amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and sanitation — See Ch. 66.
§ 72-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be construed throughout
this chapter to have the meanings herein indicated:
JUNK
Any discarded or partially disassembled material or article, including but not limited to metal,
glass, stone, machinery, equipment and motor vehicles. This meaning, however, shall not
include garbage and other organic wastes nor paper, rags, rubbish, refuse or other flammable
materials or articles.
JUNK DEALER
Any person who engages in the business of buying, selling, salvaging and dealing in junk or
any person who maintains and operates a junkyard within the Borough of Lititz.
JUNKYARD
Any place where junk is accumulated, sorted, salvaged, disposed of or wrecked.
PERSON
A natural person, partnership, association, firm or corporation.
Word usage. Words in the singular shall include the plural, and those in the masculine gender
shall include the feminine and neuter genders.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 137/233
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 72-2. License required; limitations on use.
No person shall maintain a junkyard in the Borough of Lititz without first having obtained a license from
the Lititz Borough Office. The license shall be issued for a calendar year and shall be renewed before
the first day of January of each year. Licenses are not transferable. No person may keep more than
one junkyard in the Borough under any one license.
§ 72-3. Application for license.
Application for a license shall be made in writing to the Lititz Borough Council, which shall issue or
refuse to issue a license to the person applying therefor after an examination of the application and
after taking into consideration the suitability of the property to be used for the purposes of the license,
the character of the properties nearby and the effect of the proposed use upon the health, welfare and
safety of the residents of the Borough.
§ 72-4. License fee.
The annual license fee shall be as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 72-5. Exclusions from licensing provisions.
A person engaged as a dealer in new and/or used machinery, equipment or motor vehicles is excluded
from the licensing provisions of this chapter, provided that the outside area of the premises used as a
junkyard is less than twice the size of the inside service area of the same premises. Such person,
however, shall comply with the regulations set forth under § 72-6.
§ 72-6. Maintenance of premises; storage of junk; hours.
Every person subject to the provisions of this chapter shall maintain the premises on which his
business is conducted in the manner prescribed in this section.
The premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute a nuisance or a menace to
the health of the community or of the residents nearby or not to constitute a place for the breeding
of rodents and vermin.
No garbage or other organic wastes and no paper, rubbish, refuse, rags or other flammable
material or article shall be stored on the premises.
Whenever any motor vehicle or other equipment shall be received on the premises as junk, all
gasoline and oil shall be drained and removed therefrom. No gasoline or oil shall be permitted to
remain upon the premises.
The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage facilities of the premises shall
be such as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water upon the premises and to facilitate
access for fire-fighting purposes.
The premises shall not be open for business nor shall any work be done thereon in connection
with the accumulation, sorting, salvaging, disposing, transporting or removal of junk at any time on
the first day of the week, commonly called "Sunday," or on any other day of the week before 7:00
a.m. or after 6:00 p.m.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 138/233
F.
[1]
Junk may not be stored within 100 feet of any right-of-way line of any street, road or alley or within
100 feet of the property lines of the premises. All junkyards must be concealed by evergreen
plantings or other enclosure approved by the Borough Council. No junk shall be stored on the
premises higher than the enclosure.
§ 72-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter and shall be convicted thereof before
the Mayor or any District Justice in the Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days;
provided, however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is without the financial
means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall be
permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as the District Justice
deems to be just.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 72-8. Variances.
[Added 2-22-1966 by Ord. No. C-62, approved 2-26-1966]
If any of the regulations set forth in § 72-6 are shown by a person to the satisfaction of a majority of the
members of the Borough Council to be unreasonable and to cause unique and undue hardship as they
apply to such person, the Council may grant a variance in writing to such person from the regulation or
regulations in question so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured;
provided, however, that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this
chapter.
Chapter 77. (Reserved)
[Former Ch. 77, Mechanical Standards, adopted 12-29-1998 by Ord. No. C-413, approved 12-29-1998,
was superseded 12-27-2006 by Ord. No. C-481, approved 12-27-2006. For current provisions, see Ch.
36, Construction Code, Uniform; Property Maintenance, Art. I, Uniform Construction Code.]
Chapter 80. Official Map
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 3-27-2001 by Ord. No. C-433, approved 3-
27-2001; amended in its entirety 1-27-2009 by Ord. No. C-497, approved 1-27-2009. Subsequent
amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 108.
Zoning — See Ch. 122.
§ 80-1. Statutory authority; purpose; review; hearing.
Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code[1] (MPC) authorizes the Borough to
prepare and adopt an Official Map of the Borough showing existing and proposed public streets,
pedestrianways, public grounds, public parks, playgrounds, open space reservations, and other public
lands and facilities. In accordance with the MPC, the Borough enacted Ordinance No. 433 adopting an
Official Map, which Official Map was recorded in Plan Book J-210, Page 33, in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds in and for Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. The Borough, in connection with the
implementation of the 2006 update to the Lititz/Warwick Joint Strategic Comprehensive Plan, desires
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 139/233
[1]
[1]
[1]
to amend and reenact in its entirety the Official Map adopted by Ordinance No. 433 to show existing
and proposed streets, access roads, trails, urban growth boundaries, public grounds, public buildings,
parks, swimming pools, schools, bus shelters, and other public lands and facilities within the Borough.
The adoption of an updated Official Map will assist landowners in the determination of the uses and
development of their lands within the Borough. The Borough has solicited reviews of the proposed
Official Map from the Lititz Borough Planning Commission, the Lancaster County Planning
Commission, Warwick Township, the Warwick Township Planning Commission, Penn Township, the
Penn Township Planning Commission, Manheim Township, and the Manheim Township Planning
Commission. Following the receipt of comments and recommendations from such bodies, Borough
Council held a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of Article IV of the MPC.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10401 et seq.
§ 80-2. Adoption of revised Official Map.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Lititz hereby adopts the map prepared by ELA Group, Inc.,
updated January 2009, and entitled "Official Map of the Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania," which indicates thereon existing and proposed streets and highways and existing and
proposed trails together with other public lands and facilities within the Borough, as the Official Map of
the Borough of Lititz. A true and correct copy of the Official Map is attached hereto as Exhibit A and
incorporated herein.[1]
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 80-3. Recording; filing.
The proper officials of the Borough are authorized to take all steps necessary to record the Official Map
in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lancaster County as required by Section 402(c) of the MPC.
[1] The proper officials of the Borough are further authorized to transmit certified copies of the Official
Map to those entities required to be provided with copies by the MPC.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10402(c).
§ 80-4. Amendments.
The Borough retains the right to amend the Official Map adopted by this chapter from time to time by
appropriate action of the Borough Council of the Borough of Lititz taken in accordance with the
procedural requirements of the MPC as it may be hereafter amended.
§ 80-5. Duties and rights of owners.
Those persons who own lands within areas shown on the Official Map as proposed streets or
highways, proposed trails or other proposed public areas shall be subject to the duties and shall have
the rights set forth in Article IV of the MPC.
§ 80-6. Effect on pending plans.
The Official Map adopted by Ordinance No. 433 shall continue in force as to any preliminary or final
plan which is pending action by the Borough Council at the effective date of this chapter.
Chapter 82. Parades and Meetings
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 140/233
[1]
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 5-31-1967 by Ord. No. C-74, approved 6-1-
1967. Section 82-3 amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Other
amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 82-1. Permit required.
No person shall participate in any parade, procession, assembly or meeting upon any highway, street,
lane, alley, way, sidewalk or public square of the Borough of Lititz which interferes with or excludes
other citizens in their legal rights in the use thereof, unless a permit has been procured therefor as
hereinafter provided.
§ 82-2. Written notice of application; conditions of permit.
All parades, processions and assemblages or meetings occupying, marching or assembling upon any
highway, street, lane, alley, way, sidewalk or public square of the Borough of Lititz to the interference or
exclusion of other citizens in their legal rights in the use thereof are forbidden unless written notice of
the character, time, place and route of such procession or parade and the names of the officers of
same are given by the chief officer or person(s) in charge thereof, not less than seven days prior to its
forming, to the Mayor of the Borough of Lititz, and, in case of assemblages or meetings, seven days'
notice of the object, time and place of such meetings or assemblages shall be given to said Mayor by
the person, association, firm or corporation making the application for the permit as hereinafter
provided. In pursuance of the aforesaid requirements, and for the purpose of preventing interference
with and obstruction of the lawful use of said highways, streets, lanes, alleys, ways, sidewalks or public
squares of said Borough of Lititz and the preservation of peace and good order, the Mayor shall have
the power to designate by permit the time and place of such assemblages or meetings and, as to such
processions or parades, how much of the streets, lanes, alleys, ways, sidewalks or public squares they
will occupy and the time they will start. The length of time of such parade or procession shall be
determined by the Mayor, and, when so designated and approved, the person, association, firm or
corporation to whom or to which a permit has been given shall be held responsible for the violation of
any designation or limitation mentioned in said permit.
§ 82-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, association, firm or corporation who or which shall violate the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300,
plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that if the District Justice determines that the
defendant is without the financial means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single
remittance, such defendant shall be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such
periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 84. Parental Responsibility
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 12-28-1965 by Ord. No. C-57, approved 12-
31-1965. Section 84-3 amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Other amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 41.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 141/233
[1]
A.
§ 84-1. Responsibility of parent or guardian to control activities of
minor.
Every parent, guardian and other adult person having the care and custody of a person under 18 years
of age shall be responsible for the control of the activities of such person so as to prevent such person
from violating any of the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the conduct and safety or
traffic provisions of the Lititz Borough Code between 10:00 p.m., except Friday evening or Saturday
evening when the time shall be 12:00 midnight, and 6:00 a.m.
§ 84-2. Notice of violation.
In the event a person under 18 years of age violates any of the Laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or the conduct and safety or traffic provisions of the Lititz Borough Code between the
hours of the days set forth in § 84-1, the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and
custody of such person under 18 years of age shall be notified of such violation by the Chief of Police
of the Borough by certified mail, return receipt requested.
§ 84-3. Violations and penalties.
In the event that a person under 18 years of age violates any of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or the conduct and safety or traffic provisions of the Lititz Borough Code between the
hours of the days set forth in § 84-1 and the parent, guardian or other person having the care and
custody of such person under 18 years of age has received notice of a prior violation pursuant to § 84-
2, then such parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such person under
18 years of age shall be deemed to have violated § 84-1 and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to pay a fine not to exceed a maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days; provided,
however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is without the financial means to pay
the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall be permitted to pay the
fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 84-4. Construction of provisions.
This chapter shall not be construed to limit, supplant or conflict in any way with the jurisdiction or
procedure of the Juvenile Court Law.
Chapter 87. Peddlers, Canvassers and Solicitors
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 8-26-1969 by Ord. No. C-98, approved 8-
29-1969. Sections 87-4A and 87-10 amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I. Other amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 55.
§ 87-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise stated, the following words and phrases shall be construed throughout this
chapter to have the meanings herein indicated:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 142/233
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
[1]
A.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
CANVASSING OR SOLICITING
The taking of orders for future deliveries of tangible commodities, intangible services or
subscriptions, without appointments or invitation, from house to house, on the streets or in
any public place, regardless of the time of delivery of the commodities, performance of the
services or the collection of the selling price for them.
PEDDLING
The selling of tangible commodities, without appointment or invitation, from house to house,
on the streets or in any public place, regardless of the time of delivery of the commodities or
the collection of the selling price for them.
PERSON
Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or corporation.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the feminine
and neuter gender.
§ 87-2. License required.
No person shall engage in peddling, canvassing or soliciting in the borough without first having taken
out a license as herein provided.
§ 87-3. Application for license.
Every person desiring to engage in peddling, canvassing or soliciting in the borough shall first
make an application to the Mayor of the borough, through the Police Department, for a license.
Upon such application, the person shall give:
His name, address and previous criminal record, if any.
The names and addresses of persons for whom he works, including his immediate supervisor.
The type of tangible commodities he wishes to peddle and/or the type of tangible
commodities, services or subscriptions for which he will canvass or solicit.
The length of time for which he wishes to be licensed.
The type of vehicle he will use.
The number of his helpers.
The foregoing information must be given for each helper, who also must apply for a license. No
license issued hereunder shall be transferable from one person to another.
§ 87-4. License fee.
[Amended 12-30-1975 by Ord. No. C-181, approved 12-30-1975]
No license shall be issued hereunder until the applicant pays to the borough for its use the
appropriate fee based upon the schedule as provided in Chapter 55, Fees.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code: see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 143/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
A.
B.
Notwithstanding the foregoing Subsection A, no license fee shall be charged:
To farmers selling their own produce.
For the sale of goods, wares and merchandise or for the collection of donations, the proceeds
whereof are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose.
To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat
products or milk or milk products.
Any peddler, canvasser or solicitor dealing in one or more of the excepted categories above who
also peddles, canvasses or solicits commodities, services or subscriptions not excepted shall be
subject to the license fee fixed for his activities in connection with the nonexcepted categories.
§ 87-5. Issuance and display of license.
Upon approval of an application thereof and after receiving the appropriate fee from the applicant as
specified above, a license shall be issued to such person. Such license shall contain the information
required to be given upon the application thereof. Every such person shall at all times when engaged
in peddling, canvassing or soliciting in the borough carry such license upon his person and shall exhibit
such license upon request to any borough officer, borough official or citizen. Such person shall peddle,
canvass or solicit only for those commodities, services or subscriptions set forth on his license.
§ 87-6. Permitted hours.
No person licensed as a peddler, canvasser or solicitor under this chapter shall engage in peddling,
canvassing or soliciting at any time on a Sunday or legal holiday or upon any other day of the week
before 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m., prevailing local time, except for those qualifying under § 87-4B(3),
when peddling on the street may continue until 10:00 p.m., prevailing time.
§ 87-7. Disturbance of public quiet.
[Amended 8-14-1990 by Ord. No. 333]
No person licensed as a peddler, canvasser or solicitor under this chapter, unless duly noted as an
exception qualifying under § 87-7B, shall hawk or cry his wares upon any of the streets or
sidewalks of the borough, nor shall be use any loudspeaker or horn or any other device for
announcing his presence.
Notwithstanding the foregoing Subsection A, ice cream vendors shall be permitted to announce
their presence on the streets by ringing bells and/or playing soft music, between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
§ 87-8. Record of licenses issued; supervision of activities.
The Mayor shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this chapter. The Mayor and the Chief of
Police shall supervise the activities of all persons holding such licenses.
§ 87-9. Suspension of license.
The Mayor of the Borough of Lititz or the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to suspend any license
issued under this chapter when he deems such suspension to be beneficial to the public health, safety
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 144/233
or morals or for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or for giving false information upon any
application for a license hereunder.
§ 87-10. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon summary conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30
days; provided, however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is without the
financial means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall
be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as the District
Justice deems to be just.
Chapter 89. (Reserved)
[Former Ch. 89, Plumbing, adopted 12-29-1998 by Ord. No. C-412, approved 12-29-1998, was
superseded 12-27-2006 by Ord. No. C-481, approved 12-27-2006. For current provisions, see Ch. 36,
Construction Code, Uniform; Property Maintenance, Art. I, Uniform Construction Code.]
Chapter 92. (Reserved)
[Former Ch. 92, Property Maintenance, adopted 12-29-1998 by Ord. No. C-414, approved 12-29-1998,
was superseded 12-27-2006 by Ord. Nos. C-480 and C-481, approved 12-27-2006. For current
provisions, see Ch. 36, Construction Code, Uniform; Property Maintenance, Art. II, Property
Maintenance.]
Chapter 94. Rental Units
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Real estate registry — See Ch. 24.
Construction codes — See Ch. 36.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 36.
Fee — See Ch. 55.
Solid waste and recycling — See Ch. 66.
Zoning — See Ch. 122.
Article I. Residential Rental Unit Regulation
[Adopted 6-25-2013 by Ord. No. C-523, approved 6-25-2013]
§ 94-1. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this article and the policy of the Borough of Lititz shall be to protect and promote the
public health, safety and welfare of its citizens, to establish rights and obligations of owners and
occupants relating to residential rental units in the Borough and to encourage owners and occupants to
maintain and improve the quality of rental housing within the Borough. As a means to these ends, this
article provides for a systematic inspection program, registration and licensing of residential rental
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 145/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
units, and penalties. In considering the adoption of this article, the Borough makes the following
findings:
There is a greater incidence of problems with the maintenance and upkeep of residential
properties which are not owner-occupied as compared to those that are owner-occupied.
The Borough is concerned with the condition of a property when EMS responds and for the safety
of the EMS responders and general safety of the occupants.
The Borough is unaware of the exact number of tenant-occupied residences, with knowledge of
such used for the accountability and safety of the occupants and owner/manager.
Borough records indicate there are a greater number of disturbances at residential rental units
than at owner-occupied units.
§ 94-2. Definitions and word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this article, have
meanings indicated as follows:
BOROUGH
The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
A person designated by Borough Council to enforce this article, including performance of
inspections, issuance of residential rental licenses and issuance of citations.
CODES
Any state or local code or ordinance adopted, enacted or in effect in and for the Borough,
including, but not limited to, the Building Code, the Property Maintenance Code, the Zoning
Ordinance, trash collection, and general nuisance ordinances.
COUNTY
The County of Lancaster.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT
Any act by an occupant of a residential rental unit or by a person present at a residential rental
unit involving public drunkenness, consumption of an alcoholic beverage in public, public urination
or defecation, the unlawful deposit of trash or litter on public or private property, damage to or
destruction of public or private property, the obstruction of public roads, streets, highways or
sidewalks, interference with emergency or police services, use of profane or obscene language or
gestures, indecent exposure, fighting or quarreling, or any other act defined as disorderly conduct
in the Pennsylvania Crimes Code or any act which otherwise injures or endangers the health,
safety or welfare of the residents of the Borough residing in the neighborhood or vicinity of the
gathering. It is not necessary that such conduct, action, incident or behavior constitute a criminal
offense, nor that criminal charges be filed against any person, in order for said person to have
perpetrated, caused or permitted the commission of disruptive conduct, as defined herein;
provided, however, that no disruptive conduct shall be deemed to have occurred unless a police
officer shall investigate and make a determination that such did occur and keep written records,
including a disruptive conduct report, of such occurrences.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT
A written report of disruptive conduct to be completed by a police officer who actually investigates
an alleged incident of disruptive conduct and which shall be maintained by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
MANAGER
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 146/233
[1]
(1)
A.
A person retained by an owner to be responsible for one or more residential rental units within the
Borough.
OCCUPANT
Any person over one year of age living and sleeping in a residential rental unit or having actual
possession of said residential rental unit.
OWNER
The person who holds record title and/or the equitable owner under an agreement of sale of a
property upon which a residential rental unit is erected or maintained. If more than one person
owns the residential rental unit as joint tenants, tenants in common, tenants by the entireties, or
tenants in co-partnership, each such person shall be considered an owner and shall have all of the
duties of an owner under this article.
PERSON
A natural individual, unincorporated association, partnership, corporation, estate, trust or any other
legally recognized entity, and the members of such partnership and the officers of such
corporation.
PREMISES
Any parcel of real estate within the Borough, including the land and all buildings and appurtenant
structures, on which one or more residential rental units are located.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
The Borough Property Maintenance Code, adopted as the International Property Maintenance
Code of 2009, and any future amendments.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE
A document issued by the Code Enforcement Officer to the owner of a residential rental unit.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT
A rooming unit; or a dwelling unit let for rent; or a residential unit occupied by any persons other
than one occupied solely by the owner and members of the owner's family. Each individual
townhouse dwelling, each individual apartment unit, each individual unit in a multifamily building,
and each rooming unit shall be considered a separate residential rental unit. If a structure contains
a rooming unit or if any portion of the structure is let for rent, it shall be considered a residential
rental unit whether or not the owner or a relative of the owner also resides in the structure. A
residential rental unit shall not include a hotel unit, excepting, to the extent permitted by applicable
federal and state law, units occupied by the same person or persons for 30 or more consecutive
days. A residential rental unit includes dwelling units under lease-purchase agreements or longterm
(greater than six months) agreements of sale.
ROOMING UNIT
A portion of a dwelling unit including any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not for cooking purposes. Granting of
permission to use shared or common cooking facilities may be associated with the leasing of a
rooming unit.
§ 94-3. Duties of owners and managers.
It shall be the duty of every owner to:
Keep and maintain all residential rental units in compliance with all applicable codes and
provisions of all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances and regulations,
including, but not limited to, the Zoning Ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 122, Zoning.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 147/233
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
B.
C.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
D.
Keep and maintain the premises in good and safe condition.
Be aware of, and to act to eliminate, disruptive conduct in all residential rental units under
his/her control.
Employ policies to and manage the residential rental units under his/her control in compliance
with the provisions of this article and all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances
and regulations.
Pay or ensure payment of all real estate taxes, sewer rates, water rates, and trash collection
fees to ensure that such vital utilities are provided.
Obtain and maintain a residential rental license from the Borough for each residential rental
unit.
Within 30 days of a new occupancy of any residential rental unit or upon a change of
occupancy or a change in the number of occupants, provide the Borough with the names of
all occupants of the residential rental unit.
Provide trash and recyclable collection and disposal services and instruct occupants of the
method of trash and recyclable collection (e.g., curbside or dumpster) and, if applicable, the
day of the week for trash and recyclable pickup.
Provide each occupant with a disclosure statement containing the requirements of this article.
Providing a copy of this article to each occupant will satisfy this requirement.
Take all actions necessary to ensure that each residential rental unit is occupied by a "family,"
as defined by the Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance.
Require a written rental agreement for each residential rental unit, which shall contain the
names of all permitted occupants.
Retain a manager when this article requires that a manager be designated.
If the owner has appointed a manager, the manager shall be jointly responsible to fulfill all of the
obligations set forth in this § 94-3. No owner may relieve himself of the responsibility to perform
the duties set forth in this § 94-3 by appointing a manager.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate or cause to be rented, either as owner or
manager, any residential rental unit within the Borough without having a residential rental license
as required by this article.
It shall be the responsibility of every owner and every manager to display the residential rental
license in the residential rental unit.
The residential rental license shall include the following information:
The name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner or manager.
The evenings on which garbage and recycling are to be placed curbside for collection.
The telephone number to call to register complaints regarding the physical condition of
the residential rental unit.
The telephone number for emergency police, fire and medical services.
The date of expiration of the residential rental license.
A summary of the owner's and occupant's duties under this article.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 148/233
(2)
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A small ID or sticker shall be displayed in a conspicuous window by the front door to provide
contact information for the property owner/manager for use by EMS/police.
No residential rental license shall be issued to any owner residing more than 50 miles from the
municipal limits of the Borough unless the owner provides the Code Enforcement Officer with the
name, mailing address and telephone number of a manager, residing within the fifty-mile radius,
authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the owner. For the purpose of this subsection,
a post office box is not acceptable for the manager's address. This designation shall not be valid
unless signed by the owner and the manager designated to act on behalf of the owner. The owner
shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer within 30 days of any change in manager.
§ 94-4. Exemption from licensing requirements.
All property owned by the county or any housing authority created by the county which is
inspected annually by those agencies to assess conformance with federal standards, or properties
that are inspected annually for compliance with the requirements of the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development or the Pennsylvania Housing Finance Agency, regardless of
the occupants, shall be exempt from the licensing provisions of this article.
Dormitories located within a school facility or use and all nursing home facilities and associated
cottages are exempt from licensing/inspections.
If, in response to a complaint, an exempt unit is found to be in violation of a code, the owner and, if
applicable, the manager shall correct the violation(s) within the time frame cited by the Code
Enforcement Officer. If the violation(s) is/are not corrected within a timely manner, the unit shall
lose its exemption until the violation(s) is/are corrected. If three verified complaints are received in
any twelve-month period, the unit shall lose its exemption from the requirement to obtain a license
for a period of five years.
All occupants of residential rental units, whether or not the residential rental unit is exempt from
the licensing requirements of this article, shall be subject to the provisions of §§ 94-5 and 94-6 of
this article.
§ 94-5. Duties of occupants.
Each occupant of a residential rental unit shall have the following duties:
Comply with all obligations of this article and all applicable federal, state and local laws,
ordinances and regulations.
Conduct himself/herself and require other persons, including, but not limited to, guests on the
premises and within his/her residential rental unit with his/her consent, to conduct themselves in a
manner that will not disturb the peaceful enjoyment of the premises by others and that will not
disturb the peaceful enjoyment of adjacent or nearby dwellings by people occupying the same.
Not engage in, nor tolerate, nor permit others on the premises to cause damage to the residential
rental unit or engage in disruptive conduct or other violations of this article, codes, Borough
ordinances, or applicable state laws.
Use the trash and recyclable collection services provided by the owner.
Use the residential rental unit for no purpose other than as a residence.
Maintain the residential rental unit in a manner meeting all requirements for occupants of
structures set forth in this article.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 149/233
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Allow the Code Enforcement Officer to inspect the residential rental unit at reasonable times.
Not allow persons other than those identified on the residential rental agreement to reside in the
residential rental unit.
Not allow the residential rental unit to be occupied in a way that conflicts with the Borough Zoning
Ordinance.
§ 94-6. Disruptive conduct.
Police officers shall investigate alleged incidents of disruptive conduct. The police officer
conducting the investigation shall complete a disruptive conduct report upon a finding that the
reported incident constitutes disruptive conduct. The information filed in the disruptive conduct
report shall include, if possible, the identity of the alleged perpetrator(s) of the disruptive conduct
and the factual basis for the disruptive conduct described in the disruptive conduct report. A copy
of the disruptive conduct report shall be given or mailed to the occupant and mailed to the owner
and, if applicable, the manager, within 10 working days of the occurrence of the alleged disruptive
conduct.
The occupant or the owner and, if applicable, the manager shall have 10 working days from the
date of a disruptive conduct report to appeal the disruptive conduct report. The appeal shall be
made in writing and submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer.
After three documented disruptive conduct incidents by an occupant in any twelve-month period,
the property owner's rental license shall be revoked unless proof is provided that the eviction
process is started and being diligently pursued by the owner or manager.
The disruptive conduct report shall count against all occupants of the residential rental unit. More
than one disruptive conduct report filed against the occupants of a residential rental unit in a
twenty-four-hour period shall count as a single disruptive conduct report for the purpose of § 94-6.
§ 94-7. Licensing.
Within three months of adoption of this article, the owner and, if applicable, the manager of each
residential rental unit shall apply for a residential rental license with the Code Enforcement Officer,
which shall be valid for one year. Within three months of receiving a rental license, the first
inspection shall be scheduled. The property owner/manager shall apply yearly for a rental license.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue residential rental license if the owner provides the
name, address and phone number of a manager (if applicable), pays the registration fee, submits
a complete and accurate occupant listing for the residential rental unit by the registration deadline
of each year and is current on real estate taxes and sewer/water/trash fees for the residential
rental unit.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall deny and may revoke a residential rental license if the owner
does not provide the name, address and phone number of a manager (if applicable), does not pay
the annual registration fee, is not current on real estate taxes, sewer and water rates or trash
collection fees for the residential rental unit, does not submit a complete and accurate occupant
listing for the residential rental unit upon the renewal date or within one month after a change in
the identity of the occupants of the residential rental unit, does not correct a code violation within
the time frame cited by the Code Enforcement Officer, and/or has not complied with the disruptive
conduct provisions of this article.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall deny and may revoke a residential rental license if the
following occur within the licensed residential rental unit or on the premises:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 150/233
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
F.
A.
B.
(a)
(1)
C.
Failure to abate any violation of this article or any code violation noted in the rental housing
inspection form within the time specified in the notice of violation, unless an appeal is
pending.
Occurrence of three violations of this article and/or of any other Borough codes or ordinances
that apply to the residential rental unit or premises during the term of the license. Before an
occurrence may be considered a violation, there must be either:
A summary conviction; or
The Code Enforcement Officer must send the owner a written notice of the violation
within 30 days of the incident and the period for the owner to file an appeal from the
determination of the Code Enforcement Officer must have expired.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall forward written notice to the owner if the Code Enforcement
Officer will deny, refuse to renew or revoke a residential rental license. The notification shall:
Identify the residential rental unit;
Include the grounds for the denial, nonrenewal or revocation, including the factual
circumstances and the section of this article supporting such determination; and
Inform the owner of the right to appeal the denial, nonrenewal or revocation of the residential
rental license to the Borough Council under this article.
The Code Enforcement Officer may reinstate a residential rental license if the owner or manager
corrects the reason for the revocation of the residential rental license and has paid the residential
rental license reinstatement fee.
§ 94-8. Inspections.
Prior to initial occupancy of newly constructed residential rental units, newly created residential rental
units, or substantially rehabilitated residential rental units (as documented by a certificate of
occupancy), the owner or manager shall register with and make written application to the Code
Enforcement Officer for a residential rental license as herein provided.
Initial inspections will occur in accordance with a phased-in, systematic inspection program to be
prepared and made available upon request by the Code Enforcement Officer. A minimum 30 days'
written notice shall be given for all initial inspections. The penalty for not allowing an inspection
shall be revocation of the residential rental license.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect residential rental units after completion of the initial
inspections under this article in accordance with a systematic program. The Code Enforcement
Officer may also inspect residential rental units upon a change in occupancy of the residential
rental unit, upon receipt of complaints, upon the occurrence of disruptive conduct at such
residential rental unit, or for any other reasonable cause.
If the Code Enforcement Officer, upon completion of the inspection, finds that the applicable codes
have not been met, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue notices and, if appropriate,
commence enforcement actions under the procedure set forth in the code which has been
violated. The following notices shall be issued to the owner of the residential rental unit or the
manager. Notice provided to a manager shall be deemed notice provided to the owner.
If the Code Enforcement Officer finds violations warranting condemnation of the residential
rental unit under this article, in addition to the remedies under this article, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall:
Issue a ten-day notice of violation; and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 151/233
(b)
(a)
(b)
(2)
D.
A.
B.
A.
If, after 10 days from the date of the ten-day notice of violation, a reinspection reveals
that the violations are not corrected and arrangements satisfactory to the Code
Enforcement Officer have not been made, the residential rental license for the residential
rental unit shall be revoked until the issue has been satisfactorily resolved; and if the
residential rental unit is vacant, it shall remain vacant.
If the Code Enforcement Officer finds violations not warranting condemnation of the
residential rental unit under this article, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a thirty-day
notice of violation.
If, after 30 days from the date of the thirty-day notice of violation, the first reinspection
reveals that all violations have not been corrected, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a second thirty-day notice of violation.
If, after 30 days from the date of the second thirty-day notice of violation, a second
reinspection reveals that all violations have not been corrected, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall revoke the rental license for the rental unit; and if the residential rental unit is
vacant, it shall remain vacant.
A fee will be charged for the initial inspection and for each reinspection. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall maintain a list of all residential rental units and their ownership that have been the
subject of prosecution during the preceding five years.
§ 94-9. Sale or transfer of units.
A residential rental license shall not be transferred. In the case of licensed residential rental units that
are sold or transferred, the new owner shall secure a residential rental license for each residential
rental unit and have each residential rental unit inspected. Failure to secure a residential rental license
for each residential rental unit within 60 days of the date of sale or transfer of ownership shall result in
the revocation of the residential rental license.
§ 94-10. Appeals.
An appeal from any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be taken to the Borough
Council. Such appeal shall be made in writing within 10 working days after such decision has been
made. The appeal shall be verified by an affidavit, shall state the grounds therefor and shall be
filed with the Borough Secretary. The appeal shall be accompanied by the appeal fee, which shall
be established by ordinance or resolution of the Borough Council. The appellant or his
representative shall have the right to appear and be heard, if such right is requested in the written
appeal. The Borough Council shall make a decision on such appeal within 45 days. The Borough
Council shall render a written decision, copies of which shall be provided to the Code Official and
the appellant.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of a police officer or Code Enforcement Officer in regard to
a police incident report or the revocation of a residential rental license may appeal to the Borough
Council in accordance with the provisions of Subsection A above. Such appeal must be filed, in
writing, within 10 working days from the date of the report or notice of revocation.
§ 94-11. Violations and penalties.
Violations. It shall be a violation of this article to commit or to permit any other person to commit
any of the following acts:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 152/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(a)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
To lease, let, or allow the occupancy of a residential rental unit without obtaining a residential
rental license where required by this article.
To refuse to permit inspections required under this article for a residential rental unit.
To fail to perform the duties established by § 94-3 of this article if such person is an owner or
a manager of a residential rental unit.
To fail to perform the duties if such person is an occupant of a residential rental unit.
To place false information on or to omit relevant information from an application for a
residential rental license.
To fail to comply with any other provision of this article.
Penalties and remedies.
Allowing occupancy of a residential rental unit after the residential rental license has been
revoked: a fine of not less than $500 per residential rental unit for each month the violation
exists. Each month the violation exists constitutes a separate violation.
Failure to secure a residential rental license:
The owner or manager shall be sent a thirty-day notice of violation, warning him/her of
his/her failure to comply with the terms of this article. If he/she does not comply at the
end of 30 days, there shall be a fine of not less than $500 per residential rental unit for
each month the violation exists. Each month the violation exists is considered a separate
violation.
Whoever violates any other provision of this article shall, upon a first offense, be fined not
more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
In addition to prosecution of persons violating this article, the Code Enforcement Officer, or
any duly authorized agent of the Borough, may take such civil or equitable remedies in any
court of record of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, against any person or property, real or
personal, to effect the provisions of this article.
The provisions of this section and the provisions of this article governing revocation,
suspension or nonrenewal of residential rental licenses shall be independent, non-mutuallyexclusive,
separate remedies, all of which shall be available to the Borough as may be
deemed appropriate. The remedies and procedures in this article are not intended to supplant
or replace, to any degree, the remedies provided to the Borough in the Property Maintenance
Code, Zoning Ordinance or any other code.
Where there are three documented disruptive conduct reports within a twelve-month period
and if the eviction process is started and being diligently pursued by an owner or manager, no
further enforcement by the Borough will occur regarding this residential rental unit during the
eviction process.
Chapter 96. Right-Of-Way Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 4-30-2019 by Ord. No. C-574, approved 4-
30-2019. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Definitions
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 153/233
§ 96-1.1. Terms defined.
Terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, whether or not the terms are capitalized.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, terms not defined in this chapter shall be construed consistently
with Title 47 of the United States Code, and, if not defined therein, with their common and ordinary
meaning.
AERIAL FACILITIES
Poles, wires, cables, equipment, and other facilities located above the surface of the ground,
including their underground supports and foundations. Such term does not include private
driveways, newspaper vending machines, street banners, canopies or other minor obstructions
located in the rights-of-way.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH CODE
The Code of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH PROPERTY
All real property now or hereafter owned by the Borough whether in fee ownership or other
interest.
BOROUGH WORK
All construction work performed by the Borough or any of its departments, either with its own
personnel or under contract, including repair, alteration, replacement, or maintenance of facilities
owned, operated, maintained, or controlled by the Borough or for which the Borough is
responsible.
CABLE ACT
The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as hereafter
amended (47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as hereafter amended).
CABLE FRANCHISE FEE
A fee paid by a cable operator for the cable operator's use of the Borough's rights-of-way. The fee
is calculated as a percentage of the cable operator's gross revenues from the operation of the
cable system to provide cable services in the Borough.
CABLE FRANCHISE or FRANCHISE
Right-of-way use authorization pursuant to this chapter authorizing a cable operator to own,
construct, operate and maintain a cable system to provide cable service within the Borough.
CABLE OPERATOR
An entity providing or offering to provide cable service over a cable system, as that term is defined
in the Cable Act, within the Borough.
CABLE SERVICE
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service and
subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming
or other programming service.
CABLE SYSTEM
Facilities consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation,
reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the Borough; but such term
does not include (i) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 154/233
television broadcast stations; (ii) a facility that serves subscribers without using any right-of-way;
(iii) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of
the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a
cable system [other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 541(c)] to the extent such facility is used in
the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is
solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (iv) an open video system that complies with 47
U.S.C. § 573; or (v) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility.
This definition of "cable system" shall in no way be deemed to circumscribe or limit the valid
authority of the Borough to regulate or authorize the facilities and/or services of any
telecommunications provider that owns, constructs, operates, or maintains facilities in the right-ofway.
CERTIFICATE
A certificate of public convenience issued by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT
The Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 151 et seq., as amended and as hereafter
amended.
DEPARTMENT
The Public Works Department of the Borough of Lititz.
DIRECTOR
The Director of the Public Works Department of the Borough of Lititz. Except for the preparation
and promulgation of policies and procedures, which is solely the function of Borough Council, such
term shall include the employees, agents and assignees of the Director.
EMERGENCY
A condition that (1) constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or safety of
the public, or (2) has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be unusable and
result in loss of the services provided.
FACILITY(IES)
Conduit, cables, wires, lines, towers, optic fiber, antennae, poles, associated equipment and
appurtenances, and any other facilities located in the right-of-way and designed, constructed,
and/or used, by telecommunications providers for transmitting telecommunications services.
FRANCHISE
A right-of-way use authorization pursuant to this chapter that authorizes a cable operator to own,
construct, operate and maintain a cable system to provide cable service within the Borough.
FRANCHISEE
A cable operator that is issued a franchise by the Borough.
INFORMATION SERVICE
The offering of a capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing, retrieving,
utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications (whether over a cable system,
telecommunications system, or any other type of facilities), and includes electronic publishing, but
does not include any use of any such capability for the management, control, or operation of a
telecommunications system or the management of a telecommunications service.
NON-PUC REGULATED ENTITY OR ENTITIES
Any corporation, company, association, joint stock company, firm, partnership, limited liability
company, or other entity; municipal, industrial development, housing, redevelopment, and other
authority or corporation established pursuant to statutes of the State of Pennsylvania not regulated
as a telecommunications provider by the Public Utility Commission.
PERMITEE
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 155/233
The recipient of a right-of-way use permit or cable franchise that is issued by the Borough
pursuant to this chapter, and entities holding existing franchises, special ordinances, or other
authorizations, including the Borough, its departments, agencies, and authorities.
PERSON
Corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies, firms, partnerships, limited liability
companies, and other entities; municipal, industrial development, housing, redevelopment, and
other authorities and corporations established pursuant to statutes of the State of Pennsylvania;
and individuals.
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
The written regulations, standards, operations and/or courses of action established by the
Borough to implement the provisions of this chapter. The preparation and promulgation of policies
and procedures are solely the function of the Borough and not the employees, agents or
assignees of the Borough.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMMISSION or PUC
The state administrative agency, or lawful successor thereto, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications services in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to the extent provided by
law.
PUBLIC UTILITY or UTILITY
Shall be defined as that term is defined in the Pennsylvania Public Utility Code as of the effective
date of this chapter, and as hereafter amended.
PUC REGULATED UTILITY
Any entity which is operating as a telecommunications provider as defined under the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Code, and is subject to regulation by the PUC, regardless of whether or not the entity
has been issued a certificate of public convenience by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission.
RIGHT-OF-WAY USE AUTHORIZATION or ROW USE AUTHORIZATION
A license, right-of-way use permit or cable franchise issued pursuant to this chapter.
RIGHT-OF-WAY USE PERMIT or ROW USE PERMIT
A right-of-way use permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, RIGHTS-OF-WAY OR ROW
The surface of and space above and below any real property in the Borough in which the Borough
has a regulatory interest, or interest as a trustee for the public, as such interests now or hereafter
exist, including, but not limited to, all streets, highways, avenues, roads, alleys, sidewalks, tunnels,
viaducts, bridges, skyways, or any other public place, area or property under the control of the
Borough, and any unrestricted public or utility easements established, dedicated, platted,
improved or devoted for utility purposes but excluding lands other than streets that are owned by
the Borough. The phrase "in the Right(s)-of-Way" means "in, on, over, along, above and/or under
the Right(s)-of-Way."
STREET
A strip of land or part thereof within the right-of-way, whether dedicated or not, that is intended or
used for vehicular and pedestrian traffic. The phrase "in the (a) street(s)" means "in, on, over,
along, above and/or under the (a) street(s)."
STREET OPENING PERMIT
A permit for excavation of a street for the construction or installation of facilities in any right-of-way
in the Borough.
SYSTEM
Any cable system, telecommunications system, or integral part thereof.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 156/233
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's
choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
The plant, equipment and property within the Borough used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide
or offer telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER
A person who provides telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE
The offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to
be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
A system that offers telecommunications service.
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES
Telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground
foundations or supports for aerial facilities.
Article II. PUC-Regulated Utilities
All telecommunications providers regulated by the Public Utility Commission owning or operating
facilities in the Borough’s rights-of-way shall comply with the following requirements.
§ 96-2.1. License.
All telecommunications providers shall be deemed to have a license from the Borough under this
chapter to occupy the rights-of-way.
§ 96-2.2. As-built maps.
On or before December 1, 2019, each telecommunications provider shall submit to the Borough two
paper copies and one electronic copy of as-built map or maps and engineering specifications as set
forth in the policies and procedures depicting and certifying the location of all its existing facilities within
the right-of-way. Such electronic and paper maps and engineering specifications shall be submitted in
a format and include the information required by the Borough in the policies and procedures. If the
maps are not provided electronically in the required format, then the telecommunications provider shall
reimburse the Borough for the cost of converting paper maps into electronic form or the cost of
converting electronic maps in another format into the required format. Such maps are, and shall
remain, confidential documents and are exempt from public disclosure under Pennsylvania's Right to
Know Law, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 708; the telecommunications provider confidential Security Information
Disclosure Protection Act, 35 P.S. §§ 2141.1 through 2141.3; and the Public Utility Commission
Regulations relating to Confidential Security Information, 52 Pa. Code § 102.1. After submission of the
as-built maps required under this section, each telecommunications provider having facilities in the
Borough rights-of-way shall update such maps as required under this chapter.
§ 96-2.3. Right to inspect.
The Borough may conduct inspections of the Borough rights-of-way in order to ensure that
Telecommunications facilities located within such rights-of-way do not constitute a public safety hazard,
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 157/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
and remain in compliance with the standards set forth by the Public Utility Commission. Such
inspections shall be limited to establishing whether such facilities meet relevant PUC standards, and
comply with such Borough construction standards as relate to the opening and closing of Borough
streets, curbs, and sidewalks, as provided under 15 Pa.C.S.A. § 1511(e) and Chapter 105 of the
Borough Code. In the event that the Borough determines that any facilities of a telecommunications
provider are not in compliance with such standards, then the Borough may bring a complaint against
such telecommunications provider before the Public Utility Commission, in accordance with
established PUC procedures. The Borough may also elect, in its discretion, to notify the
telecommunications provider of the existence of any noncompliant facilities, in order to abate such
violations without the need for the filing of a formal PUC complaint.
§ 96-2.4. Construction in rights-of-way.
Street opening permits. Except in the case of an emergency, no telecommunications provider shall
perform any street excavation in the rights-of-way without first obtaining a street opening permit
and paying a permit fee pursuant to Chapter 105, Article I, of the Borough Code. No
telecommunications provider shall perform curb and sidewalk construction replacement or repair
without first obtaining a curb and sidewalk permit and paying a permit fee pursuant to Chapter
105, Article I, of the Borough Code. The procurement of a street opening permit shall only be
necessary when the proposed street excavation and/or construction impacts Borough streets; it
shall not apply to any construction or excavation activities on state roads.
Construction standards. Construction standards shall include those determined by the Public
Utility Commission for the installation of facilities in Borough rights-of-way, as well as such
Borough construction standards as relate to the opening and closing of Borough streets, curbs,
and sidewalks, as provided under 15 Pa.C.S.A. § 1511(e). Compliance with construction
requirements pursuant to PUC-related standards shall remain within the sole and exclusive
jurisdiction of the PUC. Compliance with construction requirements pursuant to Borough
standards shall remain within the jurisdiction of the Borough. The Borough shall retain the right to
file formal complaints pursuant to PUC-related construction as set forth under § 96-2.4.
Recently constructed streets. No street opening permit shall be issued to cut any Borough street
that was constructed, reconstructed or resurfaced fewer than five years prior to application for a
street opening permit, unless the applicant agrees in writing to overlay or pave the surface of the
street, from curb to curb and intersection to intersection, in accordance with applicable Borough
standards. The Borough may grant an exception to this section in the case of an emergency. The
applicant shall pay all street degradation fees and comply with all related requirements as
prescribed in Chapter 105, Article I, of the Borough Code.
Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written notice from the Borough, or
such longer period as the Borough determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in
the case of an emergency, a telecommunications provider shall temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any facilities within the right-of-way, excluding
those underground, whenever the Borough, consistent with applicable PUC regulations, shall have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the
following circumstances: the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Borough or
other public improvement in the right-of-way; the operations of the Borough or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way; vacation of a street or the release of a utility easement; or an emergency
as determined by the Borough. Utilities must relocate and remove facilities consistent with the
regulations and standards of the PUC.
Coordination of construction activities. By March 1 of each year, or at such other time as the
Borough and utilities may agree, each telecommunications provider shall provide the Borough with
a schedule (including plans and projected start and finish dates for each project) of its planned
construction activities for the following year which may affect the rights-of-way. The schedule shall
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 158/233
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
depict all planned construction activities the telecommunications provider is planning to perform
within the current year.
Damage to facilities or property. A telecommunications provider, including any contractor working
for a telecommunications provider, shall avoid damage to any facilities and/or public or private
property. If any facilities and/or public or private property are damaged by the telecommunications
provider, including any contractor working for the telecommunications provider, the
telecommunications provider shall promptly repair and restore such property within 10 business
days. The telecommunications provider shall utilize the Pennsylvania One Call System prior to any
disturbance of the rights-of-way and shall adhere to all other requirements of the Pennsylvania
Underground Utility Line Protection Act.
Facilities maps. Each telecommunications provider issued a street opening permit shall submit to
the Borough, not later than 30 days after completion of the permitted construction (or any part
thereof, if required by the Borough), two paper copies and one electronic copy of updated as-built
map or maps and engineering specifications as set forth in the policies and procedures depicting
and certifying the location of the new facilities constructed or updated. Such documents shall be
submitted in a format and include the information required by the Borough in the policies and
procedures. If the maps are not provided electronically in the required format, then the
telecommunications provider shall reimburse the Borough for the cost of converting paper maps
into electronic form or the cost of converting electronic maps in another format into the required
format. Such maps are exempt from public disclosure under Pennsylvania's Right to Know Law,
65 Pa.C.S.A. § 708; the Telecommunications Provider Confidential Security Information Disclosure
Protection Act, 35 P.S. §§ 2141.1 - 2141.3; and the Public Utility Commission Regulations relating
to Confidential Security Information, 52 Pa. Code § 102.1.
Field marking. Each telecommunications provider shall field mark the locations of its underground
facilities upon request by other utilities or the Borough, consistent with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Underground Utility Line Protection Act and at no cost to the Borough.
§ 96-2.5. Right-of-way fee.
Compensation for right-of-way use. Occupancy of Borough rights-of-way by any telecommunications
provider is subject to the Borough's right to fix a fair and reasonable compensation for such occupancy,
which shall be directly related to the Borough's actual right-of-way costs pertaining to the
telecommunications provider.
Article III. Non-Puc Regulated Entities
§ 96-3.1. Right-of-way use authorization required.
Right-of-way use authorization. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no non-PUC
regulated entity shall own, construct, operate and/or maintain facilities in any right-of-way of the
Borough to provide or to enable others to provide services to telecommunications providers or
areas in the Borough or outside the Borough without a right-of-way use authorization. The types of
right-of-way use authorization are a right-of-way use permit and a cable franchise.
Telecommunications providers regulated by the PUC shall not be subject to this section, and shall
comply with Article II above.
Permit required. Pursuant to this chapter, all non-PUC regulated entities that own, construct and/or
maintain facilities in any public right-of-way shall obtain a right-of-way use permit. If any such
entity is subject to a cable franchise agreement, the Permitee shall not be required to remit both a
cable franchise fee and an annual right-of-way maintenance fee to the Borough. Such permitee
shall pay the higher amount of the two fees to the Borough.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 159/233
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 96-3.2. Right-of-way use permit.
Permit required; term and scope of permit. No non-PUC regulated entity, other than a franchisee,
may own, construct, operate and/or maintain facilities that occupy the right-of-way without first
obtaining a ROW use permit. Any ROW use permit shall be subject to such conditions as the
Borough may from time to time establish and shall otherwise conform to the requirements of this
chapter and applicable law. A ROW use permit shall be for a term of five years. A ROW use permit
and the rights, benefits and permissions conferred thereby shall apply to the entire geographic
area of the Borough.
Approval by Borough. A ROW use permit shall be authorized only by the Borough and shall not
become effective unless or until so authorized. In addition to the other requirements contained
herein, the applicant shall demonstrate:
That it has a history of compliance with applicable laws and regulations relating to the
management, construction and maintenance of facilities in streets and rights-of-way,
wherever located; and
That it possesses all licenses, permits, authorizations, and other permissions required by the
Federal Communications Commission, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the Borough
as a condition of its using the right-of-way and furnishing the services and operating the
facilities proposed by the applicant;
Indemnification. Each permitee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Borough, its elected and appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times
against any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and property damage arising in
whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or omission of the permitee, its officers,
agents, employees or contractors arising out of but not limited to, the construction, installation,
operation, maintenance or removal of permitee's system or facilities in the rights-of-way. Each
permitee shall defend any actions or proceedings against the Borough in which it is claimed that
personal injury, including death, or property damage was caused by the permit holder's
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of permitee's system or facilities in
the rights-of-way. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys'
fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
Application for right-of-way use permit. Application for a ROW use permit shall be in such form
and shall include such information as the Borough determines by regulation. Within a reasonable
period not to exceed 60 days after receiving a complete application hereunder, the Borough shall
approve or deny the application. Determinations to grant or deny an application shall be made on
a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral basis. If the application is denied, the determination
shall include the reasons for denial. The application fee, which shall be paid at the time of the filing
of the application, shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of Borough Council. The
application fee shall be sufficient to reimburse the Borough for the actual costs of Borough staff
time and other resources that are required and may be adjusted by resolution of Borough Council.
Renewal of right-of-way use permit. A telecommunications provider desiring to renew a ROW use
permit prior to the expiration of the permit shall file an application with the Borough at least 60
days prior to expiration for renewal of its authorization, which shall include the information and
documents required for an initial application and other material information required by the
Borough by regulation. The Borough shall make a determination accepting or denying the renewal
application. If the renewal application is denied, the determination shall include the reasons for
nonrenewal. Determinations to grant or deny a renewal application shall be made on a
nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral basis. The Borough shall not unreasonably delay or
deny the issuance of a renewal permit.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 160/233
F.
G.
H.
I.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
B.
As-built maps. Each telecommunications provider applying for a ROW use permit shall submit to
the Borough two paper copies and one electronic copy of as-built map or maps and engineering
specifications as set forth in the policies and procedures depicting and certifying the location of all
its existing facilities within the right-of-way. Such electronic and paper maps and engineering
specifications shall be submitted in a format and include the information required by the Borough
in the policies and procedures, and shall be submitted with the application. If the maps are not
provided electronically in the required format, then the telecommunications provider shall
reimburse the Borough for the cost of converting paper maps into electronic form or the cost of
converting electronic maps in another format into the required format. Such maps are, and shall
remain, confidential documents and are exempt from public disclosure under Pennsylvania's Right
to Know Law, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 708. After submission of the as-built maps required under this
section, each permitee having facilities in the Borough rights-of-way shall update such maps as
required under this chapter.
Right to inspect. The Borough shall have the right to inspect all of the facilities of the Permitee,
including aerial facilities and underground facilities, to ensure health and safety with respect to
such facilities, other facilities, the rights-of-way and any other public or private property, and to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations.
Permitees are required to cooperate with all such inspections and to provide information
requested by the Borough as part of the inspection.
Use authorized. No ROW use permit shall confer any exclusive right or privilege to occupy or use
the right-of-way for any purpose; or explicitly or impliedly preclude or affect the Borough's right to
authorize use of the right-of-way by other telecommunications providers to own, construct,
operate, maintain, and/or provide the same or different facilities or services, or for any other
purposes as the Borough determines appropriate; or affect the Borough's right to construct,
operate or maintain any type of facilities itself or offer any type of services in the right-of-way; or
authorize, or excuse any telecommunications provider from securing such further easements,
leases, permits or other approvals as may be required by applicable law or regulation to occupy
and use the right-of-way; or convey any right, title or interest in any right-of-way greater or other
than an agreement only to use and occupy the right-of-way for the limited purposes and terms
provided in the ROW use permit; or be construed as any warranty of title.
Owner's consent. No ROW use permit expressly or impliedly authorizes a Permitee to provide any
services to, or install any facilities on, any private property without the owner's consent, or to use
publicly or privately owned poles, ducts or conduits without a separate agreement with the owners
thereof for such use.
§ 96-3.3. Cable franchise.
Franchise required.
No entity may own, construct, operate or maintain a cable system within the Borough, provide
cable service over a cable system without a cable franchise issued by the Borough.
To the extent permitted by law, facilities used to provide telecommunications service,
information service or any form of services similar to cable service, that are also used to
provide cable service, shall be subject to this chapter and shall also require a right-of-way use
permit pursuant to this chapter.
Effect of authorization.
A cable franchise shall not confer any authority to provide any form or type of
telecommunications service or information service in addition to the cable service authorized
by the franchise. To the extent permitted by law, a separate right-of-way use permit pursuant
to this chapter, in addition to the cable franchise, shall be required before any franchisee is
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 161/233
(2)
A.
B.
A.
(1)
B.
C.
D.
E.
permitted to use facilities in the right-of-way to furnish any form or type of telecommunications
service or information service.
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and a cable franchise
agreement in effect on the effective date of this chapter, the provisions of the cable franchise
agreement shall govern.
§ 96-3.4. Alteration or modification of existing facilities.
Alteration or modification of existing facilities. The Permitee must notify the Borough upon
alteration or modification of existing facilities within the rights-of-way. The Permitee must
additionally provide an updated facilities map if facilities have been removed from, or added to, the
rights-of-way.
Change in information. If there are any changes in the information provided in the original permit
application, the permit holder has an obligation to notify the Borough within 60 days of such
changes.
§ 96-3.5. Construction in rights-of-way.
Street opening permits. Except in the case of an emergency, no non-PUC regulated entity shall
perform any street excavation in the rights-of-way without first obtaining a street opening permit
and paying a permit fee pursuant to Chapter 105, Article I, of the Borough Code. No
telecommunications provider shall perform curb and sidewalk construction replacement or repair
without first obtaining a curb and sidewalk permit and paying a permit fee pursuant to Chapter
105, Article I, of the Borough Code. The procurement of a street opening permit shall only be
necessary when the proposed street excavation and/or construction affects Borough streets; it
shall not apply to any construction or excavation activities on state roads.
Construction standards.
All construction, installation, maintenance, and operation of facilities in the ROW by non-PUC
regulated entities shall conform to the requirements of the following publications, as from time
to time amended: the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication Form 408, the
Borough of Lititz Curb and Sidewalk Regulations, National Electrical Code, and the National
Electrical Safety Code (collectively, the "Borough of Lititz ROW Construction Standards"). In
the event of conflict between the ROW Construction Standards and this section, this section
shall govern as of the effective date of this chapter.
Security. Each non-PUC regulated entity performing construction in the ROW shall furnish to the
Borough, at the telecommunications provider's expense, a letter of credit or other form of financial
security, in such form and in the amount as required by the Borough consistent with the policies
and procedures and regulations of the Borough. The security shall be a continuing obligation until
the completion of the construction as confirmed in writing by the Borough.
Right to inspect facilities. The Borough may inspect the construction or installation of the facilities
of any non-PUC regulated entity, including both aerial and underground facilities, and any
construction or repair activity to ensure health and safety with respect to such facilities, other
facilities, the rights-of-way and any other public or private property, and determine compliance with
the terms of this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations. Entities are required to
cooperate with all such inspections and to provide information requested by the Borough as part of
the inspection.
Recently constructed streets. No street opening permit shall be issued to cut any Borough street
that was constructed, reconstructed or resurfaced fewer than five years prior to application for a
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 162/233
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
street opening permit, unless the applicant agrees in writing to overlay or pave the surface of the
street, from curb to curb and intersection to intersection, to the satisfaction of the Department. The
Borough may grant an exception to this section in the case of an emergency. The applicant shall
pay all street degradation fees and comply with all related requirements as prescribed in Chapter
105, Article I, of the Borough Code.
Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written notice from the Borough, or
such longer period as the Borough determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in
the case of an emergency, a Permitee shall temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change
or alter the position of any facilities within the right-of-way, excluding those underground,
whenever the Borough, consistent with applicable PUC regulations, shall have determined that
such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances: the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Borough or other public
improvement in the right-of-way; the operations of the Borough or other governmental entity in the
right-of-way; vacation of a street or the release of a utility easement; or an emergency as
determined by the Borough.
Coordination of construction activities. By March 1 of each year, or at such other time as the
Borough and Permitees may agree, each right-of-way use permitee shall provide the Borough with
a schedule (including plans and projected start and finish dates for each project) of its planned
construction activities for the following year which may affect the rights-of-way. The schedule shall
depict all planned construction activities the Permitee is committed to perform within the current
year.
Damage to facilities or property. A Permitee, including any contractor working for Permitee, shall
avoid damage to any facilities and/or public or private property. If any facilities and/or public or
private property are damaged by Permitec, including any contractor working for Permitee,
Permitee shall promptly repair and restore such property within 10 business days. Permittee shall
utilize the Pennsylvania One Call System prior to any disturbance of the rights-of-way and shall
adhere to all other requirements of the Pennsylvania Underground Utility Line Protection Act.
Facilities maps. Each non-PUC regulated entity issued a street opening permit shall submit to the
Borough, not later than 30 days after completion of the permitted construction (or any part thereof,
if required by the Borough) two paper copies and one electronic copy of as-built map or maps and
engineering specifications as set forth in the policies and procedures depicting and certifying the
location of the facilities constructed. Such engineering specifications and electronic and paper
maps shall be submitted in a format and include the information required by the Borough in the
policies and procedures. If the maps are not provided electronically in the required format, then
the telecommunications provider shall reimburse the Borough for the cost of converting paper
maps into electronic form or the cost of converting electronic maps in another format into the
required format. Such maps are exempt from public disclosure under Pennsylvania's Right to
Know Law, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 708.
Field marking. Each Permitee shall field mark the locations of its underground facilities upon
request by other Permitees, telecommunications providers or the Borough, consistent with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Underground Utility Line Protection Act and at no cost to the
Borough.
§ 96-3.6. Right-of-way maintenance fee.
Compensation for right-of-way use. Every ROW use permit is subject to the Borough's right to fix
fair and reasonable compensation, which compensation shall be directly related to the Borough's
actual right-of-way costs including, but not limited to, the cost to the Borough of administration and
performance of all inspection, permitting, enforcement, and other ROW management activities.
Article IV. Remedies
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 163/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 96-4.1. Violations and penalties.
PUC regulated utilities. In the event a telecommunications provider is found by the Borough to
have violated a PUC regulation, standard, or order, then the Borough may bring a complaint
against such telecommunications provider before the Public Utility Commission for violation of
such regulation, standard, or order. The Borough may also notify the telecommunications provider
of the existence of any suspected violation of PUC standards, regulations or order in order to
obtain compliance by the telecommunications provider.
In the event a telecommunications provider is found to have violated any other provision of this
chapter that is not within the exclusive jurisdiction of the PUC, then such telecommunications
provider shall be subject, upon conviction thereof, to a fine not exceeding $300, for each and
every offense, together with attorneys' fees and costs, and in default of the payment thereof,
imprisonment for not more than 90 days. A separate and distinct violation shall be deemed to be
committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues to occur. In addition to an action to
enforce any penalty imposed by this chapter and any other remedy at law or in equity under this
chapter, the Borough may apply to a Court of Common Pleas for an injunction or other appropriate
relief at law or in equity to enforce compliance with or restrain violation of any provision of this
chapter which is not subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the PUC.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the Borough to commence or attempt to
commence prosecution of any PUC regulated telecommunications provider for a violation of any
regulation, standard or order of the PUC.
Non-PUC regulated entities. Any entity not regulated by the PUC that is found by the Borough to
have violated any provision of this chapter shall be subject, upon conviction thereof, to a fine not
exceeding $300, for each and every offense, together with attorneys' fees and costs, and in
default of the payment thereof, imprisonment for not more than 90 days. A separate and distinct
violation shall be deemed to be committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues to
occur. In addition to an action to enforce any penalty imposed by this chapter and any other
remedy at law or in equity under this chapter, the Borough may apply to a Court of Common Pleas
for an injunction or other appropriate relief at law or in equity to enforce compliance with or restrain
violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 96-4.2. Determination of violation.
In the event a determination is made that a telecommunications provider has violated any provision of
this chapter or right-of-way use permit, such telecommunications provider shall be provided written
notice of the determination and the reasons therefor. Except in the case of an emergency, the
telecommunications provider shall have 30 days to cure the violation. If the nature of the violation is
such that it cannot be fully cured within such time period, the Borough may, in its reasonable judgment,
extend the time period to cure provided the telecommunications provider has commenced to cure and
is diligently pursuing its efforts to cure. If the violation has not been cured within the time allowed, the
Borough may take any and all actions authorized by this chapter and/or Pennsylvania law and
regulations.
Article V. Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 96-5.1. Proprietary information.
If a telecommunications provider considers information it is obligated to provide to the Borough under
this chapter to be a business or trade secret or otherwise proprietary or confidential in nature, and
desires to protect the information from disclosure, then the telecommunications provider shall mark
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 164/233
A.
B.
such information as proprietary and confidential. Subject to the requirements of the Right to Know Act
of 2009, 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq., as amended, and other applicable law, the Borough shall exercise
reasonable good faith efforts to protect such proprietary and confidential information that is so marked
from disclosure. The Borough shall provide notice to the telecommunications provider in the following
circumstances: (i) if the Borough receives a request for disclosure of such proprietary and confidential
information and the Borough Solicitor determines that the information is or may be subject to
disclosure under applicable law; or (ii) if the Borough Solicitor determines that the information should
be disclosed in relation to its enforcement of this chapter or the exercise of its police or regulatory
powers. In the event the telecommunications provider does not obtain a protective order barring
disclosure of the information from a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days following receipt of
the Borough's notice, then the Borough may disclose the information without further notice to the
telecommunications provider.
§ 96-5.2. Leased facilities.
Subject to the provisions of this chapter and with prior written approval of the Borough, a non-PUC
regulated entity shall have the right to furnish any facilities for which it has the applicable authorization
to own, construct, operate and/or maintain in the right-of-way to another telecommunications provider
for the latter's use in constructing or operating its own facilities in the right-of-way, provided that:
The entity furnishing its facilities to another shall first deliver to the Borough notice that there is a
fully signed and executed lease, rental agreement, or other agreement with such other
telecommunications provider pursuant to which the facilities are to be furnished; and
The telecommunications provider to which the facilities are furnished shall comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable policies and procedures.
§ 96-5.3. Duty to provide information.
Within 10 days of a written request from the Borough, each Permitee shall furnish the Borough with
information sufficient to demonstrate the following: that the Permitee has complied with all
requirements of this chapter; that all fees and taxes due the Borough in connection with the services
and facilities provided by the Permitee have been properly paid by the Permitee; and any other
information reasonably related to the Permitee's obligations pursuant to this chapter.
§ 96-5.4. Right to inspect records.
The Borough shall have the right, upon 30 days' written notice and during normal business hours, to
inspect all documents, records, maps and other pertinent information maintained by the Permitee that
relate directly to the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 96-5.5. No substitute for other required permissions.
No ROW use authorization or ROW use permit includes, means, or is in whole or part a substitute for
any other permit or authorization required by the laws and regulations of the Borough for the privilege
of transacting and carrying on a business within the Borough; or any permit or agreement for
occupying any other property of the Borough.
§ 96-5.6. No waiver.
The failure of the Borough to insist on timely performance or compliance by any Permitee holding a
right-of-way use authorization shall not constitute a waiver of the Borough's right to later insist on
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 165/233
[1]
timely performance or compliance by that Permitee or any other Permitee holding such a right-of-way
use authorization. The failure of the Borough to enforce any provision of this chapter on any occasion
shall not operate as a waiver or estoppel of its right to enforce any provision of this chapter on any
other occasion, nor shall the failure to enforce any prior ordinance or Borough Charter provision
affecting the right-of-way, any facilities, or any user or occupant of the right-of-way act as a waiver or
estoppel against enforcement of this chapter or any other provision of applicable law.
§ 96-5.7. Policies and procedures.
The Borough is authorized to establish such written policies and procedures consistent with this
chapter as the Borough deems necessary for the implementation of this chapter.
§ 96-5.8. Police powers.
The Borough, by granting any permit or taking any other action pursuant to this chapter, does not
waive, reduce, lessen or impair the lawful police powers vested in the Borough under applicable
federal, state and local laws and regulations.
§ 96-5.9. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter is for any reason held
illegal or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such provision shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not render the remainder of this chapter
invalid.
§ 96-5.10. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective as provided by law.
Chapter 100. Sewers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961.[1]
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Authority — See Ch. 27.
Construction codes — See Ch. 36.
Fees — See Ch. 55.
Holding tanks — See Ch. 68.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 103.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 108.
Utilities — See Ch. 113.
Water — See Ch. 118.
Editor's Note: This chapter was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
Article I. Sewer Connections
§ 100-1. Definitions.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 166/233
The following words and terms as used in this chapter shall be construed or defined as follows, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ACT or THE ACT
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
ALLOWABLE INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance, waterborne waste or form of energy ejected or escaping
from any industrial, manufacturing, trade, or business process or from the development, recovery,
or processing of natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage, which complies with all
provisions of these regulations and which is allowed to be discharged into the sewer system by
the rules and regulations of the Borough.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
AUTHORITY
The Lititz Sewer Authority,[1] as presently or hereafter constituted, to which has been referred by
said borough the specific project of sewers.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
CONNECTION
[Repealed 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345, approved 6-25-1991]
CONNECTION FEE
A single charge levied against a property owner for each physical or actual connection of service
line to the municipal sewer system, which fee is related to the actual costs of physically connecting
the service line to the sewer system and the borough's fees and costs incurred in inspection of
such connection.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345, approved 6-25-1991]
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT or EDU
The EDU shall be equal to sewage discharge at a rate of 350 gallons of sewage per day, per unit.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345, approved 6-25-1991]
INDIRECT DISCHARGE
The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under
Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act into the sewage system (including holding tank waste
discharged into the system).
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
INDIVIDUAL DWELLING UNIT
A single-family residence, apartment unit or mobile home occupied by one or more persons.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345, approved 6-25-1991]
INDUSTRIAL USER
A source of indirect discharge.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Solids, liquids or gaseous substances or forms of energy ejected or escaping in the course of any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or in the course of development, recovering
or processing of natural resources.
[Amended 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
LATERAL SEWER OR SERVICE CONNECTION
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 167/233
A.
That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to a curbline or, if there shall be no curbline,
to the edge of the right-of-way of the street abutting property affected, or, if no such lateral shall be
provided, then "lateral sewer or service connection" shall mean that portion of or place in a
sanitary sewer which is provided for the connection of any service line.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345, approved 6-25-1991]
OCCUPIED BUILDING
Any structure erected and intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by
human beings or animals and from which structure sewage is or may be discharged.
PERSON
Natural persons, partnerships, organizations and corporations.
PREMISES ACCESSIBLE TO THE SEWER SYSTEM
[Repealed 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. C-257, approved 11-25-1980]
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in
§ 100-4.1 of these regulations.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
SERVICE LINE
That part of the main building drain or sewer line extending from the exterior wall of a building to
its connection with the lateral or service connection.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345, approved 6-25-1991]
SEWAGE
Household waste, liquids, human or animal excretion and all substances commonly known as
"sewage," but shall not include roof or surface waters, exhaust steam, oils, tar, grease, gasoline,
benzine or other combustible gases and liquids and offal or insoluble solids or substances which
would impair, impede, affect, interfere with or endanger the sewer system or any part thereof in
any manner whatsoever or the functioning of the processes of sewage treatment or industrial
waste.
[Amended 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. C-257, approved 11-25-1980]
SEWAGE SYSTEM or SEWERAGE SYSTEM
All facilities operated by the Borough or the Authority which are used for collecting, plumbing,
transporting, treating or disposing of sewage and allowable industrial waste. For the purposes of
these regulations, "sewage system" and "sewerage system" shall also include any sewers that
convey wastewaters to the sewerage system from persons who are, by contract or agreement with
the Borough, users of the Borough's sewerage system.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
SEWER MANAGER
Any person who may from time to time be placed in general charge of the sewer system by the
Borough of Lititz.
SEWER SYSTEM or SEWER COLLECTION SYSTEM
Sewers which convey sewage or industrial waste to the sewage treatment plant operated by the
Borough.
[Amended 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. C-257, approved 11-25-1980]
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER
Any industrial user that contributes over 25,000 gallons per day and either:
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
Contributes over 5% of the daily load for BOD, total suspended solids, ammonia, or total
phosphorus; or
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 168/233
B.
[1]
[2]
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
Whose discharge composition is such that the Borough determines it poses risk of upset,
bypass, or interference to the sewage system.
SLUG
Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or
noncustomary batch discharge, or which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards of § 100-4.1 of these regulations.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
TAPPING FEE
A charge levied against the property owner of each property connecting to the Borough's sewer
system, computed on an equivalent-dwelling-unit basis as authorized by Act 57 of 2003.[2]
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345, approved 6-25-1991; amended 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527,
approved 8-6-2013]
USER
Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the Borough's
sewerage system.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 27. Sewer Authority.
Editor’s Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5607.
§ 100-2. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 100-2. Time limit for connections, was repealed 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. C-257,
approved 11-25-1980.
§ 100-3. Sewer system must be used.
[Amended 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. C-257, approved 11-25-1980]
All sewage must be discharged to the sewer system.
§ 100-4. (Reserved)
Editor’s Note: Former § 100-4, Prohibited discharges, as amended, was repealed 8-6-2013 by Ord. No.
C-527, approved 8-6-2013.
§ 100-4.1. Use of sanitary sewers and admission of industrial
waste.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
All sewage and allowable industrial wastes may be discharged to the sewerage system except
those which the Borough deems harmful to the system or which are specifically prohibited by this
chapter. The Borough may from time to time amend these rules and regulations to specifically
prohibit certain discharges, and these rules and regulations shall not be deemed to create any
vested rights to any particular discharge.
The discharge of stormwater runoff to the sewerage system is prohibited. No user shall discharge
or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, cooling water, drainage from tile fields or unpolluted process waters to any sanitary
sewer.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 169/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
D.
All persons connecting occupied buildings to the sewage system shall provide adequate
means for excluding stormwater runoff to any sanitary sewer.
No person who connects an occupied building to the sewage system shall connect any roof
drain or foundation drain thereto or permit any such drains to remain connected to the
sewage system, nor shall he permit, allow or cause to enter into any sanitary sewer any
springwater, or surface water from any other source.
The provisions of this chapter do not prohibit the present or future discharge of stormwater
runoff to storm sewers or to natural watercourses within the Borough.
No sump pumps or roof drains shall be connected to the sewage system without authorization
by the Borough.
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater which causes interference or pass-through. These general prohibitions apply to all
such users of the sewerage system, whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or
pretreatment requirements.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no user shall discharge or cause to be discharged to
the sewerage system any sewage, industrial waste, pollutant or other matter or substance:
Having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the sewage treatment plant
resulting in interference and/or cause the temperature at the treatment plant to exceed 40° C.
Additionally, no discharge shall exceed 60° C. at the point of public connection.
Containing any liquids, solids, or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity, are, or
may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or
explosion or be injurious in any other way to the sewerage system or to the operation of the
sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flash
point of less than 140° F. or 60° C. using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. At no
time shall two successive readings on any explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge
into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than 5% nor any single reading over
10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
Containing unground garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
Containing solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or
other interference with the operation of the sewage treatment plant, such as, but not limited
to, ashes, cinders, spent lime, stone dust, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metals, glass, rags,
grass clippings, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, bentonite, lye,
building materials, rubber, asphalt residues, hair, bones, leather, porcelain, china, ceramic
wastes, polishing wastes, glass grinding or other solid or viscous substances capable of
causing obstruction or other interference with the operation of the sewerage system.
Having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 10.5 standard units or having any corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, bacterial action or personnel
of the sewerage system.
Containing toxic or poisonous pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A
toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to Section
307(a) of the Act.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 170/233
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
Containing a BOD or total suspended solids concentration of such character and quantity that
unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials in the sewage treatment
plant.
Containing any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
Containing dye from any source that will not have an effluent the equivalent of that produced
by alum coagulation and chlorination to remove suspended or colloidal matter and bleach the
dissolved dyes.
Containing radioactive substances and/or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may
exceed limits in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
Having a chlorine demand of such quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
Prohibited by any permit issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
Containing any substance which will cause the sewage treatment plant to violate its NPDES
permit and/or state permit or the receiving water quality standards.
Containing any substance which may cause the sewage treatment plant's effluent or any
other product of the sewage treatment plant, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case
shall a substance discharged to the sewerage system cause the sewage treatment plant to be
in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed
under Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or
disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act; or state criteria applicable to
the sludge management method being used.
Containing wastes which are not amenable to biological treatment or reduction in existing
treatment facilities, specifically nonbiogradeable complex carbon compounds.
Causing a hazard to human life or public nuisance.
Containing total solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is
required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
Containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow
rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference to the sewage treatment
plant.
Containing fats, tars, greases, vegetable oil, petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
Containing pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the
sewerage system in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
Containing any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the
Borough.
Containing detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause
excessive foaming in the sewerage system or may cause interference or pass through the
sewage treatment plant.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 171/233
(23)
[1]
(24)
(25)
Waste prohibited by federal or Pennsylvania law or regulations, including the general
pretreatment standards (40 CFR, Part 403) and categorical pretreatment standards.
Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which.[1]
Editor's Note: So in original.
Containing concentrations of anions, cations, and other various objectionable substances in
excess of the following local limits, measured in a representative sample collected at the point
of discharge to the sewerage system:
Parameter Sample Type
Daily Maximum Allowable
Concentration (Local Limit)
(mg/L)
Ammonia Composite Monitor
Arsenic Composite 0.030
Biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD-5)
Composite 1,200, monitor
Cadmium Composite 0.020
Chromium, total Composite 1.0
Chromium, hexavalent Composite 0.10
Copper Composite 0.050
Cyanide Grab 0.20
Dissolved solids, total (TDS) Composite 2,000
Flourides Composite 1.50
Iron Composite 5.00
Lead Composite 0.075
Manganese Composite 0.50
Mercury Composite 0.01
Molybdenum Composite 0.11
Nickel Composite 0.25
Nitrogen, total Composite Monitor
Oil and grease (O&G) Grab 100
pH Grab 5.0 to 10.5 s.u.
Phosphorus, total Composite Monitor
Selenium Composite 0.050
Silver Composite 0.50
Suspended solids, total
(TSS)
Composite Monitor
Temperature Grab 40° C. (at headworks)
60° C. (at connection)
Zinc Composite 0.10
NOTES:
Monitor and report. Parameter subject to surcharge fees.
Discharges <6.0 or >9.0 s.u., subject to surcharge fees on a case-by-case basis.
Provided, however, that deviations from the above schedule may be authorized by the
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 172/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
Borough at its sole discretion, upon affirmative showing, by the person requesting the same,
that such deviation will not be harmful to the sewerage system or the sewage treatment
plant or cause the plant effluent to violate its current NPDES discharge limitations. For the
purpose of this chapter, an allowable deviation may be granted by the Borough, provided
that the corresponding total loading allocated for each objectionable substance does not
exceed the maximum allowable industrial loading limit. Deviations granted by the Borough
shall be incorporated in the industrial user's discharge permit. In no event shall a deviation
allow a discharge to occur that is below the federal pH standard of 5.0 s.u.
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or proposed to be discharged, to the sewerage system,
which waters or wastes contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated and
prohibited in this chapter or which, in the judgment of the Borough, may have a deleterious effect
upon the sewerage system or receiving waters, the Borough may, upon giving official notice to the
discharger:
Reject the waste.
Require pretreatment to reduce characteristics to daily maximum allowable concentrations
permitted by this chapter or any other applicable rules or law.
Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
Require immediate discontinuance of the waste discharge until such time as it meets the
requirements of this chapter.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided where, in the opinion of the approving
authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity acceptable to the Borough and shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Users having such devices shall submit annual
reports to the Borough that include receipts, manifests, bills and other proof that these devices are
in place and have been properly maintained.
The use of mechanical garbage grinders producing a finely divided mass, properly flushed with an
ample amount of water, shall be permitted upon the condition that no such mechanical garbage
grinder to serve premises used for commercial purposes shall be installed until permission for
such installation shall have been obtained from the Borough.
Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall
be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner's
expense and shall be accessible to the Borough for inspection and testing.
§ 100-4.2. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
Upon the promulgation of the categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial
subcategory, the general standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter
for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this
chapter. The Borough shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under
40 CFR 403.12. The categorical standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-
471, are incorporated herein by reference.
Modification of Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Where the Borough's sewage
treatment plant achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal categorical standards,
the Borough may apply to the regulatory authority for modification of specific limits in the federal
categorical standards.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 173/233
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
§ 100-4.3. State requirements.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
State requirements and limitations on discharge shall apply in any case where they are more stringent
than federal requirements and limitations or those in this chapter.
§ 100-4.4. Authority's right to revision.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
The Borough reserves the right to establish more-stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to
the sewerage system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in § 100-4.1 of this
chapter. Nothing in these rules and regulations shall be deemed to create any vested right in any user
to a particular level, amount, concentration, characteristic or type of discharge.
§ 100-4.5. Excessive discharge.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a
partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations
contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards or in any other pollutant-specific
limitation developed by the Borough or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 100-4.6. Accidental discharges and slugs.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
substances regulated by this Borough and from slugs. Facilities to prevent slugs or accidental
discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own
cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this
protection shall be submitted to the Borough for review and shall be approved by the Borough
before construction of the facility. No user who commences contribution to the sewerage system
after the effective date of this chapter shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the sewerage
system until slug and accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the Borough.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the
responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. In
the case of an accidental discharge or slug discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to
immediately telephone and notify the Borough of the incident. The notification shall include the
location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions.
Any user required to develop and implement an accidental spill prevention and/or slug control plan
shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following:
Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
Description of stored chemicals;
Procedures for immediately notifying the Borough of any accidental or slug discharges,
including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under § 100-4.1, with procedures for
follow-up written notification within five days;
If required by the Borough, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills,
including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials,
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 174/233
A.
B.
A.
B.
loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic chemicals
(including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
§ 100-4.7. Written notice of accidental discharge.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
Within five days following an accidental or slug discharge, the user shall submit to the Borough a
detailed written report describing the cause of the accidental or slug discharge and the measures to be
taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of
any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
sewerage system, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification
relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or
other applicable law.
§ 100-4.8. Advising employees on emergency notification
procedures.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising
employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous or unauthorized discharge. Employers shall
ensure that all employees who may suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
§ 100-4.9. Drainage of swimming pools.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
Filter backwash lines shall be discharged to the sewerage system as follows:
Sand filter backwash may be discharged to the sewerage system.
Diatomaceous earth filter backwash shall be connected to the sewerage system through settling
tanks with three months' storage capacity of spent diatomaceous earth, which tanks shall be
readily accessible for removing solid waste for disposal.
§ 100-4.10. Removal, transportation and disposal of sewage and
industrial waste.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
The industrial wastes discharged by tank trucks into the sewerage system shall not contain
industrial waste, chemicals, or other matter, with or without pretreatment, that does not conform to
the requirements of this chapter.
Any industrial waste to be discharged from tank trucks shall be disposed of at the location
designated at the sewage treatment plant at the time or times and at the rate or rates of discharge
fixed by the Borough.
§ 100-4.11. Pretreatment requirements.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 175/233
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
A.
Users shall design, construct, operate and maintain wastewater pretreatment facilities whenever
necessary to reduce or modify the user's wastewater to achieve compliance with this chapter, national
pretreatment standards, pretreatment requirements, and conditions or limitations contained in the
user's industrial waste discharge permit, or any sludge limitation imposed by federal, state or local
authorities. The review or approval of pretreatment facility plans, specifications and operating
procedures by the Borough or its consulting engineer shall not excuse or mitigate any violations by the
user of this chapter or any federal, state or local requirements.
§ 100-4.12. Industrial user agreement.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
A significant industrial user ("SIU") may be required by the Borough to enter into a user agreement.
Such user agreement will establish additional restrictions, surcharges, fees and pretreatment
requirements as deemed necessary by the Borough for the protection of the sewerage system and to
provide for equitable cost sharing between users of the sewerage system. The user agreement may
establish specific sampling and monitoring requirements for the SIU. An SIU with a user agreement is
subject to pay reasonable administrative, sampling and reporting fees incurred by the Borough in
administering the user agreement. The Borough shall submit invoices and receipts to the SIU for
reimbursement of such costs by the SIU.
§ 100-5. Industrial wastes, peak flows and powers of inspectors.
[Amended 4-16-1970 by Ord. No. C-106, approved 4-16-1970; 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. C-257,
approved 11-25-1980]
Sampling and reporting.
All those who discharge or desire to discharge industrial wastes into the sewer system shall
fill in and file with the borough quarterly an industrial wastes report in a form determined by
the borough, which shall furnish pertinent or predicted data inclusive of quantity of flow and
analysis of the character and concentration of the typical industrial wastes discharged or to be
discharged into the sewer system. Such report shall be based on analysis by an independent
testing laboratory, at the expense of the discharger. The installation, operation and
maintenance of the sewage sampling facilities shall be the responsibility of the person
discharging the industrial wastes into the sewer system and shall be subject at all times to the
approval of the Borough Council or its sewer system engineer. Access to the sewage
sampling location or locations shall be available to the Borough Council or its duly authorized
representatives at all times. Due care shall be exercised in the collection and preservation of
all samples to ensure the preservation of the sample in as nearly its natural state as possible,
including the refrigeration of all samples which will be analyzed by biochemical methods.
An authorized representative of the borough may require a user of sewer services to provide
information needed to determine compliance with this Article or other applicable local, state or
federal laws, rules or regulations. This information may include:
Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period.
Laboratory analyses of wastewaters.
Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting wastewater volume and
quality.
Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important
to sewer use control.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 176/233
(e)
(f)
(g)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility
locations.
Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the
municipal sewer.
Peak flows. No discharger of industrial waste shall discharge such waste at an instantaneous
peak rate higher than twice the average daily rate of discharge.
Powers and authority of inspectors.
Duly authorized employees of the borough, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall
be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the sewer system.
Duly authorized employees of the borough are authorized to obtain information concerning
industrial processes resulting in industrial waste. The industry may withhold information if the
industry establishes to the satisfaction of the borough that the revelation to the public of the
information in question would result in an advantage to competitors.
While performing the necessary work on private properties, duly authorized employees of the
borough shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner,
and the owner shall be held harmless for injury or death to the borough employees, and the
borough shall indemnify the owner against loss or damage to its property by borough
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the owner and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as
such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions. For the
purpose of this section, the term "owner" is defined to mean and include the lawful owner of
the premises, the operator of any lawful business on the premises, the tenant, lessee and any
other person lawfully occupying the premises by and with the consent and permission of the
owner.
Duly authorized employees of the borough, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall
be permitted to enter all private properties through which the borough holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewer system lying within said
easement.
§ 100-6. Only registered plumbers to make connections.
No connections shall be made to the sewer system except by a plumber duly registered and licensed
by the borough and in the manner and of such materials as are approved of by the sewer manager or
his duly appointed deputy or assistant and in compliance with the rules and regulations prescribed by
existing ordinances or as may otherwise be required by law.
§ 100-7. Grease interceptors required for eating establishments.
[Amended 5-31-2005 by Ord. No. C-466, approved 5-31-2005]
Where the building connected to the sewer system is used, in whole or in part, for preparation or
serving of food to the public, including, but not limited to, eating houses, restaurants, nursing homes,
hotels, drugstores, bars and saloons, there shall be installed in each connection a grease interceptor
or trap.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 177/233
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
Installation plans and specifications for proposed oil and grease interceptor systems shall be
submitted to the Borough prior to the start of installation. Installation shall not be started until
approval of the system has been obtained from the Borough.
Owners of said facilities shall, at their expense, provide a written inspection and cleaning report of
the grease trap/interceptor by a properly licensed professional. This annual report shall be
submitted to the Borough on or before the anniversary date of the Borough's approval of the
system. The owner shall also self-monitor the system on an ongoing basis to assure its proper
operation.
§ 100-8. Connections from buildings to be independent.
Each separate occupied building shall be provided with an independent connection with the sewer
system and two or more occupied buildings shall not be permitted to discharge into the building lateral
connecting any property with the sewer system except with the consent of the borough.
§ 100-9. Unlawful to construct private disposal system.
Any person who erects, constructs or maintains a privy, cesspool, sinkhole or septic tank on any
property accessible to the sewer system shall be deemed and shall be declared to be erecting,
constructing and maintaining a nuisance, which nuisance the borough may abate in the manner
provided by law.
§ 100-10. Violations and penalties; hearings.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978; 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. C-257,
approved 11-25-1980; 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
Any person, firm or corporation (whether owner, occupier, plumber or other responsible person,
firm or corporation) who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 per offense, plus costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate
offense. If such violation shall not be corrected within 10 days after notice from the Borough
served on the property owner, the Borough may either:
Enter upon the property and correct the defect or make the necessary connection and charge
the cost thereof against the owner or owners of the property and collect the same by lien or
suit;
Take legal action to compel the owner or owners or occupier or occupiers to correct the defect
or make any required connection;
Enter upon the property and shut off sewer and/or water service and restore the same only
upon payment of the cost of shutting off and restoring service and of any work done by the
Borough; or
Pursue any or all of its remedies cumulatively.
Any party aggrieved by an "adjudication," as that term is defined in the Local Agency Law, 2
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., may request a hearing before the Borough Council if no other hearing
procedure exists. The request shall be in writing, shall reasonably describe the decision,
determination, ruling or other adjudication in question and the basis for disagreement with it, shall
be signed by the person or persons aggrieved and contain the addresses and telephone numbers
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 178/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
A.
B.
of the persons claiming to be aggrieved and shall be filed with the Borough Manager. The request
shall be filed within 30 days of the date the party knew or reasonably should have first known
himself or herself to be aggrieved. The Council shall schedule a hearing and give reasonable
notice thereof to all persons who have requested a hearing. The procedure shall thereafter be in
accordance with the Local Agency Law.
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged, to the sewer system
which contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in §§ 100-4.1 through
100-4.12 or which, in the judgment of the Borough, may have a deleterious effect upon the
wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Borough may:
Reject the wastes;
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the system;
Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by
existing taxes or sewer charges.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be liable to the Borough for any
expense, loss, damage, fine or penalty occasioned because of such violation.
Article II. Sewer Connection Regulations
§ 100-11. Supervision of installations and repairs.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager or some other authorized person of the Borough of Lititz to
supervise the installation and repair of sanitary sewer laterals and all sanitary house drainage
connected therewith in conformity with the provisions of ordinances of the Borough of Lititz and rules
and regulations adopted by the Borough Council. "Sanitary house drainage" shall be construed to
include any connections with any sewer, drain, soil, waste or vent pipe or any pipe connected
therewith.
§ 100-12. Persons authorized to install laterals.
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in or carry on the business of installing laterals between
the sewer trunk system of the borough and the connections with the structural plumbing except either:
A contractor who shall have obtained authorization to do such work in the Borough of Lititz, in
writing, from the Borough Council.
A registered plumber.
§ 100-13. Only registered plumbers to make connections.
No person except a registered plumber shall be permitted to make the connections between laterals
and the structural plumbing system.
§ 100-14. Authorization required prior to connection.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 179/233
A.
B.
C.
A.
No plumber shall undertake any work whatsoever on any premises intended to be fully connected to
the sanitary sewer system of the borough until the owner thereof has exhibited to him the authorization
for the connection granted to him by the Borough Manager, which authorization shall be applied for by
the owner or his agent.
§ 100-15. House drains.
When separate drains not necessary. The entire drainage system of every house or building shall
be separately and independently connected with the street sewer where such sewer exists, that
where one building exists or is erected in the rear of another or on an interior lot, of single
ownership, and no private sewer is available or can be made for the rear building through an
adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the house drain from the front building may be extended to
the rear building and the whole will be considered as one drain. Where it is necessary to construct
such a private sewer, such plans may be followed as may be approved by the Borough Council,
but in no case shall joint drains be laid in cellars, which joint drains are parallel with the street or
alley which the property faces.
Weights of cast-iron pipe required. House drains or soil pipes laid under or through the wall must
be plain cast-iron soil pipe of weights as set forth in the following table:
Pipe Size
(inches)
Weight
(pounds per lineal foot)
4 13
5 17
6 17
7 27
8 33
10 45
12 54
However, pipe laid under the floor may be standard cast-iron soil pipe.
Installation of pipe. Joints shall be leaded and caulked and shall be carried five feet outside the
foundation wall, All drains or soil pipes connected with the main drain shall be of plain cast-iron
soil pipe with leaded and caulked joints or of heavy wrought iron or steel pipe with gas tight screw
joints properly secured and carried five feet outside the cellar wall. No cast-iron soil pipe, drain,
waste or vent pipe shall be tarred or coated until after the inspection and approval by the
appropriate borough officials. All arrangements of soil waste pipes shall be laid by as direct a route
as possible. Changes of direction in pipes shall be made with curved pipes, and all connections
with Y- branches, both above and below the ground shall be protected from frost and readily
accessible for inspection and convenience in repairing. In each instance in which a pipe passes
through a new foundation wall, a relieving arch shall be built over it with a two-inch space above
and on either side of the pipe, or a sleeve shall be grouted into the wall and a sewer pipe laid
through the sleeve and caulked into place.
§ 100-16. Drains outside of buildings.
Alternate pipe permitted. Where the ground is of sufficient solidity for a proper foundation, it shall
be permissible to use transit pipe or cylindrical bell-and-spigot terra-cotta pipe, perfectly burned
and well-glazed over the entire inner and outside surfaces, provided that same shall be of the best
quality, free from flaws, splits or cracks, and provided that same shall be laid on a smooth bottom,
with a special groove cut in the bottom of the trench for each hub, where necessary, in order to
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 180/233
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
give the pipe a solid bearing on its entire length, and the soil well-rammed on each side of the
pipe. In any instance in which terra-cotta pipe is used, the spigot and hub ends shall be closely
connected and the space between the hub and pipe caulked with oakum, jute or hemp and
thoroughly filled with hot poured bituminous compound where trees are present, or the space
between the hub and pipe shall be caulked with oakum, jute or hemp and thoroughly filled with
cement mortar made of one part of the best American portland cement and two parts of bar sand,
thoroughly mixed dry, and with enough water added afterwards to give proper consistency. The
joints must be carefully wiped and pointed, and all mortar that may be left inside shall be removed,
and the pipe when completed shall be clean and smooth throughout.
Where alternate pipe not permitted. Transit or terra-cotta pipe must be laid not closer than five feet
to any exterior wall of a building nor in any portion of a drain passing under a driveway less than
3 1/2 feet below the surface of the driveway, not within 10 feet of any well, nor in "made" or "filled
in" ground.
Grade. Before any pipe is laid, the trench shall be evenly graded. The minimum grade shall be
one-fourth-inch fall per running foot. After the pipe is laid and the joints made, it shall remain
uncovered, and sufficient time shall be allowed for the joints to become set to allow for the
necessary inspection by the borough authorities. The house lateral sewer shall not be connected
to the borough sewer system until after inspection by the Borough Manager or his proper agent.
Backfilling. Backfilling shall be made with loose earth and carefully tamped about and over the
pipe in six-inch layers for a depth of one foot above the pipe, on top of which the coarser materials
may be backfilled and the trench brought to its original condition. The contractor or plumber is
authorized to supervise backfill up to and including one foot above the top of the pipe.
Cradle for wet areas. When the pipe is laid in wet areas, either cast-iron pipe with lead joints or
transit or terra-cotta pipe with a concrete bed and jacket shall be used. The concrete bed and
jacket shall extend below the bell of the pipe at least four inches, shall have a horizontal bearing
extending at the least three inches on each side of the bell of the pipe and shall be at least three
inches thick over the top or side of any part of the pipe. Concrete for this purpose shall be a oneto-
two-to-three mix with mineral aggregate having a maximum size of one inch.
Cradle for rock excavation. When pipe is laid in rock excavation, the trench shall be excavated
three inches deeper than the outside bell of the pipe, and this depth under the pipe and up to the
midsection of the pipe shall be of well-compacted concrete of a one-to-three-to-five mix or shall be
of fine gravel or coarse sand.
§ 100-17. Drilling and tapping not permitted.
Drilling and tapping of drain and waste pipes will not be permitted. When iron drains and waste pipes
are to be removed for a connection, the connection must be made by the insertion of a Y- branch;
provided, however, that when the connection is made in a basement on a horizontal run and is to
remain exposed, such connection may be made by the use of a Y-saddle. In either case, such
connections must be inspected and approved by the Borough Manager.
§ 100-18. Specifications for horizontal drains.
All horizontal drains within and to a distance of five feet beyond the walls of buildings shall be of cast
iron with caulked leaded joints or wrought iron with screw joints and shall be so located as to be readily
accessible for inspection. The house drain within the building shall not be less than four inches, and
the fall shall not be less than 1/4 of an inch per foot; it shall be laid in a trench cut out at a uniform
grade, or it may be constructed along the foundation walls above the cellar floor, resting on nine-inch
brick or stone piers laid in cement mortar [said piers to be not more than seven feet apart], or it may be
suspended from the floor beam by heavy iron hangers at intervals of not more than seven feet. The
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 181/233
use of pipe hooks, gas pipe or iron pipe driven into the walls is prohibited. Where a pipe passes under
the walls of a building, there shall be a relieving arch to prevent the pipe from being broken by settling
of the foundation. Said drain shall be provided with a fitting for cleaning purposes, the same to be
closed with a screw plug.
§ 100-19. Location of main trap.
[Amended 7-30-1963 by Ord. No. C-21, approved 7-30-1963]
Each drain must be provided with a double-extra-heavy cast-iron trap located just inside the curbline.
The trap will be equipped with a cleanout on the curb side of the trap for convenience in cleaning from
the trap to the main, the cover of which must be properly fitted and made gas- and airtight with a heavy
brass screw-cap ferrule, caulked in. The house drain must be equipped with a hand hole properly fitted
as described above, for the convenience of cleaning from the house to the main trap.
§ 100-20. Fresh-air inlet.
[Amended 7-30-1963 by Ord. No. C-21, approved 7-30-1963]
A fresh-air inlet must be connected with the drain at the main trap. In any instance in which it is
underground, it must be of extra-heavy cast iron. Said inlet must lead to the outer air and be finished
with an automatic device. The fresh-air inlet must be of the same size as the drain up to four inches in
diameter. For five- and six-inch drains, it must not be less than four inches in diameter; for seven- and
eight-inch drains, not less than six inches in diameter or its equivalent; and for larger drains, not less
than eight inches in diameter or its equivalent.
§ 100-21. Alternate location of main trap.
[Amended 7-30-1963 by Ord. No. C-21, approved 7-30-1963]
Where the trap and fresh-air inlet are desired to be included inside the house, the arrangement must
be approved in writing by the Borough Manager.
§ 100-22. Changes in pipe direction; offsets.
All sewer, soil and waste pipes must be in as direct a course as possible. Changes in direction must be
made with Y- or half-Y- branches, or one-eighth bends. Offsets in soil or waste pipe will not be
permitted except where necessary, nor, in any case, unless suitable provision is made to prevent
accumulation of rust or other obstructions. Offsets shall be made with forty-five-degree bends or similar
fittings. The use of T-Y's (sanitary T's) will be permitted on upright joints only.
§ 100-23. Exceptions.
Any person or persons desiring exception to any provisions in §§ 100-17, 100-19 or 100-20 of this
chapter will present in writing a petition to the Borough Manager for exceptions to the rulings. These
petitions will be prepared by the owner on forms provided by the borough and shall be accompanied by
a sketch showing the proposed connections. This petition must be approved by a registered plumber of
Lititz Borough. After the petition is submitted to the Borough Manager, he shall study the proposed
changes and shall then present the petition with recommendations to the Sewer Committee of Lititz
Borough Council. The Sewer Committee may accept or reject the proposed changes and inform the
applicant accordingly.
§ 100-24. Violations and penalties.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 182/233
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
Any person violating any provision of this Article, upon conviction before any District Justice of the
Borough of Lititz, shall be subject to pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is
without the financial means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such
defendant shall be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as
the District Justice deems to be just.
Article III. Sewer Service Charges
§ 100-25. Connection charges and annual rental.
[Amended 11-26-1963 by Ord. No. C-27, approved 11-26-1963; 1-26-1965 by Ord. No. C-44, approved
1-28-1965; 1-28-1969 by Ord. No. C-91, approved 1-31-1969; 4-27-1971 by Ord. No. C-118, approved
5-12-1971; 6-29-1971 by Ord. No. C-123, approved 6-29-1971; 6-24-1975 by Ord. No. C-167,
approved 6-24-1975; 5-25-1976 by Ord. No. C-186, approved 5-25-1976; 5-30-1978 by Ord. No. C-
212, approved 5-30-1978; 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978; 5-29-1984 by Ord.
No. C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984; 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345, approved 6-25-1991]
There is hereby imposed upon the owners of improved properties served by the sewers, sewer system
and sewage treatment works (hereinafter in this Article all collectively called "sewer system") in the
Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, who have the use of said sewer system, and who
shall pay connection charges and an annual rental or charge, payable as hereinafter provided, for the
use, the following schedule of rates in accordance with the following classifications.
Application, connections to the borough's sewer system shall not be made to any premises until
application shall have been made to the Borough Manager by the owner of such premises or by
his authorized agent. Such application shall be made upon a form to be prescribed by the
borough, and, upon such application, the applicant shall state fully all purposes for which he shall
desire such sewer and shall answer fairly and without concealment all necessary questions.
Connection fee.
There is hereby imposed and fixed upon the owner of each property making a connection to
the sewer system a connection fee in an amount equal to the actual costs incurred by the
borough in respect of each connection to the sewer system. Such costs shall include the
borough's actual costs involved in opening and closing the street, making the tap, laying the
service connection and costs of all equipment and materials used in making the service
connection.
The borough's costs shall include actual labor costs at the borough's then-current rates, the
costs of all materials used to construct the lateral sewer or service connection and the
reasonable rental value of all equipment used by the borough or its agents in making such
connections. The borough shall publish, on at least an annual basis, a schedule of its thencurrent
rates for labor and equipment. The schedule of rates will be available for inspection by
the public during the borough's regular business hours.
Customer facility fee. There is hereby imposed and fixed upon the owner of each property making
a connection to the borough's sewer system a customer facility fee in an amount equal to the
borough's actual costs incurred by the borough in supplying and installing any customer facilities
required to provide sewer service to the customer's property. Such fee shall also include
installation costs thereof, when such equipment is necessary to serve the customer's property, and
inspection fees, where applicable, to confirm compliance with the borough's rules and regulations.
Tapping fee. There is hereby fixed and imposed upon the owner of each property making a
connection to the borough's sewer system a tapping fee per EDU as set forth below:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 183/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
E.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
F.
[Amended 7-26-2005 by Ord. No. C-468, approved 7-26-2005]
The capacity-related tapping fee for the sewer system shall be $2,061.9 per EDU based on
an EDU of 237 gallons per day for the sewer system.
The connection-related tapping fee for the sewer system shall be $497.70 per EDU based on
an EDU basis of 237 gallons per day.
The total sewer tapping fee shall be $2,559.60 per EDU based on EDU value of 237 gallons
per day.
Notwithstanding any other definition of an EDU as set forth in Ord. No. C-345, or the Code of
Ordinances of Lititz Borough, for the purposes of calculating sewer tapping fees, an EDU
shall be calculated on the basis of 237 gallons per day per EDU.
Date of payment.
Tapping fees imposed hereunder shall be paid to the borough at the time a property owner
makes an application for a permit to connect to the borough's sewer system.
At the time a property owner makes an application for a permit to connect to the sewer
system, the borough shall estimate the connection fee and customer facilities fee (if any) to
be payable with respect to such connection. The estimated connection fee and customer
facility fee shall be payable at the time application is made for a connection permit. The
estimated amount held by the borough shall be applied to the borough's actual costs for
making such connection and providing and installing any customer facilities which may be
necessary for such connection. After the connection is completed, if the combined amount of
the estimated connection fee and customer facility fee was in excess of the actual cost of
such connection, the borough shall refund the excess to the property owner within 30 days
following the completion of the connection. If the combined estimated connection fee and
customer facility fee is less than the borough's actual cost for making such connection, the
borough shall bill the property owner for the additional costs, which bill shall be payable within
30 days of the date of said bill.
Annual sewer rentals and regulations.
Annual sewer rental.
Sanitary sewage. The sewer rental hereby imposed shall be an annual charge, payable
as hereinafter provided, based upon the water consumption of the property served as
shown by the meter readings. The schedule of rates to be used in determining the charge
for sewer rentals by the Borough of Lititz to users of the Borough of Lititz sewer system,
based on three months' usage, shall be as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees. Dwellings or
establishments which have sources of water supply other than the Borough of Lititz water
system will be required to provide a meter at the source of supply. This meter and its
installation must be furnished by the property owner and must be acceptable to the
borough and shall be available to borough employees for meter reading at any time. The
amount of water consumed, as shown by their meter readings, will be the basis for the
sewer rental charge.
Minimum charge. The minimum charge for each meter shall be as provided for in
Chapter 55, Fees, and shall be billed as follows: on March 10, on June 10, on September
10 and on December 10 of each year. Minimum charges for additional dwelling unit(s)
served by the same meter and billed to one account shall be appropriate multiples of this
schedule. For services outside of the borough limits, the minimum charges contained
herein shall be as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees.
(Reserved)
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 184/233
(d)
[1]
(2)
(3)
G.
(Reserved)
Water not discharged into sewer system. Whenever a property upon which a sewer supply is
hereby imposed uses water from the borough water supply system[1] and/or from an
independent supply for industrial purposes such that the water so used is not discharged into
the sewer system, the quantity of water so used and not discharged into the sewer system
shall be excluded in determining the sewer rental of said property, provided that the quantity
of water so used and not discharged into the sewer system is measured by a device or
devices approved by the borough and installed without cost to the borough. The quantity used
to determine the sewer rental shall be computed by deducting the water not discharged into
the sewer system from the borough water meter readings; provided, however, that when, in
the opinion of the Borough Engineer, it is not practical to install measuring devices to
continuously determine the quantity of water not discharged into the sewer system, the
borough shall determine, in such manner and by such method as it may prescribe, the
percentage of metered water discharged into the sewer system, and the quantity of water
used to determine the sewer rental shall be the quantity measured by the water meter or
meters. Any dispute as to the estimated amount shall be determined by the borough after
notice of the estimate, whose decision on the matter shall be final for the current year.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 118, Water.
Measuring devices. All meters or other measuring devices installed or required to be used
under the provision of Subsection B(2) of this section shall be under the control of the
borough. The owner of the property upon which any such measuring device is installed shall
be responsible for its maintenance and safekeeping, and all repairs thereto shall be made at
the property owner's expense, whether such repairs thereto shall be made necessary by wear
and tear or other causes.
Industrial waste. The borough reserves the right to refuse connection to the sewer system or
otherwise to compel discontinuance of use or to compel pretreatment by any industry to prevent
discharge into the sewer system of any industrial wastes deemed to be harmful to the sewer
system or to have a deleterious effect on the sewage treatment process.
§ 100-26. Time and method of payment
[Amended 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984]
All connection charges shall be due and payable at the time of making connection. The annual sewer
rentals shall commence when the sewer system becomes available for use by the particular improved
property and thereafter shall be due and payable at the same time and by the same method that water
rentals are now due and payable. They shall be included in the same bills and shall be collected at the
same times and in the same manner as the charges for water.
§ 100-27. Penalty for late payment.
[Amended 12-30-1975 by Ord. No. C-179, approved 12-30-1975; 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2,
approved 5-29-1984]
Every customer who does not pay in full the sewer rental bill rendered within 30 days after the billing
date shall be subject to a penalty of 5% of the amount of such bill.
§ 100-28. Delinquent rentals to be lien on property.
[Amended 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984]
If any sewer bill is not paid within 60 days after the billing date, the Business Manager may place a
municipal lien on the property charged with the payment thereof in the office of the Prothonotary of
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 185/233
A.
B.
C.
Lancaster County, and it shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the filing and collection of
municipal claims.
Article IV. Inspections
[Adopted 1-30-2001, approved 1-30-2001]
§ 100-29. Right to enter premises.
The Borough of Lititz and the Lititz Sewer Authority, through their agents and employees, shall have
the right, at all reasonable times and with reasonable notice, to enter any premises connected with or
about to be connected with the sewer system in order to enforce compliance with any ordinance,
resolutions or rules and regulations adopted by the either the Borough of Lititz or the Lititz Sewer
Authority.
Chapter 101. Skateboards and Scooters
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 7-30-1991 by Ord. No. C-347, approved 7-
30-1991. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 115.
§ 101-1. Intent.
The Borough Council recognizes that the use of skateboards, roller skates, street skates, scooters,
pedalcycles and any other humanpowered device or devices has become prevalent in the borough.
The use of these devices on public areas and streets my constitute a danger to the public and the
person using these devices. In order to lessen the hazards to the public health, safety and welfare, the
Borough Council has determined to regulate the use of skateboards, roller skates, street skates,
scooters, pedalcycles or any other type of device or devices that are propelled solely by human power
in the borough.
§ 101-2. Word usage and definitions.
Word usage. In the interpretation of this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
Application. It is not the intent of this chapter to apply to baby strollers, wheelchairs or other
nonrecreational humanpowered devices.
Definitions.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
COUNCIL
The Council of the Borough of Lititz.
PEDALCYCLE
A device propelled solely by humanpowered pedals.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 186/233
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
ROLLER SKATE OR STREET SKATE
A device having multiple sets of wheels affixed to shoes and used to glide over hard surfaces
by an individual.
SCOOTER
A child's vehicle consisting of a narrow board mounted on two wheels in tandem and guided
by a handle attached to the front wheel. The child stands with one foot on the board and
pushes the device with the other foot.
SIDEWALK
That portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the
adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians.
SKATEBOARD
A device consisting of a a flat surface constructed of wood, metal, plastic, fiberglass or other
similar material with two or more wheels affixed to the underside and which is used by a
person for coasting and guided by the distribution of the weight of the user.
STREET OR TRAFFICWAY
The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public for vehicular travel.
§ 101-3. Prohibited acts.
No person shall ride upon, or utilize in any manner upon the streets, alleys and trafficways in the
Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania, or on any property owned, leased, managed or under the control
of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania, except as may be provided by the Lititz Community Center,
any skateboards, roller skates, street skates, scooters or any other human-powered devices, other
than pedalcycles, except to cross the street at appropriate designated areas or crosswalks in
compliance with signalization or right-of-way.
No person shall erect, construct or place any type of ramp designed for use with skateboards,
roller skates, street skates, scooters, pedalcycles or any other human-powered devices onto the
streets, alleys and trafficways in the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania, or on any property owned,
leased, managed or under the control of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania, except as may be
provided by the Lititz Community Center.
No person other than Lititz Borough Police Bicycle Patrol shall ride or use skateboards, roller
skates, street skates, scooters, pedalcycles or other human-powered devices on any sidewalks in
the following areas, as determined by the Lititz Borough Council:
[Amended 3-31-1992 by Ord. No. C-351, approved 3-31-1992]
The entire length of East Main Street.
The entire length of West Main Street.
The entire length of Broad Street.
No person shall ride a skateboard or use roller skates, street skates, scooters or pedalcycles on
any sidewalk located within the boundary lines of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania, in a reckless
manner. No person shall ride a skateboard, roller skates, street skates, scooters or pedalcycles on
any sidewalk without exercising due care for the safety of other persons using the sidewalk, and
said person shall always give way to pedestrian traffic. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave
a skateboard, roller skates, street skates, scooter or pedalcycle upon a sidewalk in such a manner
as to obstruct pedestrian traffic.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 187/233
E.
A.
B.
C.
No person shall operate a skateboard, roller skates, street skates, scooter or pedalcycle or other
human-powered device on any private property or private parking lot without the express consent
of the owner or a responsible agent for such owner of the private property.
§ 101-4. Parental responsibility.
The parent and/or guardian of any child shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child to
violate any provision of this chapter.
§ 101-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the following
penalties:
First offense: The violator and/or his parent or guardian shall receive a written warning. Such
written warning will be kept on file by the Borough Police Department for a period of one year.
Second offense: the impoundment of the violator's skateboard, roller skates, street skates,
scooter, pedalcycle or other device for a period not to exceed 15 days and/or a sentence of a fine
of between $5 and a maximum fine of $25, plus costs of prosecution, with payment paid in full
prior to return of the mentioned device.
Third and subsequent offenses: the impoundment of the violator's skateboard, roller skates, street
skates, scooter, pedalcycle or other device for a period not to exceed 30 days and/or a sentence
of a fine of between $25 and a maximum fine of $50, plus costs of prosecution, with payment paid
in full prior to return of the mentioned device.
§ 101-6. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Lititz Borough Police Department to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 102. Speed-Timing Devices
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 8-30-1983 by Ord. No. C-276, approved 8-
30-1983. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 115.
§ 102-1. Enforcement of speed restrictions.
Any police officer, to the extent allowed by law, may enforce the speed restrictions authorized under
Subchapter F of Chapter 33 of the Vehicle Code, Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 101 et seq. (hereinafter and heretofore referred to as the "Vehicle Code"), as the same may be
hereafter amended.
§ 102-2. Electrical and/or mechanical devices authorized.
The rate of speed of any vehicle may be timed on any street or highway within the physical boundaries
of Lititz Borough, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, by a police officer using an electrical and/or
mechanical speed-timing device.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 188/233
[1]
A.
§ 102-3. Approval and testing.
All electrical and/or mechanical speed-timing devices shall be of a type approved by the Department of
Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and shall be calibrated and tested in accordance
with regulations prescribed by said Department of Transportation.
§ 102-4. Enforcement and penalty.
Every person convicted of a summary offense for a violation of any speed restriction authorized under
the Vehicle Code shall be sentenced to pay those fines and costs established by the applicable
provisions of the Vehicle Code or any subsequent Act of Assembly which amends said Vehicle Code.
Disposition of said fine or fines shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the Vehicle Code.
Chapter 103. Stormwater Management
[The current Stormwater Management Ordinance is on file in the Borough offices.]
Chapter 105. Streets and Sidewalks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961;[1]
amended in its entirety 4-30-2019 by Ord. No. C-575, approved 4-30-2019. Subsequent amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes and property maintenance — See Ch. 36.
Fees — See Ch. 55.
Parades and meetings — See Ch. 82.
Skateboards and scooters — See Ch. 101.
Speed-timing devices — See Ch. 102.
Streets in subdivisions — See Ch. 108.
Utilities — See Ch. 113.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 115.
Utilities in public ways — See Ch. A125.
Editor's Note: This chapter was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 by part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
Article I. Excavations in Streets
§ 105-1. Definitions.
The following words, used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates otherwise:
OWNER
Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have a legal title to any lot, with
or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or control of
any lot as an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner.
PERSON
Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association or corporation.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 189/233
B.
A.
B.
A.
SIDEWALK
An improved walkway along the side of the street intended for use by pedestrians.
SNOW
Precipitation depositing any accumulation on the streets and sidewalks, such as snow, sleet,
hail, ice, and freezing rain.
STREET
Any public street, avenue, road, square, lane, alley, highway or other public place located in
the Borough of Lititz and established for the use of vehicles.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine
and neuter.
§ 105-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of any kind in any of the streets
in the Borough of Lititz without first securing a permit therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 105-3. Application for permit.
Any person who shall desire to make any opening or excavation in any of the streets in the Borough of
Lititz shall make application to the Code Enforcement Officer in writing for that purpose. Such
application shall be made upon blanks to be furnished by the Borough and shall set forth the name of
the applicant, the exact location of the proposed opening or excavation and the approximate size or
depth thereof and shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that the work shall be done in
full compliance with the ordinances of the Borough and the laws of the commonwealth in relation
thereto and that the applicant shall well and truly save, defend and keep harmless the Borough from
and indemnify it against any and all actions, suits, demands, payments, costs and charges for or by
reason of the proposed opening or excavation, and all damages to persons or property resulting in any
manner therefrom or occurring in the prosecution of the work connected therewith or from any other
matter, cause or thing relating thereto.
§ 105-4. Permit fee and charge.
Before any permit shall be issued to open or excavate any public street, lane or alley within the
Borough, the applicant shall pay to the Borough Secretary a permit fee in the amount as provided
in Chapter 55, Fees, plus a charge based upon one of the schedules, as applicable, in Chapter
55, Fees.
No permit shall be issued for more than one opening or an opening larger in area than that
required for the work which is to be performed under the permit.
§ 105-5. Guards, barriers and lights required; liability for
damages; backfilling.
It shall be the duty of every person to whom a permit is issued or by whom any opening or
excavation is made as aforesaid to provide and maintain proper and adequate guards, barriers
and lights to prevent accidents, and such person shall assume all risks and be liable for all
damages by reason of such opening or excavation and by reason of any failure to properly fill the
hole or trench in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 190/233
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
After first notifying the Public Works Forman or their designee, all trenches and openings dug in
pursuance of a permit granted under this chapter shall be backfilled immediately upon completion
of the work for which such opening was made by the person securing the permit. The dirt shall be
thoroughly compacted in the excavation at six-inch intervals and filled and compacted to the level
of the rest of the street. All surplus dirt and other material shall be immediately removed.
§ 105-6. Maintenance of temporary resurfacing; liability.
The permanent resurfacing and repaving of street surface openings, made by and under a permit as
provided for in this chapter and after said opening has been properly filled in accordance with the
terms of this chapter by the person securing the permit, shall be undertaken by the permitee; provided,
further, that the temporary resurfacing and refilling of the opening shall be maintained by the permittee
until the permittee shall have permanently resurfaced said opening, which period shall extend up to
one year after the temporary filling of the opening. The Borough may require additional maintenance
by permittee. The permittee shall remain liable and assume all liability during this period in accordance
with § 105-5.
§ 105-7. Location and size of opening; interference with conduits;
tunneling.
No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curbline into the highway a distance
greater than one foot beyond the centerline of the street before refilling, and the surface of the
highway shall be restored to a condition safe and convenient for travel.
No more than 25 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at any one time.
The work of excavation shall be so conducted as not to interfere with the water mains, sewers or
their connections with the houses, or any other subsurface lines or constructions, until permission
of the proper authorities in connection with such subsurface lines or construction shall have been
obtained.
No tunneling shall be allowed without the express approval of the Borough Engineer and
permission therefor endorsed upon the permit. The backfilling of a tunnel excavation shall be
made only in the presence of the Borough Engineer or an inspector designated by him and shall
be done only in a method approved by him.
§ 105-8. Emergency work.
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe, line, construction or
apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning or responsible for such pipe, line, construction or
apparatus to commence an excavation to remedy such condition before securing a permit, provided
that application for a permit shall be made immediately and not later than the next business day
thereafter and that all other provisions of this chapter are fully complied with. If any such emergency
condition shall not be immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for such pipe, line,
construction or apparatus, the Public Works Forman or their designee, after such notice as he or she
shall deem necessary under the circumstances of the particular case, shall proceed to do the work
necessary and required by such emergency and charge same on the basis of cost plus 20% to such
owner or person.
§ 105-9. Notice of resurfacing; opening of new pavement.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 191/233
A.
The Borough shall give timely notice to all persons owning property abutting on any street within the
Borough about to be paved or improved and to all public utility companies operating in the Borough,
and all such persons and utility companies shall make all water, gas or sewer connections, as well as
any repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation of the said street, within 30 days from the
giving of such notice, unless such time is extended, in writing, for cause shown, by the Borough
Manager. New paving shall not be opened for a period of five years after the completion thereof,
except in the case of an emergency which endangers life or property and requires the opening of such
paving. If it is sought to excavate upon or open a street within five years after the completion of the
paving thereof for any other reason than an emergency as above stated, the applicant shall make
written application to the Borough Council, and a permit for such opening shall only be issued after
express approval of Council.
§ 105-10. Approval required prior to work.
No new water, sewer or gas main shall hereafter be laid or constructed, and no existing water, sewer
or gas main shall be extended, in any of the streets of the Borough until the exact location thereof and
the plan therefor shall have been first approved by the Borough Council or the Borough Secretary.
§ 105-11. Payment of charges for work done by Borough.
Payment for all work done by the Borough under the provisions in § 105-8 hereof shall be made by the
person made liable therefor under the provisions hereof within 30 days after a bill therefor is sent to
such person by the Borough. Upon failure to pay such charges within such time, same shall be
collectible by the Borough in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims.
§ 105-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, whether as principal, agent or employee, violating or assisting in the violation of any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before the Mayor or before any District Justice of
the Borough, pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment of such costs and prosecution, be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days;
provided, however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is without the financial
means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall be
permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as the District Justice
deems to be just.
§ 105-13. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to laying sidewalks or curbs or to the planting of poles.
Article II. Sidewalk and Curb Construction
§ 105-13.1. Responsibility for construction, repair and
maintenance.
It shall be the responsibility of every property owner within the Borough of Lititz to construct,
maintain and repair all sidewalks and curbs on or adjacent to his property. Failure to do so shall
subject such property owner, upon conviction thereof, to the penalties established by this article,
whether or not any notice was issued pursuant to this article.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 192/233
B.
A.
B.
The purpose of §§ 105-14 through 105-22 of this article is to provide a procedure whereby the
Borough may order the construction and/or the repair of sidewalks and curbs and to ensure that
certain standards are met by the property owner in performing such construction and/or repair.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as affecting the responsibility for the construction,
maintenance or repair of sidewalks and curbs, which is hereby declared to rest solely with the
property owner, nor shall this article be deemed in any way to make the Borough liable for any
injury or damages caused by the failure of the property owner to properly construct, maintain or
repair any sidewalk or curb, whether or not any notice was issued to the property owner by the
Borough concerning such failure, or whether or not the work was undertaken and approved
pursuant to this article.
§ 105-14. Notice to construct.
Every owner of property in the Borough of Lititz shall, on 30 days' notice from the Borough Council,
construct or reconstruct a sidewalk and/or a curb, which shall conform to all applicable requirements of
this chapter, in front of or at the side of such property.
§ 105-15. Notice to repair.
Every owner of property in the Borough of Lititz shall, on five days' notice from the Borough Council,
repair the sidewalk and/or curb in the manner stipulated in such notice, in front of or at the side of such
property.
§ 105-16. Form of notices.
The notices referred to in §§ 105-14 and 105-15 of this chapter may be written or printed or partly
written and partly printed.
§ 105-17. Specifications and materials.
All sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed, reconstructed and repaired of concrete only, according to
specifications determined by the Borough Council, provided that, in the case of sidewalks only, a
temporary bituminous surface meeting specifications determined by the Borough Council may be
applied as protective coating only until the concrete is replaced; but where a block of concrete has to
be replaced, such replacement shall be with concrete only; provided, further, that where the existing
sidewalk is of brick and at least 2/3 of such sidewalk is in good repair, such sidewalk may be repaired
with brick.
§ 105-17.1. Installation of ramps.
It shall be the duty of all owners of property abutting a dedicated or opened or public street or
highway within the Borough to construct concrete ramps, where feasible, and crosswalks when
new installations of sidewalks and/or curbs are made or when a replacement of an existing
sidewalk and/or curb is made so as to make the transition from street to sidewalk easily negotiable
for handicapped persons in wheelchairs and for other persons who may have difficulty in making
the required step up and down from curb level to street level.
All such ramps shall be constructed or installed in accordance with the designs and specifications
thereof prepared by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. The cost of such installation
shall be borne by the abutting property owners. The abutting property owners shall also keep the
same in good repair.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 193/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 105-17.2. Brick sidewalks.
New brick sidewalks may be constructed with the permission of the Borough Council and only in
accordance with the following specifications:
Excavation shall be made to the required depth and the subgrade compacted to a firm, even
surface.
A six-inch layer of 2B stone shall be placed and compacted to accept a two-inch layer of
compacted stone dust.
Brick pavers shall be set on the compacted stone dust and sand brushed into the joints.
Line and grade dimensions, general requirements and backfilling shall be in accordance with the
specifications for curb and sidewalks, updated and revised June 25, 1991.
§ 105-18. Minimum width.
On all streets, the sidewalks shall be at least five feet wide, with the exception of sidewalks passing
tree wells which shall be allowed at four feet.
§ 105-19. Construction over excavations.
In all cases where sidewalks are constructed, reconstructed or repaired over coal cellars or other
excavations under such sidewalks, such sidewalks shall be supported by iron or steel beams or girders
or stone or concrete arches. In no case shall any support of wood or other perishable materials be
used.
§ 105-20. Line and grade.
All sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed, reconstructed and repaired and the grading thereon shall
be done upon the line and grade obtained by the property owner from the Borough Inspector, and not
otherwise. Upon notice as provided in §§ 105-14 and 105-15, as the case may be, the work of
construction, reconstruction or repair shall be done by the owner or owners of such property.
§ 105-21. Notice of completion; inspection.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Public Works to determine, in the case of any individual
property, whether or not the sidewalk and/or curb shall be reconstructed or repaired and, if so, the
specific part or parts thereof to be reconstructed or repaired. Public Works may, at any time during the
course of repairing any sidewalk and/or curb, visit the site of such work to ascertain whether such work
is being done according to requirements; and he or one of his assistants or other designated Borough
official shall visit any such site for such purpose whenever requested by the property owner. Within two
days after the completion of the work of construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk or curb, it
shall be the duty of the owner of the property where such work was done to notify the Borough
Inspector of the fact, so that he may inspect such sidewalk or curb to determine whether the grade
thereof has been observed and followed.
§ 105-22. Proceeding without notice; application required.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 194/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Any property owner, upon his own initiative and without notice from any Borough authority, may
construct, reconstruct or repair a sidewalk or curb in front of or along his property, provided that such
owner shall first make application to the Borough Inspector and shall conform to the requirements of
this chapter as to line and grade and as to material used and that he shall also notify the Borough
Inspector as required by § 105-21 within two days after completion of the work.
§ 105-22.1. Violations and penalties.
Any person, whether as principal, agent or employee, violating or assisting in the violation of any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before the Mayor or before any District Justice of
the Borough, pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment of such costs and prosecution, be subject to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
30 days; provided, however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is without the
financial means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall
be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as the District
Justice deems to be just.
Article III. Snow and Ice Removal
§ 105-23. Responsibility of owners, occupants, and tenants.
It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the owner, occupant and tenant of every property
fronting upon and alongside of any of the streets in the Borough of Lititz to remove or cause to be
removed all snow from the sidewalks fronting and alongside such property within 24 hours after
the snow shall have ceased to fall.
Each owner, tenant or person in charge of any property fronting on or adjoining any street in the
Borough of Lititz shall clear a pathway of at least five feet in width on the sidewalk(s) in front of or
adjoining such property.
In the event that snow on the sidewalk has become so hard that it cannot be removed without
likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the person charged with its removal shall, within the time
mentioned in Subsection A hereof, cause enough abrasive to be put on the sidewalk to make
travel safe; and shall, as soon thereafter as weather permits, cause to be cleared a path on said
sidewalk at least five feet in width.
The owner, tenant or person shall prevent the falling of snow and/or ice from all buildings on their
property adjacent to public sidewalks.
It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the owner, occupant and tenant of every property
which has a hydrant located on or adjacent to the property boundary to remove snow, ice and
other formed precipitation from the hydrant and area within a two-foot radius of the hydrant within
24 hours after the snow shall have ceased to fall.
It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the owner, occupant and tenant of every corner
property where there exists a handicap ramp from the public sidewalk to the street to remove
snow from the ramp at least three feet in width within 24 hours after the snow shall have ceased to
fall. The responsible party shall maintain the surface of the ramp and remove any further snow
that may be plowed, pushed or otherwise deposited onto the travel width of the ramp.
§ 105-24. Depositing of snow and ice restricted.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 195/233
A.
B.
[1]
No person shall shovel, dump, throw, plow, pile or push any snow or ice removed from any driveway,
sidewalk or parking lot across or into any street or immediately next to a fire hydrant or storm sewer.
§ 105-24.1. Violations and penalties.
Every person failing to comply with § 105-23 of this article within a period of 24 hours from the
time the snow shall have ceased to fall shall be notified by the Borough to remove such snow
within a period of 24 hours from the time of said notice. Any owner, occupant or tenant who shall
fail to remove all snow from such sidewalk as noted in § 105-23 within said twenty-four-hour
period shall be sentenced to pay an initial fine not to exceed $50, with second and third fines a
minimum of $100 and $300 respectively, and in default of payment of such fines, imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that if the District Magistrate Judge determines
that the defendant is without the financial means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a
single remittance, such defendant shall be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and
over such periods of time as the District Magistrate Judge deems to be just.
Every owner, person, occupant or tenant who causes to shovel, dump, throw, plow or push any
snow or ice removed from any driveway, sidewalk or parking lot across or into any street or
immediately next to a fire hydrant or storm sewer as noted in § 105-24 shall be sentenced to pay
an initial fine not to exceed $50, with second and third fines a minimum of $100 and $300
respectively, and in default of payment of such fines, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30
days; provided, however, that if the District Magistrate Judge determines that the defendant is
without the financial means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such
defendant shall be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time
as the District Magistrate Judge deems to be just.
Chapter 108. Subdivision and Land Development
[The provisions of the Borough of Lititz Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 1993,
adopted 3-30-1993 by Ord. No. C-363, approved 3-30-1993, are on file in the office of the Borough
Manager. This ordinance supersedes former Chapter 108, Subdivision of Land, adopted 8-17-1961 as
part of Ord. No. C-1, approved 8-17-1961, as amended.]
Chapter 110. Taxation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.[1]]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Commission of Tax Collector — See Ch. 5, Art. X.
Editor's Note: Sections 1.13.1 and 1.13.2 of the former codification of the Borough of Lititz relating to
the annual real estate tax rate were deleted from the Code during codification. A copy of this ordinance,
as amended, is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary, where it is available for public inspection.
Article I. Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 12-26-1972 by Ord. No. C-135, approved 12-26-1972]
§ 110-1. Tax levied.
A per capita tax of $10 for general Borough purposes is hereby levied and assessed under authority of
the Enabling Act[1] and its amendments upon each resident or inhabitant of the Borough of Lititz over
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 196/233
[1]
[1]
(1)
A.
the age of 18 years, which tax shall be in addition to all other taxes levied and assessed by said
Borough pursuant to any other laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Such tax shall continue in
force on a calendar-year basis without annual reenactment, unless this article shall be repealed or the
rate of the tax changed.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 110-2. Collection.
Such tax shall be collected by the duly elected or appointed Tax Collector of the Borough of Lititz in the
same manner and at the same time as other Borough taxes are collected, as provided by the Enabling
Act.
§ 110-3. Bond.
The Tax Collector shall give bond secured and conditioned for the collection and payment of such
taxes as provided by law for other Borough taxes.
§ 110-4. Authority for collection.
The entry to the per capita tax duplicate and the issuance of such duplicate to the Tax Collector shall
constitute his warrant for the collection of the per capita tax hereby levied and assessed.
§ 110-5. Compensation of Tax Collector.
The expense of collection and compensation of the Tax Collector shall be allowed in the discretion of
the Borough Council, as provided in the Enabling Act, which compensation shall be fixed from time to
time by the Borough Council in the same manner as the collection of other borough taxes.
Editor's Note: As to the commission of the Tax Collector, see Ch. 5, Administration of Government, Art.
X.
§ 110-6. Tax notice.
The Tax Collector shall give notice to the taxpayers of the amount of per capita tax due under this
Article, in the same manner and at the same time as notice of other borough taxes is given.
§ 110-7. Additions to tax duplicate.
In the event that the Tax Collector shall at any time find within the borough any resident or inhabitant
above the age of 18 years whose name does not appear upon the tax duplicate, he shall report the
name of such person forthwith to the Assessor, who shall thereupon certify same unto the Borough
Council, which shall promptly certify same to the Tax Collector reporting such name, whereupon the
Tax Collector shall add such name and the assessment of the per capita tax against such person to the
duplicate of the Borough of Lititz and shall proceed to collect same.
§ 110-8. Duties and powers of Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector shall:
Give notice to taxpayers.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 197/233
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
[1]
[1]
Have the power to collect said taxes by distress.
Have the power and authority to demand and receive said tax from the employer of any
person owing any per capita tax or whose wife owes any per capita tax.
Remit such taxes to the Borough Treasurer by separate statement at the same time as other
taxes are remitted to the borough.
Allow discounts and add penalties.
Generally be subject to all the duties and shall have the rights and authority conferred upon
him by the Enabling Act.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council in enacting this Article to confer upon
the Tax Collector, in the collection of this per capita tax, all the powers, together with all the duties
and obligations, to the same extent and as fully provided in the Enabling Act.
Article II. Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. C-502,[1] approved 11-24-2009]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. II, Occupational Privilege Tax, adopted 12-
30-1975 by Ord. No. C-173, approved 12-30-1975, and Ord. No. C-501, Local Services Tax, adopted
11-24-2009 by Ord. No. C-501, approved 11-24-2009.
§ 110-9. Short title and authority.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Lititz Local Services Tax Ordinance."
This article is enacted under the authority of The Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.,[1] and
continues and redesignates the occupational privilege tax pursuant to Act No. 7 of 2007.
Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 110-10. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section, except where the context or language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BOROUGH OF LITITZ or BOROUGH
The area within the corporate limits of the Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
COLLECTOR
The person or agency appointed from time to time by the Council of the Borough of Lititz to assess
and collect the tax imposed under, and to administer the provisions of, this article.
COUNCIL OF THE BOROUGH OF LITITZ
The governing body of the Borough of Lititz.
EMPLOYER
An individual, partnership, association, corporation, governmental body, agency or other entity
employing one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis,
including a self- employed person.
FISCAL YEAR
The twelve-month period beginning January 1, 2010, and ending December 31, 2010, and
thereafter each 12 months.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 198/233
[1]
HE, HIS OR HIM
Indicates the singular and plural number as well as male, female and neuter gender.
INCOME FROM ALL SOURCES
Earned income and net profits or as otherwise defined by the Act.
INDIVIDUAL
Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation, trade or profession within the corporate
limits of the Borough of Lititz.
MANAGER
The Manager of the Borough of Lititz under whose direction this tax shall be administered and
enforced.
OCCUPATION
Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type, kind or character, including services,
domestic or other, carried on or performed within the corporate limits of the Borough for which
compensation is charged or received whether by means of salary, wages, commissions or fees for
services rendered.
SCHOOL DISTRICT
The Warwick School District.
TAX
The local services tax in the amount of $52 per annum levied by this article which was previously
referred to in this article as an occupational privilege tax.
§ 110-11. Imposition of tax.
Beginning January 1, 2010, the Borough of Lititz hereby levies and imposes on each occupation
engaged in by individuals within its corporate limits during the fiscal year of 2010 and each fiscal year
thereafter a local services tax in the amount of $52 per annum, said tax to be paid by the individuals so
engaged; provided, however, that all persons deriving less than $12,000 per year from such
occupation, and all other persons whom the Local Tax Enabling Act[1] exempts or shall in the future
exempt from paying a local services tax shall be exempt from paying the Borough of Lititz local
services tax. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the
Borough, and this tax shall continue in force on a calendar-year basis, without annual reenactment,
unless the rate of the tax is subsequently changed or this article is repealed. An individual may obtain
a prospective exemption by filing an exemption certificate on a form provided by the collector with the
collector and the individual's employer.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 110-12. Collection by employer; return and payment.
Each employer who engages in business within the Borough is hereby charged with the duty of
collecting from each of his employees engaged by him and performing for him within the Borough the
said tax of $52 per annum and making a return and payment thereof to the collector. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, no employer shall have an obligation to collect the local services tax from an employee
who presents such employer with an exemption certificate meeting all requirements of the Local Tax
Enabling Act[1] unless such person who has presented the exemption certificate earns in excess of
$12,000 in a calendar year. If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year from the
local services tax becomes subject to the local services tax for such calendar year, the employer shall
withhold the tax in accordance with the requirements of the Local Tax Enabling Act. If a person who is
subject to the local services tax ceases employment, such person shall make payment to the Borough
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 199/233
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
A.
[1]
B.
[1]
A.
of the portion of the local services tax which the employer did not withhold within 30 days after such
person ceases to be employed by such employer.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 110-13. Withholding by employer.
Each employer is hereby authorized to deduct the local services tax from each employee in his
employ, whether said employee is paid by salary, wages or commission. Each employer shall
deduct the tax in accordance with the requirements of the Local Tax Enabling Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
Local services taxes deducted from wages by an employer shall at all times be and remain the
property of this Borough and shall constitute a trust fund in the employer's hands until remitted to
the collector. Deduction of taxes from wages shall, as between the employee and the Borough,
constitute payment of the tax by the employee, regardless of any insolvency or failure to remit on
the employer's part.
§ 110-14. Employer's returns and payment.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the tax on forms to be
supplied by the collector. If the employer fails to file such return and pay such tax, whether or not
he makes collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him to such employee,
the employer shall be responsible for payment of the tax in full as though the tax had originally
been levied against him.
Each employer shall remit the local services tax withheld from employees within 30 days after the
end of each quarter of a calendar year. If the Local Tax Enabling Act is amended to require a
different schedule of remitting taxes withheld from employees, compliance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act[1] shall be considered compliance with this section.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 110-15. Individuals having more than one occupation.
Each individual who shall have more than one occupation shall be subject to the payment of the local
services tax in accordance with the provisions of the Local Tax Enabling Act[1] governing payment of
taxes by a person who has more than one employer.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 110-16. Self-employed individuals.
All self-employed individuals who perform services of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or
profession within the Borough shall be required to comply with this article on April 30 of the fiscal year
or as soon thereafter as he engages in an occupation and earns $12,000.
§ 110-17. Collection and administration of tax by Borough.
It shall be the duty of the collector to accept and receive payments of this tax and to keep a record
thereof showing the amount received by him from each employer or self-employed person
together with the date the tax was received.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 200/233
[1]
B.
C.
A.
B.
[1]
The Manager is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of this article and is
hereby charged empowered to prescribe, adopt, and promulgate rules and regulations relating to
any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions for
the processing of refund claims for the tax paid by any person who is eligible for an exemption, the
examination of the payroll records of any employer subject to this article, and the examination and
correction of any return made pursuant to this article and any payment alleged or found to be
incorrect, or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person aggrieved
by any decision of the Manager shall have the right to appeal to the Council of the Borough of
Lititz pursuant to the Local Agency Law.[1]
Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551.
The Manager or his duly authorized representative or agent is hereby authorized to examine the
books and payroll records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made by
an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each employer is hereby directed
and required to give the Manager or his duly authorized representative or agent the means,
facilities, and opportunity for such examination.
§ 110-18. Suits for collection.
In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30 days after the date above set
forth, the Borough may sue for the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article
together with the interest and penalty by any method permitted by the Act or by any other
appropriate remedy.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per annum on the amount
of said tax shall be calculated beginning with the due date of said tax, and an additional penalty of
0.5% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during which the tax
remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of this tax, the
individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of collection,
including attorneys' fees.
§ 110-18.1. Use of revenue.
The Borough shall use all revenue generated by the local services tax for purposes authorized in the
Local Tax Enabling Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 110-18.2. Prohibited acts; violations and penalties.
Any person who makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by this article, or who
refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts in his custody and control setting forth the number
of employees subject to this tax who are in his employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file any
return required by this article or whoever fails to pay local services taxes payable to such person
commits a violation of this article. If the Council of the Borough of Lititz or the collector determines that
a person has committed or permitted the commission of a violation of this article, the Borough may
institute summary criminal proceedings and/or may seek equitable relief. In the event summary
criminal proceedings are instituted, the fine for the first offense shall be not less than $100 and not
more than $600. The fine for a second offense shall not be less than $300 and not more than $600.
The fine for a third or greater offense shall not be less than $500 and not more than $600. Each day or
portion thereof in which a violation exists shall be considered a separate violation of this article. Each
section of this article which is violated shall also be considered a separate violation. The amount of any
fine imposed by a magisterial district judge or a court shall be in addition to any other fine which may
be imposed under any other provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the Borough or under any statute.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 201/233
A.
B.
[1]
C.
[1]
In default of payment of any fine, such person shall be liable to imprisonment for not more than 30
days. The action to enforce the article may be instituted against any person in charge of the business
of any employer who shall have failed or refused to file a return required by this article.
§ 110-18.3. Applicability; validity.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the Borough to levy and collect the
tax hereby imposed on any occupation not within the taxing power of the Borough under the
Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be held to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as to any
individual, such decision shall not affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax, or the
validity of the tax so imposed, on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed on an occupation by the
Borough and the Warwick School District (if said School District shall impose any such tax) shall
not exceed the limitations prescribed in Sections 2 and 8 of The Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S.
§§ 6902 and 6908,[1] and therefore the School District shall be entitled to its share of the tax (if
any) in accordance with the provisions of said Sections 2 and 8, Act 222 of 2004, and Act 7 of
2007.
Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
Article III. Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 11-27-2007 by Ord. No. C-486,[1] approved 11-27-2007]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. III, Real Estate Transfer Tax, adopted 12-30-
1986 by Ord. No. C-306, approved 12-30-1986.
§ 110-19. Imposition of tax.
The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, hereby adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of
the Tax Reform Code of 1971 and imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized under that Article subject
to the rate limitations therein. The tax imposed under this Section shall be at a rate of 1/2 of 1%.
§ 110-20. Administration.
The tax imposed under § 110-19 and all applicable interest and penalties shall be administered,
collected and enforced under the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), as amended, known
as the "Local Tax Enabling Act"; provided, that if the correct amount of the tax is not paid by the last
date described for timely payment, the Borough of Lititz, pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform
Code of 1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax, interest and penalties.
§ 110-21. Interest.
Any tax imposed under § 110-19 that is not paid by the date the tax is due shall bear interest as
prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No.
153) (53 P.S. § 7101, et seq.), as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent commonwealth taxes as
provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended,
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 202/233
[1]
known as the "Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and
Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
§ 110-22. Effective date.
The provisions of this ordinance shall become effective on and be applicable to any document made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording on or after November 27, 2007.
§ 110-23. through § 110-24. (Reserved)
Article IV. Discounts and Penalties
[Adopted 12-28-1976 by Ord. No. C-195, approved 12-28-1976]
§ 110-25. Discount for prompt payment.
[Amended 2-22-1977 by Ord. No. C-200, approved 2-22-1977]
All taxpayers subject to the payment of any real estate taxes levied and assessed by the Borough of
Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, and any per capita taxes levied and assessed under authority
of the Act of January 1, 1966, (1965) P.L. 1257, No. 511, as amended, commonly known as the "Local
Tax Enabling Act,"[1] shall be entitled to a discount of 2% from the amount of such tax upon making a
payment of the whole amount thereof within two months after the date of the tax notice.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 110-26. Penalty for late payment.
All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of any such taxes charged against them for four months
after the date of the tax notice shall be charged a penalty of 10%, which penalty shall be added to the
taxes by the Tax Collector and be collected by said Tax Collector.
Article V. Occupation Tax
[Adopted 12-26-1979 by Ord. No. C-246, approved 12-26-1979]
§ 110-27. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
OCCUPATION
Any trade, business, employment or undertaking of any type, kind or character, including services,
domestic or other, carried on or performed by residents or inhabitants of the Borough of Lititz for
which compensation is charged or received by means of wages, salary, commissions or fees for
services rendered.
RESIDENT or INHABITANT
A person 18 years of age or over who is a resident in or an inhabitant of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 110-28. Tax levied.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 203/233
[1]
[1]
A.
A tax for general borough purposes is hereby levied at the flat rate of $10 on the occupations of all
persons who are residents or inhabitants of the Borough of Lititz.[1]
Editor's Note: Legislation adopted 1-20-1980, approved, provided as follows: "Any person liable for
payment of said occupation tax with an earned income of less than $2,000 per year will be exonerated
from payment of the occupation tax for the fiscal year upon proper application to the Council of the
Borough of Lititz."
§ 110-29. Collection of tax; statutory authority.
Such tax shall be collected by the duly elected or appointed Tax Collector of the Borough of Lititz in the
same manner and at the same time as other borough taxes are collected, as provided by the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 110-30. Bond.
The Tax Collector shall give bond secured and conditioned for the collection and payment of such
taxes as provided by law for other borough taxes.
§ 110-31. Authority for collection.
The entry to the occupation tax duplicate and the issuance of such duplicate to the Tax Collector shall
constitute his warrant for the collection of the occupation tax hereby levied and assessed.
§ 110-32. Compensation of Tax Collector.
The expense of collection and compensation of the Tax Collector shall be allowed in the discretion of
the Borough Council, as provided in the Local Tax Enabling Act,[1] which compensation shall be fixed
from time to time by the Borough Council in the same manner as the collection of other borough taxes.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 110-33. Notice.
The Tax Collector shall give notice to the taxpayers of the amount of occupation tax due under this
Article in the same manner and at the same time as notice of other borough taxes is given.
§ 110-34. Additions to tax duplicate.
In the event that the Tax Collector shall at any time find within the borough any resident or inhabitant
above the age of 18 years who would be subject to the provisions of this article whose name does not
appear upon the tax duplicate, he shall report the name of such person forthwith to the Assessor, who
shall thereupon certify the same unto the Borough Council, which shall promptly certify the same to the
Tax Collector reporting such name, whereupon the Tax Collector shall add such name and the
assessment of the occupation tax against such person to the duplicate of the Borough of Lititz and
shall proceed to collect the same.
§ 110-35. Duties and powers of Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector shall:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 204/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
[1]
Give notice to taxpayers.
Have the power to collect said taxes by distress.
Have the power and authority to demand and receive said tax from the employer of any
person owing any occupation tax or whose wife owes any occupation tax.
Remit such taxes to the Borough Treasurer by separate statement at the same time as other
taxes are remitted to the borough.
Allow discounts and add penalties.
Generally be subject to all the duties and shall have the rights and authority conferred upon
him by the Local Tax Enabling Act.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council in enacting this Article to confer upon
the Tax Collector, in the collection of this occupation tax, all the powers, together with all the duties
and obligations, to the same extent and as fully provided in the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 110-36. Effective date.
This article shall be effective on January 1, 1980, and shall continue in force from year to year without
reenactment until repealed or the rate of tax is changed.
Article VI. Real Estate Tax Rate
[An ordinance fixing the real estate tax rate for the Borough of Lititz is on file in the Borough
Secretary's office and open to public inspection during regular business hours.]
Article VII. Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 10-25-2011 by Ord. No. C-514, approved 10-25-2011[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. VII, Earned Income Tax,
adopted 12-30-1986 by Ord. No. C-304, approved 12-30-1986, as amended.
§ 110-37. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Lititz Borough Earned Income Tax Ordinance."
§ 110-38. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act shall have the meanings set forth therein. The following
terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR
The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the
tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE
January 1, 2012.
ENACTMENT
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 205/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
This article.
GOVERNING BODY
The Council of the Borough of Lititz.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT
The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. while such numbering and
provisions remain in effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as amended in the
future.
TAX
The tax imposed by this enactment.
TAXING AUTHORITY
Lititz Borough.
TAX RETURN
A form prescribed by the collector for reporting the amount of tax or other amount owed or
required to be withheld, remitted, or reported under this enactment or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR
The period from January 1 to December 31.
TCC
The Tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee the collection of earned income
tax within the TCD under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TCD
Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part of the taxing authority is
assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 110-39. Imposition of tax.
General purpose resident tax. The taxing authority hereby imposes a tax for general revenue
purposes at the rate of 0.5% on earned income and net profits of individual residents of the taxing
authority.
General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The taxing authority also imposes a tax for general
revenue purposes at the rate of 1.0% on earned income and net profits derived by an individual
who is not a resident of the taxing authority from any work, business, profession, or activity of any
kind engaged in within the boundaries of the taxing authority.
Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the current tax year and each tax
year thereafter, without annual reenactment, until this enactment is repealed or the rate is
changed.
Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority of the Local Tax Enabling
Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated
into this enactment. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required to be
applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will automatically become part of this enactment
upon the effective date of such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this
enactment, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The tax shall be collected and administered
in accordance with: all applicable laws and regulations; and regulations, policies and procedures
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 206/233
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
adopted by the TCC or by the collector. This includes any regulations, policies and procedures
adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
§ 110-40. Exemption for individuals under age 16.
This governing body finds that:
Minors of various age groups have traditionally, and with judicial sanction, been considered as
comprising separate classes for many legislative purposes; and
Minors under the age of 16 are generally unemancipated and subject to compulsory school
attendance and child labor laws, and therefore have limited earned income and net profits
and control of money such that enforcement of reporting and collection of tax hereunder
against them would yield inconsequential amounts and be unduly difficult, expensive, and not
in the public interest.
For these reasons, individuals under the age of 16 years are exempt from liability for the tax.
§ 110-41. Exemption for residents of other states if similar
exemption in other state.
Individuals who are residents of a state other than Pennsylvania are exempt from liability for the
tax, but only if all local governments of the locality where the individual resides either:
Impose no tax on the income of a Pennsylvania resident derived from activities within the
locality; or
Exempt that income from tax.
In addition to this exemption from municipal nonresident tax, certain credits and deductions
against tax are permitted under certain circumstances as provided in applicable law and
regulations.
§ 110-42. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax year shall file tax returns and
pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 110-43. Employer withholding, remittance, and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold and remit tax, and file tax returns in accordance with the Local
Tax Enabling Act.
§ 110-44. Tax collector.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the collector. The Borough designates the
Lancaster County Tax Collection Bureau as its collector.
§ 110-45. Interest, penalties, costs, and fines.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 207/233
[1]
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines in accordance with the
Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by the collector in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
Article VIII. Volunteer Service Credit Program
[Adopted 1-29-2019 by Ord. No. C-569, approved 1-29-2019]
§ 110-46. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings given to them in
this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATION
The form completed by a volunteer and submitted to the Fire Chief or the President of the
Ambulance Agency for signature certifying eligibility according to the Volunteer Service Credit
Program criteria.
CERTIFIED VOLUNTEER
A volunteer with the volunteer fire company or volunteer ambulance agency listed under § 110-
47C who has complied with and is certified under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EARNED INCOME TAX
A tax on earned income and net profits levied under Chapter 3 of the act of December 31, 1965
(P.L.1257, No. 511), known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act."[1]
ELIGIBILITY LIST
The document provided by the Fire Chief or Ambulance President that contains the names of
those volunteers who he/she certifies as eligible according to the Volunteer Service Credit
Program Criteria.
ELIGIBILITY PERIOD
The timeframe when volunteers may earn credit under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE CALL
Any emergency call to which a volunteer responds, including travel directly from and to a
volunteer's home, place of business or other place where he/she shall have been when the call
was received.
MUNICIPAL REAL ESTATE PROPERTY TAX
An annual local governmental tax on real property or personal property based on a tax rate (so
many dollars or cents per $100 value of property.)
REQUEST FOR CREDIT
The form completed by a certified volunteer and submitted to the Municipal Treasurer, requesting
earned income tax and/or real property tax credit.
VOLUNTEER
A member of a volunteer fire company or ambulance agency.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 110-47. Volunteer Service Credit Program.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 208/233
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
Establishment. Lititz Borough hereby establishes a Volunteer Service Credit Program. The goal of
the program is to encourage membership and service in the community's volunteer fire companies
and/or ambulance agencies.
Program criteria. The Council shall establish, by resolution, the annual criteria that must be met to
qualify for credits under the program based on the following:
The number of emergency response calls to which a volunteer responds to or duty crews
he/she has been committed to.
The total amount of time served by a volunteer on administrative and other support services,
including but not limited to:
Fundraising.
Providing facility or equipment maintenance.
Financial bookkeeping or fundraising.
Fire prevention and public education.
Other events or projects that aid the financial viability, emergency response or
operational readiness of a volunteer fire company.
Eligible entities. The Volunteer Service Credit Program is available to residents of Lititz Borough
who are Volunteers of the following volunteer fire companies and ambulance agencies that
provide service to Lititz Borough:
Lititz Fire Company No. 1.
Brunnerville Fire Company.
Rothsville Volunteer Fire Company.
Brickerville Fire Company.
Warwick Community Ambulance Association.
Rothsville Volunteer Fire Company Ambulance.
Eligibility period. A volunteer must meet the minimum criteria, set by resolution under this section,
during the eligibility period to qualify for the tax credits established under § 110-48. For 2018, and
each subsequent year thereafter, the eligibility period shall run from January 1 through December
31.
Injured volunteers.
A volunteer who is injured during an emergency response call may be eligible for future tax
credits. The injury must have occurred while responding to, participating in, or returning from
an emergency response call with one of the entities listed under § 110-47C.
An injured volunteer shall provide documentation from a licensed physician with the
application required under § 110-47G stating that their injury prevents them from performing
duties to qualify as a certified volunteer. In such a case, the injured volunteer shall be deemed
a certified volunteer for that tax year.
An injured volunteer shall annually submit the application required under § 110-47G, along
with updated documentation from a licensed physician stating that the injury still exists and
prevents them from qualifying as a certified volunteer. The injured volunteer shall again be
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 209/233
F.
G.
H.
(a)
(b)
(1)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
deemed a certified volunteer for that tax year. An injured volunteer shall only be deemed a
certified volunteer for a maximum of five consecutive tax years.
Recordkeeping/eligibility list. The Fire Chief of each volunteer fire company and President of each
ambulance agency listed under § 110-47C shall keep specific records of each volunteer's activities
in a service log to establish credits under the Volunteer Service Credit Program. Service logs shall
be subject to review by the Borough Council, the State Fire Commissioner and the State Auditor
General. The Fire Chief and President shall annually transmit to the Borough an eligibility list of all
volunteers that have met the minimum criteria for the Volunteer Service Credit Program. The
eligibility list shall be transmitted to the Borough no later than January 30 of each year. The Fire
Chief and ambulance association President of each participating volunteer agency shall post the
eligibility list in an accessible area of the volunteer agency's facilities.
Application. Volunteers that have met the minimum criteria of the Volunteer Service Credit
Program shall sign and submit an application for certification to their Fire Chief or President. The
Fire Chief shall sign the application if the volunteer has met the minimum criteria of the Volunteer
Service Credit Program. Certified volunteers wishing to receive an earned income tax credit for the
previous year shall complete and submit a request for tax credit, including all required
documentation, to the Borough Treasurer between January 1 and April 30. Requests shall not be
accepted by the Borough after April 30 of each year.
Municipal review. The Borough Treasurer shall review the requests for credit under the Volunteer
Service Credit Program and shall cross reference them with the eligibility list. The Borough
Council shall acknowledge receipt of the eligibility list as submitted by the fire company or
ambulance agency.
§ 110-48. Earned income tax credit.
Each certified volunteer shall be eligible to receive a tax credit of his/her paid earned income tax levied
by the Borough. The tax credit, payable to the volunteer, has been established to be $100. The tax
credit applies only the portion of the earned income tax ultimately payable to Lititz Borough.
Claim.
A certified volunteer may submit a request for credit of his/her Borough earned income tax
liability. The tax credit shall be administered as a refund by the Borough Treasurer, to be
distributed by June 14. A certified volunteer shall file the following with the Borough
Treasurer:
Completed and signed request for credit; and
Copies of all W-2 forms (or quarterly vouchers with cancelled checks if self-employed).
Rejection of tax credit claim.
The Borough Treasurer shall reject a claim for a tax credit if the taxpayer is not on the
eligibility list or fails to provide the documents required under § 110-48A(1).
If the Borough Treasurer rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be notified in writing of the
decision. The notice shall include the reasons for the rejection and provide the method of
appealing the decision pursuant to § 110-50.
Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the Borough Treasurer to the Borough
Manager.
§ 110-49. Municipal real estate property tax credit.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 210/233
(a)
(b)
(1)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
Each certified volunteer shall be eligible to receive a tax credit of his/her paid municipal real estate
property tax levied by the Borough. The tax credit, payable to the volunteer, has been established to be
20%. The tax credit applies only to the portion of the municipal real estate property tax ultimately
payable to Lititz Borough.
Claim.
A certified volunteer may submit a request for credit of his/her municipal real estate property
tax liability. The tax credit shall be administered as a refund by the Borough Treasurer, to be
distributed by June 14. A certified volunteer shall file the following with the Borough
Treasurer:
Completed and signed request for credit; and
Copies of proof of municipal real estate property tax paid.
Rejection of tax credit claim.
The Borough Treasurer shall reject a claim for a tax credit if the taxpayer is not on the
eligibility list or fails to provide the documents required under § 110-49A(1).
If the Borough Treasurer rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be notified in writing of the
decision. The notice shall include the reasons for the rejection and provide the method of
appealing the decision pursuant to § 110-50.
Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the Borough Treasurer to the Borough
Council President.
§ 110-50. Appeals.
Earned Income Tax and Municipal Real Estate Property Tax Credit Appeals:
Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under § 110-48 or 110-49 shall have a right to appeal said
decision to the Borough Council President.
A taxpayer shall have 30 days from the date set forth on the notice of decision to appeal a
decision or rejection of claim.
All appeals of decisions under § 110-48 or 110-49 shall follow the provisions of the Act of May 5,
1998, P.L.301, No. 50, known as the "Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights."[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 110-51. Violations and penalties.
In accordance with Section 79A31 of the authorizing Act for this volunteer service program, any person
who knowingly makes/provides or conspires to make/provide a false service record report under the
Act commits a misdemeanor of the first degree punishable by a fine of $2,500.
§ 110-52. Severability.
In the event that any provision, section, sentence, clause, or part of this article is held to be invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or part of
the article, it being the intent of the Lititz Borough Council that such remainder shall be and shall
remain in full force and effect and for this purpose the provisions of this article are hereby declared to
be severable.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 211/233
[1]
§ 110-53. When effective.
This article shall be effective five days after adoption.
Chapter 113. Utilities
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz: Art. I, 10-31-1989 by Ord. No. 327,
approved 10-31-1989. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 36.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 50.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 108.
Zoning — See Ch. 122.
Utility franchises — See Ch. A125.
Article I. Underground Utility Districts
[Adopted 10-31-1989 by Ord. No. 327, approved 10-31-1989]
§ 113-1. Definitions.
Whenever in this Article the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall
have the following definitions:
POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES AND ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES
Poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces,
transformers, insulators, cut-outs, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and
appurtenances located above ground in a district and used or useful in supplying electric,
communication or similar or associated services.
RECONSTRUCTION
Removal and replacement of the cartway, curbs or sidewalks in or along the public right-of-way
involving a distance of at least 300 linear feet.
SUBDIVISION
A plan presented and approved pursuant to the borough's Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.[1]
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT or DISTRICT
That area in the borough within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
are prohibited pursuant to the provisions of this Article.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 108, Subdivision of Land.
§ 113-2. Legislative findings.
The Borough of Lititz is empowered by the terms of the Borough Code codified at 53 P.S. § 47301 to
establish reasonable districts within which the underground placement of poles, overhead wires and
associated overhead structures is required. In an effort to promote the health, welfare and safety of the
residents of the Borough of Lititz, the Borough Council has determined to create certain underground
utility districts. In order to allow affected utility companies and others the time necessary to plan the
relocation of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures to conduits in the districts, the
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 212/233
A.
B.
Borough Council has also determined to require relocation only in conjunction with reconstruction and
subdivisions.
§ 113-3. Establishment of districts.
The borough's Historic District, as previously defined, and all subdivisions approved after the effective
date of this Article are hereby established as underground utility districts. Any future amendments or
alterations to the Historic District shall also be amendments or alterations to the underground utility
district. In the case of a new subdivision, the area depicted in the subdivision plot plan shall become an
underground utility district upon the filing with the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds of the
approved subdivision plot plan.
§ 113-4. Notice to utility companies.
The borough shall give owners of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures as much
notice as possible of anticipated reconstruction projects. In all cases, the borough shall attempt to give
such notice at least 100 days prior to the initiation of reconstruction projects. The borough shall give
notice by delivering a description of the project to the owners at their principal places of business.
§ 113-5. Unlawful acts.
In the case of the underground utility district that is coterminous with the borough's Historic
District, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, maintain, continue, employ
or operate poles, overhead wires and associated structures along any street in the district after
completion of a reconstruction of that street.
In the case of underground utility districts coterminous with new subdivisions, it shall be unlawful
for any person or utility to erect, construct, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead
wires and associated structures in the district.
§ 113-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Article shall be fined not less than $100
nor more than three $300 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 113-7. When effective.
This Article shall take effect 30 days after it is approved.
Chapter 115. Vehicles and Traffic
[All vehicle and traffic legislation of the Borough of Lititz is on file in the Borough offices and may be
examined there during regular business hours.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 34.
Skateboards and scooters — See Ch. 101.
Speed-timing devices — See Ch. 102.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 213/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
Chapter 117. Warrantless Arrests
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz: Art. I, 6-25-1996 by Res. No. 545,
approved 6-25-1996. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Intermunicipal police assistance — See Ch. 12.
Curfew — See Ch. 41.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 84.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
§ 117-1. Guidelines to be followed prior to arrest.
Prior to making an arrest under 42 PA. C.S.A. § 8902 any police officer shall ensure that:
He/she has probable cause to believe that at least one of the following summary offenses is being
committed:
18 P.S. § 5502 (disorderly conduct).
18 P.S. § 5505 (public drunkenness).
18 P.S. § 5507 (obstructing highways and other public passages).
18 P.S. § 6308 (purchase, consumption, possession transportation of liquor or malt or brewed
beverages).
The suspect's conduct is ongoing;
The conduct constituting the offense is in the officer's view; and
The conduct imperils the personal security of any person or endangers public or private property.
§ 117-2. Procedure following arrest.
Following an arrest pursuant to 42 Pa. C.S.A. § 8902, the officer shall forthwith satisfy the procedures
set forth in Pennsylvania Rule of Criminal Procedure, Rule 71 (procedure following arrest without
warrant).
Chapter 118. Water
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961.[1] Sections
118-6, 118-20C(2), 118-22A, 118-26, 118-30B, 118-32, 118-34B, 118-35, 118-36, 118-37, 118-38 and
118-39 amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Other amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 55.
Plumbing — See Ch. 89.
Sewers — See Ch. 100.
Editor's Note: This chapter was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
Article I. General Provisions and Regulations
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 214/233
A.
§ 118-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them by this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CONNECTION FEE
A single charge levied against a property owner for each physical or actual connection of a
service pipe to the borough's water system, which fee is related to the actual costs of
physically connecting the service pipe to the water system and the borough's fees and costs
incurred in inspection of such connection.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 346, approved 6-25-1991]
CUSTOMER
Any person, as hereinafter defined, owning any premises receiving water from the Lititz
waterworks.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT or EDU
The EDU shall be equal to a consumption rate of 400 gallons of water per day, per unit.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 346, approved 6-25-1991]
INDIVIDUAL DWELLING UNIT
A single-family residence, apartment unit or mobile home occupied by one or more persons.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 346, approved 6-25-1991]
PERSON
Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or corporation.
SERVICE CONNECTION
Connecting facilities between the borough's water main and the customer's service pipe, in
general consisting of valve or corporation stop at the water main and all piping therefrom
terminating with the curb stop and curb box located at the curb if such exists or, in a case
where no curb exists, to the edge of the paved or traveled portion of the street, road or
highway or, in the case of rights-of-way over private property, to the edge of the right-of-way
line.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 346, approved 6-25-1991]
SERVICE PIPE
That pipe leading from the curb stop or meter setting to the premises of a customer.
STREET
Any street, alley or lane.
SUPERINTENDENT
The Superintendent of the Water-works.
TAPPING FEE
A charge levied against the property owner of each property connecting to the borough's
water system, computed on an equivalent dwelling unit basis as authorized by Act 203 of
1990[1]
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 346, approved 6-25-1991]
WATERWORKS
Includes the plant, fixtures, mains, reservoirs, rights-of-way and all other properties and
facilities now or hereafter operated and maintained by the Borough of Lititz in order to collect,
treat and distribute water for municipal purposes and for the use of the inhabitants thereof,
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 215/233
[1]
B.
A.
B.
and shall also include those officers and employees of the borough collectively engaged in
the management, operation and maintenance thereof.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 306.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the feminine
and the neuter.
§ 118-2. Operation and maintenance of waterworks.
The waterworks of the Borough of Lititz, as it is now constituted or shall hereafter, as the Borough
Council may from time to time direct, be extended through other portions of the borough, shall be
operated and maintained under the provisions of this chapter, subject to the authority of the borough at
any time to amend, alter, change or repeal same.
§ 118-3. Charge and management of waterworks.
The Borough Council shall have charge and management of the waterworks, subject to such
delegation of authority to the Superintendent as is provided herein.
§ 118-4. Protective regulations.
For the protection of the waterworks, the following regulations shall be in force:
No person shall damage, injure, molest, disturb or interfere with any pipe, hydrant, stop cock,
reservoir, machinery, tool or any other property belonging to or appertaining to the waterworks.
Where any such damage, injury, molestation, disturbance or interference takes place, the Water
Superintendent shall be notified immediately by anyone observing such.
No person shall, except with authority from the Superintendent or any person subordinate to him
in the waterworks, open, close, interfere with or attach to or connect with any fire hydrant, stop
valve or stop cock belonging to the borough; provided, however, that in case of fire, the opening
and use of the fire hydrants needed in the fighting thereof shall be under the direction of the Fire
Chief of the borough.
§ 118-5. Extension of distributing pipe.
Extension of the distributing pipe shall be made only after petition of the owners of real estate or their
authorized agents along the proposed line and upon their entering into an agreement which shall
satisfy the Council that an annual revenue will accrue to the borough as a result of such extension
equal to 7% of the cost of laying the pipe, dating from the time when water is turned into same for
public use, provided that the above rule shall not apply in cases where it may become necessary to
supply short gaps in the distributing pipe in order to perfect the circulation or to increase the size of
pipe already laid, which shall be done as the Borough Council shall direct, provided further that, in any
instance, the Borough Council may, in its discretion, extend any distributing main without petition or
refuse any petition.
Article II. Connection to System
§ 118-6. Application for service.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 216/233
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
[1]
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
[Amended 6-29-1971 by Ord. No. C-122, approved 6-29-1971; 5-25-1976 by Ord. No. C-187,
approved 5-25-1976; 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978; 6-25-1991 by Ord. No.
346, approved 6-25-1991]
Application. Connections to the borough's water system shall not be made to any premises until
application shall have been made to the Borough Manager by the owner of such premises or by
his authorized agent. Such application shall be made upon a form to be prescribed by the
borough, and, upon such application, the applicant shall state fully all purposes for which he shall
desire such water and shall answer fairly and without concealment all necessary questions.
Connection fee.
There is hereby imposed and fixed upon the owner of each property making a connection to
the water system a connection fee in an amount equal to the actual costs incurred by the
borough in respect of each connection to the water system. Such costs shall include the
borough's actual costs involved in opening and closing the street, making the tap, laying the
service connection, setting the curb stop, setting the meter and costs of all equipment and
materials used in making the service connection.
The borough's costs shall include actual labor costs at the borough's then-current rates, the
costs of all materials used to construct the service connection and the reasonable rental value
of all equipment used by the borough or its agents in making such connections. The borough
shall publish, on at least an annual basis, a schedule of its then current rates for labor and
equipment. The schedule of rates will be available for inspection by the public during the
borough's regular business hours.
Customer facility fee. There is hereby imposed and fixed upon the owner of each property making
a connection to the borough's water system a customer facility fee in an amount equal to the
borough's actual costs incurred by the borough in supplying and installing a water meter to
measure the customer's water usage. Such fee shall also include the costs of backflow
preventors, pressure-reducing valves and related equipment and installation costs thereof, when
such equipment is necessary to serve the customer's property.
Tapping fee.[1]
There is hereby fixed and imposed upon the owner of each property making a connection to
the borough's water system a tapping fee per EDU as set forth below:
Component Fee
Capacity $540.00
Distribution $840.00
$1,380.00 (total)
In addition to the capacity and distribution components of tapping fees, there is hereby
imposed on each property making a connection to the water system in the Kissel Hill area a
special facilities tapping fee of $240. The Kissel Hill area shall be that area determined by the
borough's consulting engineers and indicated on the borough's water system map.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Fees, § 55-1.9A, for amendments to tapping fees.
Date of payment.
Tapping fees imposed hereunder shall be paid to the borough at the time a property owner
makes an application for a permit to connect to the borough's water system.
At the time a property owner makes an application for a permit to connect to the water
system, the borough shall estimate the connection fee and customer facilities fee to be
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 217/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
payable with respect to such connection. The estimated connection fee and customer facility
fee shall be payable at the time application is made for a connection permit. The estimated
amount held by the borough shall be applied to the borough's actual cost for making such
connection and providing and installing a water meter for such connection. After the
connection is completed, if the combined amount of the estimated connection fee and
customer facility fee was in excess of the actual cost of such connection and water meter
installation, the borough shall refund the excess to the property owner within 30 days
following the completion of the connection. If the combined estimated connection fee and
customer facility fee is less than the borough's actual cost for making such connection, the
borough shall bill the property owner for the additional costs, which bill shall be payable within
30 days of the date of said bill.
§ 118-7. Service connections.
[Amended 3-21-1981 by No. C-262, approved 3-21-1981]
No person except an authorized employee of Lititz Borough shall tap any main or distributing pipe.
Service connections shall be installed by the borough from street main to the service line run out
from the premises to the curbline.
All single-dwelling units, each semidetached dwelling unit and each townhouse dwelling unit shall
have a separate individual service lateral from street main to dwelling unit.
Multi-unit apartment dwellings and commercial/industrial premises may be served by laterals of
the proper size as approved by the borough and metered through a common meter or multi-unit
meters as desired by the owner and approved by the borough. (All meters are to be individual
master meters.)
New services. The owner of the premises shall be liable for all connection fees, tapping fees and
customer facility fees payable in connection with providing service to said property. The borough
shall own and be responsible for the service connection from the main to and including the curb
stop or meter setting.
[Amended 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 346, approved 6-25-1991]
Replacement service connections. In the event that an existing service lateral not in compliance
with this section must be replaced between main and curb stop or meter setting, service laterals
must be installed to individual units. The owner(s) shall be liable for all costs on a pro rata basis
for opening and closing the street, making the additional tap, laying the additional service line,
setting the additional curb stop and meter, and costs of all materials used for additional service
lines. There will be no charge for a street opening permit, application or tapping fees. The
owner(s) shall run out additional services from the premises to the curb stop or meter setting. The
borough will advise the owners, if possible, in advance of repair work which may require additional
service lines to be laid. In no event shall owners be liable for more than 50% of the costs for
opening and closing the street in the event a common trench can be utilized for replaced and new
service lines. The borough shall own and be responsible for service lines from the main to and
including the curb stop or meter setting.
Subdivision. In the event that premises having an existing service lateral not in compliance with
this section is to be subdivided, the owners shall bring each proposed individual unit(s) into
compliance. The owner will be liable for all costs for new services in accordance with Subsection
D.
§ 118-8. Curb stops to be provided.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 218/233
Every street connection, at the time of making thereof, shall be provided with a separate stop cock and
box, at the curb of the sidewalk when practicable, for each property to be supplied. The stop and box
at the curb shall be the property of the borough, placed there for its sole use.
§ 118-9. Drain valves required in premises.
Every service pipe shall have a drain valve inside the premises of the customer, so placed and kept as
always to be ready for use. Such drain valve shall control the entire supply of water for the premises
and shall drain all the pipes and fixtures thereon. It shall be secure from frost and shall be provided
with a handle approved by the Superintendent. Such handle shall be kept in a convenient place ready
for immediate use.
§ 118-10. Drain valves in multiple dwellings to be independent.
Premises intended to be occupied by more than one establishment, firm or family shall be provided
with an independent drain valve conveniently located within each separate establishment or apartment
into which water is to be introduced, so that any portion of such premises which may be separately
occupied can be drained without interfering with the supply of water from other occupants.
§ 118-11. Property owner responsible from curb to premises.
The service pipe from the curb stop or meter setting to the premises shall be the property of the owner
of the premises to which it is connected, and all repairs to same shall be made at the expense of such
property owner, who shall keep his pipes and fixtures in good repair, in such condition as to avoid
unnecessary waste and protected against frost, at his own expense. The property owner shall be held
responsible for any waste or damage that may result from any defective service pipe or other pipe
located within the premises or any fixture.
§ 118-12. Borough employees not to do work on private
premises; exception.
The borough shall furnish no material or labor for use upon private premises, except when a person
shall contract with the borough to lay mains up to a building.
§ 118-13. Laying depth of service pipes.
All service pipes shall be laid at least three feet below the surface of the ground.
§ 118-14. Permission required for private extensions.
No person shall extend or cause to be extended any service pipe from one property to another without
special permission having been granted therefor by the Borough Council and without a stop being
placed in such a position that the supply of water for either property can be shut off without closing off
the supply of water for the other property.
§ 118-15. Plumbers to notify of violation; inspection.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 219/233
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
Whenever borough water is introduced into any premises or changes are made in any water pipes or
fixtures that might affect the supply or the security against frost, the plumber doing such work shall
notify the Superintendent of the location and nature of such work, and the Superintendent shall
thereupon cause such work to be promptly and carefully inspected. No water shall be turned on
permanently in any location until the Superintendent shall be satisfied that every applicable provision of
this chapter has been complied with. Prior to such approval of the Superintendent, water shall be
turned on by the plumber only as may be necessary in order to test his work.
§ 118-16. Drainage in pipes.
All pipes shall be free from jogs and snags that might obstruct the drainage, shall be securely fastened
to their places and shall be so pitched that when the stop is turned off, all water shall flow toward the
waste.
§ 118-17. Pipes to be protected against frost.
All pipes and fixtures shall be placed in such a manner as will secure them against frost. Whenever it
may become necessary to carry any pipe along any outer wall, beneath any floor, through any open
space or through any place where such pipe might be affected by drafts of air, such pipe shall be
thoroughly boxed and packed or otherwise protected against cold.
§ 118-18. Location of meters.
All plumbing for business buildings, manufacturing establishments and other premises where large
quantities of water may be used shall be done in such a manner as to enable the water consumed to
be measured by a single meter installation located as near to the main as is feasible.
§ 118-19. Extensions from existing installations.
In extending pipe from existing installations, the same rules shall apply as are applicable under this
chapter to new installations.
§ 118-20. Fire protection lines.
The following regulations shall apply to the installation and testing of pipes for fire protection purposes:
Pipes for fire protection purposes shall be fitted with only such fixtures as are needed for fire
protection, and such fixtures shall be sealed by the Superintendent.
Whenever practicable, the hose shall be kept attached to the fixtures suspended conveniently for
use in case of fire. No person shall use any fire protection fixture for other than fire protection
purposes.
Any person having connections used for fire protection may test such apparatus at any time under
the following conditions:
Written notice shall be given to the Superintendent that such test is desired, and the
Superintendent shall then assign to the applicant a day and hour when such test can begin.
All tests shall be in the presence of the Superintendent or an employee of the waterworks
assigned by the Superintendent for that purpose, and the sole duty of the Superintendent or
such employee shall be to remove and replace the seal of the Superintendent used on such
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 220/233
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
fire protection apparatus and to note the time required for his presence. The person at whose
request such test is made shall pay to the borough for that test the applicable fee provided for
in Ch. 55, Fees.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
No seal shall be removed from any fire protection apparatus except in case of fire, and in such
case the owner or occupant of the premises where such apparatus is located shall make a written
report of that fact within 24 hours of its occurrence.
Each pipe used for fire protection purposes shall have installed on it a one-inch corporation cock
with Mueller threads, which shall be accessible through an approved manhole.
Each person having a private fire service shall, upon the demand of the Superintendent, furnish
the Superintendent with a complete and accurate diagram of all piping and fixtures connected with
the fire service line.
§ 118-21. Plumber regulations.
All plumbers working in the borough shall observe the following regulations and requirements:
No plumber shall do any work within the borough that would result in a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
Every plumber shall, within 24 hours after the discovery thereof, report to the Superintendent any
plumbing installation or use of water that is contrary to any of the provisions of this chapter which
might come to his notice.
During the winter months, every plumber shall make a weekly report to the Superintendent of all
frozen water pipes and fixtures that may have required his attention or may have been brought to
his attention during the preceding week, with the cause thereof, as nearly as he can ascertain.
All reports of plumbers shall be made upon official forms obtainable at the office of the
Superintendent.
§ 118-22. Conservation of water.
The following regulations shall be in effect in order to prevent waste or excessive use of water or
irregularity of pressure:
The Superintendent may inquire into and investigate into the cause of any unusual flow or
apparently unnecessary waste of water upon any premises in the borough. If said flow or waste
results from want of repair of any pipe or other fixture, he shall require the owner of such premises
to make such necessary repairs within 10 days, and upon failure of such owner to make such
repairs within the time limit, he shall have authority to shut off the supply of water leading to such
premises. Such water shall not again be turned on until the customer shall have made the
required repairs and paid the fee as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees, which is hereby established
for such service.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
No person shall use the borough water or permit it to be used for any purpose other than that
declared at the time the permit mentioned in § 118-6 was obtained.
No person shall allow water fixtures to run excessively.
No person shall allow water to flow continuously in order to guard against freezing or for any other
purpose, except by special permission from the Superintendent, provided that the Superintendent
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 221/233
E.
F.
may at any time rescind such special permission when he shall deem its continuance to be
detrimental to the operation of the waterworks and the service available to other customers.
Except in case of fire, no large current of water shall be permitted to flow at intervals causing
irregularity of pressure. The use of fixtures that may create water hammers is prohibited.
The Mayor may, in time of emergency, restrict the uses to which water may be put.
Article III. Meters
§ 118-23. Installation; interference.
[Amended 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 346, approved 6-25-1991]
The borough shall furnish and install all meters, which shall be of sufficient size in the judgment of the
Superintendent to provide adequate service to the premises. Upon notice by the Superintendent that a
meter is to be installed in a premises, the owner thereof shall, at his own expense, prepare the pipe,
ready for the installation of the meter, as well as any stop, waste or valve required to drain it. When
convenient to place a meter at the curb, a suitable meter box or masonry pit shall be built, at the
expense of the owner of the property, such box to have a suitable cover with lock and key. When not
convenient, the meter shall be placed within the property line of the customer in a convenient,
accessible and unobstructed position within a building. No person other than an authorized officer or
employee of the waterworks shall install, remove, inspect or change, alter or interfere with any meter or
any of the dials thereof. A broken seal shall be considered sufficient evidence of interference with a
meter. The water meters furnished by and installed by the borough shall be subject to the customer
facilities fees and connection fees set forth in § 118-6.
§ 118-24. Customer to bear cost of repairing injured meters.
The customer shall, at all times, properly protect the meter upon his property from injury by frost or
other cause and shall be responsible for the cost of all repairs to any such meter damaged through his
negligence or that of any of the members of his family, his agents, workmen, servants or employees,
such charge to be payable in full at the time when his next water bill shall be due and payable.
§ 118-25. Bills to be estimated if meter fails to register.
If a meter fails to register or otherwise becomes out of order, such meter shall be replaced or repaired
by the waterworks, and the current bill shall be estimated and determined by the average amount of
water used in a previous corresponding period. No deduction from any water bill shall be allowed on
account of leakage.
§ 118-26. Tests.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
If any customer shall doubt the correctness of the meter measuring the water delivered to his
premises, he may, upon application to the Superintendent and upon making a deposit as set forth in
the schedule referred to below, to defray the cost thereof, have such meter tested by the
Superintendent or any person designated by him to do so. Should such tests show the meter to be
registering more than 1% over the accurate amount, such deposit shall be refunded to the customer,
and his account shall be adjusted accordingly, and the entire cost of such test shall be borne by the
waterworks; otherwise the customer shall forfeit the deposit made. The deposit to be required shall be
as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 222/233
A.
B.
A.
§ 118-27. Additional meters.
In all cases where the service connection serves a building occupied by two or more establishments,
firms or families, only one meter shall be furnished by the waterworks to such building, and the water
service charge as registered by such meter shall be chargeable to and payable by the owner of such
building, provided that, in any such case, the owner of the building may, after having given notice
thereof to the Superintendent, furnish and install separate meters, at his own expense, for each portion
of such building separately occupied. Such meters shall be of a type approved by the Superintendent,
and the owner shall be responsible for all expenses incurred in the testing, maintenance and repair of
such meters. After the installation of such separate meters, separate bills shall be furnished to the
owner of such property for each separately metered portion of such building.
§ 118-28. All services to be metered.
No customer shall take or receive, or permit to be taken or received, any water from the waterworks
except such water as shall have passed through and been registered by a meter, unless Council shall
have given written authorization, such authorization to be renewed each year.
Article IV. Billing
§ 118-29. Change of ownership.
[Amended 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984]
The owner of a metered property shall notify the Business Manager immediately of any change of
ownership of such property so that the Business Manager may cause the meter to be read so that the
final consumption shall be billed to the seller and all future billings shall be made to the buyer.
§ 118-30. Rates; owner liable for payment.
Rates. Rates shall be established by resolution from time to time by the Borough Council. All bills
for water service shall be rendered to the owner of the premises to which water is furnished by the
waterworks, and such owner shall in all cases be liable for payment of such bills.
Owner's responsibility. All bills for water service shall be rendered to the owner of the premises to
which water is furnished by the Borough of Lititz water system, and such owner shall in all cases
be liable for payment of such bills. Original bills shall be sent to the property owner with a
duplicate to the tenant(s). If requested by the property owner, second notices and all future
correspondence will be with the property owner only.
[Amended 7-30-1963 by Ord. No. C-21, approved 7-30-1963; 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224,
approved 10-31-1978; 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2]
§ 118-31. Payment of bills.
[Amended 7-30-1963 by Ord. No. C-21, approved 7-30-1963; 12-30-1975 by Ord. No. C-178,
approved 12-30-1975; 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2]
Bills for water service shall be payable at the Lititz Borough Office as follows:
Water bills for established accounts will be rendered quarterly on the 10th day of March, June,
September and December each year.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 223/233
B.
C.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
Water bills for water used on construction projects for final bills or for occasional use shall be
payable on demand.
Every customer who does not pay the water bill rendered in full within 30 days after the billing date
shall be subject to a penalty of 5% of the amount of such bill.
§ 118-32. Delinquent bills.
[Amended 7-30-1963 by Ord. No. C-21, approved 7-30-1963; 12-30-1975 by Ord. No. C-178,
approved 12-30-1975; 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978; 5-29-1984 by Ord. No.
C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984; 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. C-391, approved 12-30-1996]
If any water bill is not paid within 45 days after the billing date, it shall be the duty of the Business
Manager to give the customer 10 days' notice, in writing, of the fact that such water bill is delinquent
and that at the end of such ten-day period all water service to the premises upon which such water bill
is delinquent shall be shut off and shall not be resumed until such delinquent water bill has been paid
in full, including a penalty, plus a charge as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees, for restoring the service.
Any time a customer's property is posted by the borough with a ten-day notice, the customer shall be
responsible to pay the borough an administrative fee to cover the cost of such posting as set forth in
Chapter 55, Fees.
§ 118-33. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 118-33, Effective date, added 12-30-1975 by Ord. No. C-178, approved 12-30-
1975, was repealed 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984.
§ 118-34. Abatement of charges.
[Amended 7-30-1963 by Ord. No. C-21, approved 7-30-1963]
The following regulations shall govern abatement of charges for water:
No abatement of charges shall be allowed for vacancy of premises, except from the date that
written notice shall have been given by the owner of such premises, at the office of the Business
Manager, that such premises shall have been vacated.
[Amended 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984]
No abatement of charges shall be allowed for absence of the customer unless the water shall
have been shut off from the premises at the request of the customer, for which a charge shall be
made as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees. An additional charge as provided for in Chapter 55,
Fees, shall be made upon restoration of such service.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
Whenever water shall be used on any metered premises for fire protection or for fire fighting, in an
actual case of fire or conflagration, no charge shall be made for the water so used, and the
amount of water so used shall be ascertained by comparison with the average used of water
during a corresponding billing period, as shown by the meter.
Article V. Administration and Enforcement; Penalties
§ 118-35. Shutting off water.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978; 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2,
approved 5-29-1984]
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 224/233
The Director of Public Services is hereby authorized to limit or discontinue the supply of water in cases
of emergency and to shut off the supply of waste for repairs or extensions, he being the sole judge of
the time and necessity.
§ 118-36. Right of entry.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978; 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2,
approved 5-29-1984]
The Director of Public Services or any employee of the Borough of Lititz so assigned by the Director of
Public Services shall have the right at any and all reasonable hours to enter upon or into any premises
to which water is supplied by the Borough of Lititz water system for the purpose of inspecting any pipe
or fixture, setting, reading, repairing or replacing any meter, turning water off or on and enforcing the
provisions of this chapter generally. No person shall deny entrance to any such premises to the
Director of Public Services or any assigned borough employee hereby granted such right of entry.
§ 118-37. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days;
provided, however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is without the financial
means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall be
permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as the District Justice
deems to be just.
Article VI. Rates
§ 118-38. Rate schedule.
[Amended 11-26-1963 by Ord. No. C-26, approved 11-26-1963; 1-28-1969 by Ord. No. C-90, approved
1-31-1969; 4-27-1971 by Ord. No. C-117, approved 5-12-1971; 6-24-1975 by Ord. No. C-166,
approved 6-24-1975; 5-30-1978 by Ord. No. C-211, approved 5-30-1978; 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-
224, approved 10-31-1978]
The schedule of rates to be used in determining charges by the Borough of Lititz to consumers of
water of the Borough of Lititz water system, based on three months' usage, shall be as provided for in
Chapter 55, Fees.
§ 118-39. Minimum charge.
[Amended 11-26-1963 by Ord. No. C-26, approved 11-26-1963; 1-28-1969 by Ord. No. C-90, approved
1-31-1969; 4-27-1971 by Ord. No. C-117, approved 5-12-1971; 6-24-1975 by Ord. No. C-166,
approved 6-24-1975; 5-30-1978 by Ord. No. C-211, approved 5-30-1978; 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-
224, approved 10-31-1978; 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984]
The minimum charge for each meter shall be as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees, and shall be billed
as follows: on March 10, on June 10, on September 10 and on December 10 of each year. Minimum
charges for additional dwelling unit(s) served by the same meter and billed to one account shall be
appropriate multiples of this schedule. For service outside of the borough limits, the minimum charges
contained herein shall be as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees.
§ 118-40. through § 118-41. (Reserved)
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 225/233
[1] Editor's Note: Former § 118-40. Billing for additional water usage, as amended, and § 118-41, Effective
date, as amended, were repealed 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984.
Chapter 120. Weeds
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-223, approved
10-31-1978; Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and sanitation — See Ch. 66.
§ 120-1. Obnoxious growths prohibited; cutting schedule;
violations declared nuisances.
[Amended 11-30-2004 by Ord. No. C-457, approved 11-30-2004]
No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any property within the Borough of Lititz shall
permit any weeds or any vegetation whatsoever not grown for human consumption or planted for some
useful or ornamental purpose to grow or remain upon such premises so as to exceed a height of six
inches or to throw off any unpleasant or noxious odor or to conceal any filthy deposit or to create or
produce pollen. Any weeds or other vegetation growing upon any premises in the borough in violation
of any of the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the
health, safety, cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the borough.
§ 120-2. Removal, trimming or cutting required.
The owner of any premises, as to vacant premises or premises occupied by the owner, or the occupant
thereof, in case of premises occupied by other than the owner thereof, shall remove, trim or cut all
weeds, grass or other vegetation growing or remaining upon such premises in violation of the
provisions of § 120-1 of this chapter.
§ 120-3. Enforcement; removal by borough; collection of costs.
The Borough Council, or any officer or employee of the borough designated thereby for the purpose, is
hereby authorized to give notice by personal service or by United States mail to the owner or occupant,
as the case may be, of any premises whereon weeds, grass or other vegetation is growing or
remaining in violation of the provisions of § 120-1 of this chapter, directing and requiring such occupant
to remove, trim or cut such weeds, grass or vegetation so as to conform to the requirements of this
chapter within five days after issuance of such notice. In case any person, firm or corporation shall
neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such notice within the period of time stated therein, the borough
authorities may remove, trim or cut such weeds, grass or vegetation; and the cost thereof, together
with any additional penalty authorized by law, may be collected by the borough from such person, firm
or corporation in the manner provided by law.
Chapter 122. Zoning
[The provisions of the Borough of Lititz Zoning Ordinance of 1994, adopted 11-29-1994 by Ord. No. C-
379, approved 11-29-1994, are on file in the office of the Borough Manager. This ordinance
supersedes former Chapter 122, Zoning, adopted 8-25-1959 by Ord. No. 288, approved 8-25-1959, as
amended.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 18.
Building construction — See Ch. 36.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 226/233
[1]
Flood hazard control — See Ch. 62.
Sewers — See Ch. 100.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 103.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 108.
Water — See Ch. 118
Appendix
Chapter A125. Franchises
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavation and occupation of streets — See Ch. 105.
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Exhibit A Cable Franchise Agreement
Article I. Gas Company
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ A125-1. Permission granted to lay pipes under public ways.
Permission is granted and vested in the Lititz, Manheim and Ephrata Gas Company, its successors
and assigns, duly incorporated under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to lay pipes or
conduits under any or all of the public streets, squares, highways or alleys for the purpose of supplying
gas to such persons, partnerships and corporations residing therein as may desire same, at a
compensation not to exceed $1.50 per thousand cubic feet.
§ A125-2. Company to indemnify Borough; bond.
During the process of excavation, said Lititz, Manheim and Ephrata Gas Company, its successors,
lessees and assigns shall use all proper precautions at night and during the day to prevent accidents.
Said company shall at all times indemnify and save harmless the Borough of and from all and every
claim for damages to person and property which may arise from the excavation and laying of its pipes
and the subsequent maintenance and operation of same, and before any work is done on the
excavation of any streets of the Borough, said Lititz, Manheim and Ephrata Gas Company shall make
and execute to the Borough a bond in the penal sum of $5,000 conditioned as above, which bond shall
be approved by the Borough Council; that said bond be further conditioned that said gas company
keep in good repair the streets, alleys and squares occupied for a period of one year from the time
same may have been disturbed by said company, its successors, lessees, assigns or employees.
§ A125-3. Method of excavating and backfilling.
Said Lititz, Manheim and Ephrata Gas Company shall lay its pipes at such depth as may be
designated by the Borough, under the direction and supervision of its Street Committee, consistent
with the necessities of the company, and in the excavation of the streets shall replace all excavated
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 227/233
[1]
materials in the order in which they were removed from the trench; that is to say, in such manner as to
leave the hand materials or macadam on top and, in the case of a paved street, to replace same in a
manner satisfactory to the Borough, and they shall also ram the ground hard and tight so that the
surface of the street shall present a level and unbroken contour, the same as it presented before any
excavations were made.
§ A125-4. Company to furnish streetlighting.
Said Lititz, Manheim and Ephrata Gas Company its successors, lessees and assigns shall at any and
all times hereafter furnish and erect as many suitable posts and five-foot-burners with Welsbach
mantels as may be required by said Borough Council, to be placed as designated by the borough
authorities for the purpose of lighting the borough streets at a cost not to exceed $32 per annum per
lamp and maintain same, said lights to be kept burning from sunset to sunrise.
Article II. Electric Company
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This Article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ A125-5. Permission granted to occupy public highways.
Permission is granted to the Edison Electric Company, its successors and assigns to occupy, with
poles and wires, such of the public highways of the Borough of Lititz, as may be necessary for
conducting the business of supplying electric energy to the Borough of Lititz and the inhabitants
thereof.
§ A125-6. Erection of poles.
The erection of such poles shall be at the direction of the Highway Committee of the Borough Council,
subject to existing ordinances and regulations relating to electric light, telephone and telegraph poles
within the limits of the Borough of Lititz.
§ A125-7. Company to indemnify borough.
Said Edison Electric Company, its successors or assigns shall indemnify and keep harmless the
Borough of Lititz from any damage that may be done to persons or property by reason of the erection
or operation and maintenance of said poles and wires.
§ A125-8. Right of borough to use poles.
The Borough of Lititz shall have the right to use said poles to support and convey such wires as said
borough may now or hereafter desire to operate for fire alarm, police or other similar purposes, said
wires to be erected as not to interfere with or impair the usefulness of the wires of the said company.
Article III. Local Telephone Company
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 228/233
[1] Editor's Note: This Article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ A125-9. Permission granted to construct apparatus in public
ways.
Permission is granted to the Denver and Ephrata Telephone and Telegraph Company, its successors
and assigns to construct, maintain and operate its posts, poles, cables, wires and all other necessary
overhead apparatus on, over and along, and its conduits, ducts, mains, pipes, cables, wires,
manholes, terminal and distributing poles and all other necessary underground appliances on, in,
under and through, the streets, alleys and highways within the limits of the Borough of Lititz, County of
Lancaster, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to use the property of others and to permit others to use
its property, upon such arrangements as may be agreed to.
§ A125-10. Erection of poles and construction of conduits.
All poles erected by said company shall extend not less than 20 feet above the surface of the ground
and shall be so located as in no way to interfere with the safety or convenience of persons traveling on
or over said streets, alleys and highways; and in the installation and maintenance of its underground
system, said company shall not open or encumber more of any street, alley or highway than will be
necessary to enable it to perform the work with proper economy and efficiency; and in all permanently
improved streets, said company shall lay such conduits as it may desire at the time of making such
permanently improved streets. The erection of poles and construction of conduits under the provisions
of this Article shall be subject to the supervision of the Chairman of the Street Committee, and said
company shall replace and properly relay that portion of any sidewalk or street pavement which may
have been displaced or damaged by it in the construction and maintenance of its system.
§ A125-11. Right of borough to use poles and conduits.
Space on the poles erected and in the conduits constructed under the provisions of this Article may be
used, free of charge, for the purpose of carrying wires of any fire alarm or police telegraph system
owned and maintained by said borough or fire company of the Borough of Lititz, provided that said
wires are placed and maintained in such a manner as may be prescribed by said company and which
will not result in interfering with or impairing the operation or use of said company's property or service
or will endanger its property or employees.
§ A125-12. Maintenance of apparatus in safe condition; company
to indemnify borough.
The company shall maintain all posts, poles, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, mains, pipes, manholes
and all other apparatus erected or constructed under the provisions of this Article in good and safe
order and condition and shall at all times fully indemnify, protect and save harmless said borough from
and against actions, claims, suits, damages and charges and against all loss and necessary
expenditures arising from the erection, construction and maintenance of its system or from its neglect
or failure to maintain said apparatus in good and safe order and condition.
§ A125-13. Monopoly not granted.
Nothing in this Article shall be construed to grant unto said company any exclusive right or to prevent a
grant of similar privileges to other companies.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 229/233
[1]
§ A125-14. Other applicable ordinances and laws.
The company shall be governed by all legal ordinances of a general nature affecting its operations in
the Borough of Lititz that are now in force and enacted under and by the virtue of the police powers of
said borough or the laws of the commonwealth, as well as such ordinances hereafter so enacted,
provided that the terms, conditions and regulations prescribed therein do not impair or abridge the
permission contained in this Article.
Article IV. Long Distance Telephone Company
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This Article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ A125-15. Permission granted to construct underground
conduits in public ways.
Permission is granted to the Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania, its successors and assigns to
construct, maintain and operate such underground facilities, consisting of conduits, ducts, mains,
pipes, cables, wires, manholes and other necessary appliances, on, in, under, across, through and
along the streets, alleys and highways within the present or future limits of the Borough of Lititz,
County of Lancaster, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as it may require in connection with its aerial
system, and to use the underground facilities of other companies and to permit other companies that
possess authority to operate within the borough to use its underground facilities upon such
arrangements as the two companies may agree to.
§ A125-16. Construction of conduits.
The construction of conduits and manholes under the provisions of this article shall be subject to the
supervision of the Chairman of the Street Committee, and said company shall replace and properly
relay that portion of any sidewalk or street pavement which may have been displaced by it in the
construction and maintenance of its underground facilities; and in the installation and maintenance of
its underground system, said company shall not open or encumber more of any street, alley or
highway than will be necessary to enable it to perform the work with proper economy and efficiency.
§ A125-17. Right of Borough to use poles and conduits.
Space on the poles or in the conduits constructed under the provisions of this article may be used, free
of charge, for the purpose of carrying wires of any fire alarm or police telegraph system owned and
maintained by said Borough, provided that said wires are placed and maintained in such a manner as
may be prescribed by said company and that no use shall be made of such space by said Borough
which will result in interfering with or impairing the operating or use of said company's property or
service or will endanger its property or employees.
§ A125-18. Maintenance of apparatus in safe condition; company
to indemnify Borough.
The company shall maintain all conduits, ducts, mains, pipes, cables, wires, manholes and all other
apparatus constructed under the provisions of this article in good and safe order and condition and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 230/233
[1]
[1]
shall at all times fully indemnify, protect and save harmless said Borough from and against all actions,
claims, suits, damages and charges and against all loss and necessary expenditures arising from the
construction and maintenance of its system or from its neglect or failure to maintain said apparatus in
good and safe order and condition.
§ A125-19. Monopoly not granted.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to grant unto said company any exclusive rights or to prevent
a grant of similar privileges to other companies.
§ A125-20. Erection and painting of poles.
All poles shall be erected under the supervision of the Street Committee, and such as are erected shall
be painted white.
§ A125-21. Other applicable ordinances and laws.
The company shall be governed by all legal ordinances of a general nature effecting its operations in
the Borough of Lititz that are now in force and enacted under and by virtue of the police powers of said
Borough or the laws of the commonwealth, as well as all such ordinances hereafter enacted, provided
that the terms, conditions and regulations prescribed therein do not impair or abridge the permission
contained in this article.
Article V. Cable Television
[Adopted 9-25-2018 by Res. No. 885,[1] approved 9-25-2018]
Editor's Note: This resolution also superseded former Art. V, Cable Television, adopted 2-26-2013 by
Res. No. 795, approved 2-26-2013.
§ A125-22. Grant of franchise.
The Borough Council does hereby approve the Cable Franchise Agreement negotiated with Comcast,
including all of the terms and conditions contained therein, and does hereby authorize the execution of
such Agreement. A copy of the Agreement is attached hereto as Exhibit A.[1]
Editor's Note: Said exhibit is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ A125-23. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this resolution is for any reason held
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not render this resolution invalid.
Disposition List
Chapter DL. Disposition List
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Borough of Lititz adopted since 1-1-2005,
indicating its inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling legislation which is not
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 231/233
general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code material (NCM).] Consult municipal
records for information regarding prior legislation.
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. C-462 2-22-2005 Warwick Regional Recreation
Commission
Ch. 10, Art. II
Ord. No. C-465 4-26-2005 Zoning amendment See Ch. 122
Ord. No. C-466 5-31-2005 Sewers amendment Ch. 100
Ord. No. C-468 7-26-2005 Fees amendment; sewers
amendment
Ch. 55; Ch. 100
Ord. No. C-469 7-26-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Res. No. 678 11-29-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-478 10-31-2006 Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 16, Art. III
Ord. No. C-480 12-27-2006 Property maintenance Ch. 36, Art. II
Ord. No. C-481 12-27-2006 Uniform construction codes Ch. 36, Art. I; Ch. 50;
Ch. 59; Ch. 77; Ch. 89;
Ch. 92
Ord. No. C-484 1-30-2007 Cable television franchise Expired
Res. No. 704 4-24-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-485 7-31-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-486 11-27-2007 Realty transfer tax Ch. 110, Art. III
Ord. No. C-488 Sewer revenue note NCM
Res. No. 717 1-29-2008 Dumping, collecting and storing
of garbage and rubbish
amendment
Ch. 66, Art. I
Ord. No. C-489 7-29-2008 Hydronic heaters Ch. 70
Ord. No. C-493 11-25-2008 Uniform construction code
amendment
Ch. 36, Art. I
Ord. No. C-495 12-30-2008 Police Pension Plan See Ch. 16, Art. III
Ord. No. C-496 12-30-2008 Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 16, Art. II
Ord. No. C-497 1-27-2009 Official Map amendment Ch. 80
Res. No. 735 1-27-2009 Records retention schedule NCM
Res. No. 736 1-27-2009 Disposition of records NCM
Res. No. 737 1-27-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-498 3-31-2009 Street acceptances NCM
Ord. No. C-499 5-26-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment See Ch. 115
Ord. No. C-500 11-24-2009 Intermunicipal agreements:
Intergovernmental Insurance
Cooperative
Ch. 10, Art. III
Res. No. 750 11-24-2009 Earned income tax amendment Expired
Res. No. 751 11-24-2009 Per capita tax amendment See Ch. 110, Art. I
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 232/233
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Res. No. 752 11-24-2009 Occupation tax amendment See Ch. 110, Art. V
Res. No. 753 11-24-2009 Realty transfer tax amendment See Ch. 110, Art. III
Res. No. 755 11-24-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-501 11-24-2009 Local services tax Superseded by Ord.
No. 502
Ord. No. C-502 11-24-2009 Local services tax Ch. 110, Art. II
Ord. No. C-503 12-29-2009 Real estate tax rate amendment See Ch. 110, Art. VI
Ord. No. C-504 1-26-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment See Ch. 115
Ord. No. C-505 1-26-2010 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 16, Art. III
Res. 1-26-2010 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 16, Art. III
Ord. No. C-506 1-26-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment See Ch. 115
Ord. No. C-509 9-28-2010 Bond NCM
Res. No. 762 9-28-2010 Pension plan reduced
amortization option
NCM
Ord. No. C-510 10-26-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-511 12-28-2010 2011 real estate tax rate See Ch. 110, Art. VI
Ord. No. C-512 9-27-2011 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 105
Res. No. 771 9-27-2011 Pension plan actuarial value
determination
NCM
Ord. No. C-513 10-25-2011 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 16, Art. III
Ord. No. C-514 10-25-2011 Earned income tax amendment Ch. 110, Art. VII
Res. No. 777 11-29-2011 Encouraging youth education
and youth participation in local
government
NCM
Ord. No. C-515 12-20-2011 2012 real estate tax rate See Ch. 110, Art. VI
Ord. No. C-516 1-31-2012 Intermunicipal agreements:
Susquehanna Municipal Trust
Ch. 10, Art. IV
Ord. No. C-518 2-28-2012 Right-of-way acceptance NCM
Res. No. 782 3-27-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-519 6-19-2012 Land acquisition NCM
Ord. No. C-520 8-28-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment See Ch. 115
Ord. No. C-521 11-27-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment See Ch. 115
Ord. No. C-522 12-18-2012 2013 real estate tax rate See Ch. 110, Art. VI
Res. No. 792 12-18-2012 Civil Service Commission rules
and regulations
Ch. 7
Res. No. 795 2-26-2013 Cable television franchise Ch. A125, Art. V
Ord. No. C-523 6-25-2013 Rental units: residential rental
unit regulation
Ch. 94, Art. I
Ord. No. C-524 6-25-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment See Ch. 115
Ord. No. C-527 8-6-2013 Sewers amendment Ch. 100
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 233/233
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Res. No. 805 8-6-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-528 8-27-2013 Intermunicipal agreements:
regional emergency services
Ch. 10, Art. V
Ord. No. C-529 10-29-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment See Ch. 115
Res. No. 819 5-27-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-535 10-28-2014 Fireworks Ch. 60
Ord. No. C-536 11-25-2014 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 16, Art. III
Ord. No. C-538 1-27-2015 Intermunicipal agreements:
capital funding for the Lititz Rec
Center
Ch. 10, Art. VI
Res. No. 833 3-31-2015 Procurement NCM
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
C-540 9-29-2015 Curfew Amendment Ch. 41 29
C-543 1-26-2016 See Ch. 122 29
C-544 3-29-2016 Floodplain
Management
Ch. 62 29
C-547 7-26-2016 See Ch. 122 29
C-550 See Ch. 108 29
C-554 12-27-2016 See Ch. 122 29
C-556 4-25-2017 Parking Prohibited See Ch. 115 29
C-557 5-30-2017 Snow Emergency
Procedures
See Ch. 115 29
C-560 10-24-2017 Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 105 29
C-561 11-28-2017 Non-Uniformed
Employee's Pension
Plan
See Ch. 16 29
C-569 1-29-2019 Taxation: Volunteer
Service Credit Program
Ch. 110, Art. VIII 29
C-570 1-29-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 55 29
C-572 2-26-2019 Administration of
Government: Health
and Sanitation Advisory
Committee Amendment
Ch. 5, Art. V 29
C-574 4-30-2019 Right-of-Way
Management
Ch. 96 29
C-575 4-30-2019 Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 105 29
885 9-25-2018 Franchises: Cable
Television Amendment
Ch. A125, Art. V 29
892 1-29-2019 Hazard Mitigation Plan NCM 29

8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 1/233
Borough of Lititz, PA
Friday, August 14, 2020
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1. General Provisions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz: Art. I, 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224,
approved 10-31-1978. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)], the codification of a complete
body of ordinances for the Borough of Lititz, County of Lancaster, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
revised, codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp.
and consisting of Chapters 1 through 122, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a
single ordinance of the Borough of Lititz which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code
of the Borough of Lititz," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of ordinances in force
immediately prior to the enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the
date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect
and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Council of the Borough of Lititz, and it is the
intention of said Council that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and
reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from
this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only new or
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective
date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Borough of
Lititz and in force on the date of the adoption of this Code, and not contained in the Code, are hereby
repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by
repeal.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 2/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following ordinances, rights and obligations which are hereby expressly saved from repeal;
provided, however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from repeal of
ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to revive any ordinance previously
repealed, superseded or no longer of any effect:
Any ordinance adopted subsequent to March 29, 1977.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative provision of the borough
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance in violation of any
legislative provision of the borough, or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending, or any judgment rendered,
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the
borough.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the
borough, or any lawful contract, obligation or agreement.
Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing
the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the borough, or
other instruments or evidence of the borough's indebtedness.
Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax rate.
Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special taxes, assessments or
charges.
Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property or acquiring property
by acceptance of deed, condemnation or exercise of eminent domain.
Any ordinance annexing land to the borough.
Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or reconstruction of sidewalks, curbs and
gutters.
Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public place
or property or designating various streets as public highways.
Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose districts and designating the
boundaries thereof, or providing for a system of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the
construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a system of sewers
or water supply lines.
Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers and employees of the
borough or setting the bond of any officer or employee.
Any ordinance regulating traffic or parking within the Borough of Lititz.
Any ordinance adopting provisions relating to the Recreation Board in the Borough of Lititz.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 3/233
R.
S.
T.
U.
V.
W.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
[1]
D.
The currently effective ordinances regulating building construction in the borough.
The currently effective ordinances establishing the real property tax rate in the borough.
The currently effective ordinances concerning fires or the prevention of fires.
Any ordinance amending provisions creating the Sewer Authority of the borough or ordinances
providing for agreements between the Lititz Sewer Authority and the Borough of Lititz with respect
to the collection, treatment or disposal of garbage.
Resolution No. 251, providing for a police cooperative agreement.
Any ordinance regulating abandoned or junked vehicles, particularly Ord. Nos. C-121 and C-157,
adopted 6-29-1971 and 9-24-1974, respectively.
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, adopted subsequent to the date given in § 1-4A
and/or prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance, are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and
shall, upon being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances;
new provisions.
Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the borough
for adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style
changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Council that all
such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
Nomenclature changes. Throughout the Code, the term "Justice of the Peace" (and "Burgess,"
where a judicial function is involved) have been changed to "District Justice." The obsolete title
"Town Council" has also been changed to "Borough Council," and "Burgess" (except where a
judicial function is involved) has been changed to "Mayor" in accordance with current statutory
provisions.
General deletions.
Sections pertaining to severability, effective dates and repeals have been deleted since such
provisions are included in this ordinance or are of no further effect.
Sections assigning titles to various ordinances have been deleted as all ordinances have
been given chapter or Article titles as part of the Code.
Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and revisions described above, the
following changes and revisions of a substantive nature are hereby made to various ordinances
included in the Code. These changes are made to bring provisions into conformity with the desired
policies of the Council, and it is the intent of the Council that all such changes be adopted as part
of the Code as if the ordinances so changed have been previously formally amended to read as
such. All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the
Code specified in § 1-15.[1]
Editor's Note: Pursuant to Subsection D, the following sections were amended. A complete
description of each change is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary: §§ 16-24, 24-1, 34-3,
34-5D, 36-13, 36-15B, 72-4, 87-4A, 100-25A(1) and (3), 100-25B(1)(a) and (b), 105-4A, 108-26,
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 4/233
[2]
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
F.
A.
B.
118-6, 118-20C(2), 118-22A, 118-26, 118-30B, 118-32, 118-34B, 118-35, 118-36, 118-38 and 118-
39.
Standardization of penalty provisions. The penalty provisions in the following sections of individual
ordinances prescribing penalties for violations are revised to provide for a maximum fine of $300,
plus costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that if the District Justice determines that the
defendant is without the financial means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single
remittance, such defendant be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such
periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.[2]
Editor's Note: Pursuant to Subsection E, the following penalty sections were added or amended:
§§ 24-7, 41-8, 46-6, 46-8, 66-8C, 66-10, 69-15, 72-7, 82-3, 84-3, 87-10, 100-10, 100-24, 105-12,
105-24, 105-26, 110-17B, 110-23, 118-37 and 122-54.
New ordinances. Certain new ordinances were approved by the Council during the process of
codification to replace previously adopted ordinances deemed obsolete and/or inadequate or to
provide regulation and control on new subject matters. These new ordinances are described in the
notice published in conjunction with the adoption of this Code and shall take effect as of the
effective date of the Code specified in § 1-15. Such ordinances are cited within the historical
statements for individual chapters by the phrase "adopted . . . during codification . . ." and are as
follows:
Chapter 5, Article V, Health and Sanitation Advisory Committee.
Chapter 18, Planning Commission.
Chapter 36, Article I, Adoption of Standards.
Chapter 50, Electrical Standards.
Chapter 55, Fees.
Chapter 59, Fire Prevention.
Chapter 89, Plumbing.
Chapter 120, Weeds.
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
Where the provisions of the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall control. Where the provisions of
any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
Chapter and Article titles, headings and titles of sections and other divisions in the Code, or in
supplements made to the Code, are inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to
the Code for the convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the ordinances.
Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information or referring to the statutes or
to other parts of the Code are inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 5/233
Code for the convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the ordinances.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the Ordinance Book in the office of
the Borough Secretary and shall remain there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption,
such copies shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and such certified
copies shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while the said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when passed and adopted
in such form as to indicate the intention of the Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include
such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the post-bound book
containing the said Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary, or someone authorized and directed by him or her, to
keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of
the Borough Secretary for use by the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted by
the Council subsequent to the effective date of this codification, which the Council shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such
changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the manner required a notice of
the introduction and of the adoption of the Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the borough.
The enactment and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notices of
introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability of copies of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of
the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or deletions, or to alter or
tamper with the Code, or any part or portion thereof, in any manner whatsoever which will cause the
law of the borough to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this ordinance shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $300 and costs of prosecution, collectible
as provided by law, or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that if the
District Justice determines that the defendant is without financial means to pay the fines and costs
immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant be permitted to pay the fines or costs in
installments and over such periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
§ 1-14. Severability.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 6/233
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are severable, and if any clause,
sentence, subsection, section, Article or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation and application to the clause,
sentence, subsection, section, Article or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such
judgment shall have been rendered. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that
this ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause,
sentence, subsection, section, Article or part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect on and after November 1,
1978.
§ 1-16. Inclusion of ordinance in Code.
This ordinance shall be included in the Code as Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
Article II. Ordinances Enacted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain complete new ordinances were approved by the
Borough Council for inclusion in the Code of the Borough of Lititz. Such new ordinances are
noted in the histories of individual chapters as "Adopted __________ during codification; see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II." In accordance with recognized codification procedures,
these new ordinances have been enacted separately. A complete enumeration of all chapters
and Articles in the Code included in such ordinances is printed below, along with specific
dates of adoption.]
Chapter/Article Ordinance No. Adoption Date Approval Date
Ch. 5, Administration of
Government, Art. V, Health
and Sanitation Advisory
Committee
C-216 10-31-1978 10-31-1978
Ch. 18, Planning Commission C-217 10-31-1978 10-31-1978
Ch. 36, Building Construction,
Art. I, Adoption of Standards
C-218 10-31-1978 10-31-1978
Ch. 50, Electrical Standards C-219 10-31-1978 10-31-1978
Ch. 55, Fees C-220 10-31-1978 10-31-1978
Ch. 59, Fire Prevention C-221 10-31-1978 10-31-1978
Ch. 89, Plumbing C-222 10-31-1978 10-31-1978
Ch. 120, Weeds C-223 10-31-1978 10-31-1978
Chapter 5. Administration of Government
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions and employee benefits — See Ch. 16.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 7/233
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
Article I. Council
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 5-1. Meeting day.
The Council of the Borough of Lititz shall meet on the last Tuesday of each month.
§ 5-2. Compensation.
[Amended 12-19-1974 by Ord. No. C-164; 12-27-1977 by Ord. No. C-206,[1] approved 12-27-1977]
Members of the Borough Council shall receive as compensation the sum of $66.66 a month.
Editor's Note: This ordinance became effective 1-1-1978.
Article II. Compensation of Mayor
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 5-3. Compensation.
The Mayor shall receive as compensation the sum of $66 and $66.66 per month, to be paid in monthly
installments.
Article III. Manager
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]; amended in its entirety 12-12-1998 by Ord. No. C-417,
approved 12-29-1998]
Editor's Note: This article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 5-4. Creation of office.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created, subject to the right of Borough Council, by
ordinance, at any time to abolish such office.
§ 5-5. Filling of office.
The Borough Council shall, from time to time and whenever there is a vacancy, elect, by a vote of a
majority of all the members, one person to fill said office. In case of a vacancy, the Borough Council
shall, by a vote of a majority of its members, fill said office, subject to removal by Council at any time
by a vote of majority of all the members.
§ 5-6. Qualifications.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 8/233
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
A.
The Borough Manager shall have a bachelor's degree from an accredited college in public or business
administration or related field or equivalent work experience, plus considerable experience in municipal
or similar financial administration and in planning, organizing and directing administrative services.
§ 5-7. Compensation.
The Borough Manager shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by the
Borough Council.
§ 5-8. Bond.
The Borough Manager shall be bonded with a trust company or bonding company as surety, in the
sum of $50,000, conditioned for the faithful performance of duties.
§ 5-9. Nature of position; to serve as Secretary/Treasurer.
The position of Borough Manager shall be administrative and managerial in nature, planning,
directing and coordinating the administration of the municipality and advising the Borough Council
in the creation of new municipal policies and the revision of old policies.
The Borough Manager shall also serve as Secretary/Treasurer.
§ 5-10. Specific duties.
Subject to recall by ordinance, the specific duties of the Borough Manager are defined as follows.
The Borough Manager shall:
Attend all public meetings of the Council, prepare meeting agendas and keep full minutes of
the proceedings.
Coordinate borough departments through the Public Works Superintendent, Chief of Police
and Project Manager of contract operations for the Water and Wastewater Treatment Plants.
Prepare the annual budget and maintain budget control throughout the year.
Coordinate the administration for all engineering projects for all areas, including design
through project completion with the cooperation of the Borough Engineer and the Public
Works Superintendent.
Plan, organize, administer and supervise the operations of the borough office.
Coordinate the planning and zoning functions of the borough and serve as Planning
Commission Secretary, keeping full minutes of the proceedings.
Prepare and submit a variety of municipal, state and federal reports.
Coordinate with the appointed accounting firm in the preparation of the annual audit and
coordinate with state auditors in the preparation of the annual police pension, municipal
employees pension, liquid fuels and worker compensation audits.
Serve as liaison to the Borough Solicitor.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 9/233
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
[1]
Administer the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment and services for all borough
departments.
Advise the Council of the financial condition of the borough operating funds.
Develop county, state and federal funding requests.
Oversee tax collection and swimming pool management.
Address citizens' correspondence and complaints.
Manage the borough insurance system.
Administer the borough office computer operations.
Maintain the borough filing system and personnel records.
Serve as Chief Executive Officer for the Police and Municipal Employees Pension Plans.
Administer personnel major medical and life insurance policies.
Recommend changes to personnel policies and the employee benefit package and serve as
the management representative in contract negotiations with police and public works.
Administer the employment of all new personnel.
Serve as Secretary to the Civil Service Commission.
Coordinate the borough's volunteer boards and commissions.
Assist in the preparation of all ordinances and resolutions and implements such after
enactment.
Maintain the Borough Code.
Advertise legal notices.
Attend the letting of contracts.
Perform such other duties as required by law or as directed by the Borough Council.
Article IV. Building Inspector
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 5-11. Creation of office.
There shall be an office of Building Inspector.
§ 5-12. Filling of office; term.
On the first Monday after January 1 in even-numbered years, the Borough Council shall appoint, by a
majority vote of the members present, a properly qualified person to serve as Building Inspector for a
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 10/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
term of two years or until his successor shall be duly appointed. He may be suspended or removed for
cause by the Council, but only after full opportunity has been given him to be heard on specific
charges.
§ 5-13. Qualifications.
No person shall be eligible for appointment as Building Inspector who cannot furnish evidence
satisfactory to the Council that he is generally informed on the quality and strength of building materials
and on the prevailing methods of building construction.
§ 5-14. General duties.
[Amended 3-31-1992 by Ord. No. C-343, approved 3-31-1992]
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector, and he is hereby given the power and authority, to serve
as the code official and enforce the provisions of Chapter 36, Building Construction, Chapter 50,
Electrical Standards, and Chapter 89, Plumbing. It shall also be the duty of the Building Inspector, and
he is hereby given the power and authority, to enforce the provisions of Chapter 69, Housing
Maintenance and Occupancy, and to enforce other borough ordinances as directed by the Borough
Council. For the purpose of enforcing compliance with the law, remedying or removing illegal or unsafe
conditions, securing the necessary safeguards during construction or requiring adequate exit facilities
in existing buildings or structures, he shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary.
§ 5-15. Specific duties.
Subject to recall at any time by Council, the powers and duties of the Building Inspector shall include
the following:
The Building Inspector shall receive and examine all applications and accompanying plans and
specifications required by the provisions of Chapter 36, Building Construction, Chapter 50,
Electrical Standards, Chapter 89, Plumbing, or any other ordinance enacted by the Borough
Council which shall require submission of an application to the Building Inspector. He shall
approve such applications as are in conformity with the requirements of the ordinance which
requires submission of plans to the Building Inspector and shall issue permits therefor. He shall
disapprove such applications as are not in conformity with the provisions of such ordinance and
refuse to issue permits therefor until such applications have been modified to conform to all
applicable standards and regulations.
[Amended 3-31-1992 by Ord. No. C-343, approved 3-31-1992]
The Building Inspector shall receive and examine all applications for certificates of occupancy and
issue such certificates where approved.
The Building Inspector shall inspect, at least once a year, all buildings other than single-family
dwellings to determine any changes in classification or occupancy or construction, to remedy
illegal or unsafe conditions or to require adequate exit facilities.
The Building Inspector shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are
complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely.
The Building Inspector shall keep careful and comprehensive records of applications, of permits
and certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered and of notices or orders issued.
He shall retain on file copies of all papers and plans in connection with building permits for a
period of not less than five years from the date of the issuance of the permit. All such records shall
be kept on file at the office of the Council. They shall be open to inspection during regular office
hours but shall not be removed from the office of the Council.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 11/233
F.
G.
H.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
[1]
[1]
The Building Inspector shall make a report to the Council once each month, or more often if
requested. Such report shall include statements of permits and certificates issued and orders
promulgated.
The Building Inspector shall recommend to the Borough Council any special rules or regulations
that shall, in his opinion, be necessary to define or carry out the intent and purpose of any portion
of this Article.
For the purpose of securing for the public the benefits of new developments in the building
industry and yet ensuring public safety, the Building Inspector may make, or cause to be made,
investigations or may accept duly authenticated reports from reliable sources of new materials or
modes of construction and recommend to the Borough Council rules or regulations setting forth
the conditions under which such materials or modes of construction may be used.
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 36, Building Construction; Ch. 69, Housing Maintenance and Occupancy;
and Ch. 122, Zoning, Art. XIII.
§ 5-16. Right of entry.
The Building Inspector, in the discharge of his duties, shall have authority to enter any building,
structure or premises at any reasonable hour.
§ 5-17. Supplementary rules.
Rules necessary to define or carry out the intent or purpose of this Article or to set forth conditions
under which new materials or methods of construction may be used may be recommended from
time to time by the Building Inspector to the Borough Council and shall become effective upon
approval by Council.
Rules adopted as herein provided shall have the same force and effect as provisions of this
Article.
Any rule may be amended or repealed by the same procedure provided for the adoption of new
rules.
§ 5-18. Appeals from decisions of Building Inspector.
[Amended 3-31-1992 by Ord. No. C-343, approved 3-31-1992]
All appeals from decisions of the Building Inspector shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
the ordinance which authorizes the Building Inspector to render the decision from which an appeal is to
be taken.
Article V. (Reserved)
Editor’s Note: Former Article V, Health and Sanitation Advisory Committee, adopted during codification
10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-216, approved 10-31-1978, was repealed 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. C-572.
Article VI. Police Department
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This Article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 12/233
[1]
[1]
[1]
§ 5-19. Establishment; chief executive.
A Police Department is hereby established in and for the Borough of Lititz. The Chief of Police shall be
the chief executive of the Police Department. He shall, under the direction of the Mayor, be in charge of
the police force and have supervision over its members in the exercise of their powers, duties and
authority.
§ 5-20. Number and compensation of patrolmen.
The Department shall also include such number of full-time and/or part-time patrolmen as shall be
determined by the Borough Council from time to time, and the compensation of members of the Police
Department shall also be as determined by the Borough Council from time to time.
§ 5-21. Special policemen.
Nothing herein contained shall affect the authority of the Mayor to appoint special policemen during
emergencies.[1]
Editor's Note: For intermunicipal police assistance in times of emergency, see Ch. 12, Intermunicipal
Assistance, Police.
Article VII. Planning Commission, Regional
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This Article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 5-22. Participation authorized.
The Borough of Lititz does join and associate in the creation of a Regional Planning Commission, to be
known as the "Lancaster Regional Planning Commission," in conformity with the Act of August 9, 1955,
P.L. 323, as now or hereafter amended.[1]
Editor's Note: See 16 P.S. § 2009.
§ 5-23. Borough Representative.
There is created the position of Official Representative of the Borough of Lititz on said Regional
Planning Commission, which position shall be filled from time to time by the Council, said Official
Representative to serve for a one-year term.
§ 5-24. Execution of agreement authorized.
The President of Council is authorized to execute the Articles of Agreement, in the form submitted to
the Council by the Organizational Committee for Regional Planning, and the Secretary is directed to
attest the signature and place the corporate seal hereon and forward a copy of this resolution to the
acting Secretary of the Regional Planning Commission.
§ 5-25. Granting of financial and contractual authority.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 13/233
The Lancaster Regional Planning Commission is authorized to receive and expend federal, state and
other funds from private and public sources and to contract with the United States, the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and other private and public agencies with respect thereto.
Article VIII. Recreation Board
[Adopted 7-6-1964 by Ord. No. C-38, approved 7-7-1964]
§ 5-26. Establishment; membership.
For the purpose of supervising and maintaining such recreation places as may be leased, acquired
and established by the Borough of Lititz, a Recreation Board is hereby established. Such Recreation
Board shall be composed of five members, of whom two shall be members or appointees of the
Warwick Union School Board. The members of the Recreation Board shall be appointed by the Council
of the Borough of Lititz and shall serve for terms of five years, except that members of such Board first
appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one member shall expire annually
thereafter. Members of the Board shall serve without pay. Both men and women shall be eligible for
appointment. Vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by Council in the
same manner as original appointments.
§ 5-27. Officers; authority and power.
The members of the Recreation Board shall elect their own Chairman and Secretary and select all
other necessary officers, to serve for a period of one year, and may employ such persons as may be
needed. The Recreation Board shall possess all the authority invested in Borough Recreation Boards
by law. Such Board shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of all business
within its jurisdiction, subject, however, to the approval of the Council.
§ 5-28. Limitations.
The Recreation Board shall have no power to pledge the credit of the Borough of Lititz nor make any
contracts, agreements or commitments whatsoever which may be binding upon the Borough of Lititz,
unless previously approved by the Borough Council.
Article IX. Auditor, Independent
[Adopted 12-28-1976 by Ord. No. C-196, approved 12-28-1976]
§ 5-29. Auditor appointed to examine borough records.
There shall hereafter be appointed, annually, by resolution of the Borough Council before the close of
each fiscal year, an independent auditor to make an independent examination of the accounting
records of the borough for such fiscal year.
§ 5-30. Qualifications.
Such independent auditor shall be a certified public accountant registered in Pennsylvania, a firm of
certified public accountants so registered, a competent public accountant or a competent firm of public
accountants.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 14/233
[1]
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
§ 5-31. Powers and duties.
Such independent auditor shall perform the duties and exercise the powers set forth in Subdivision (k)
of Article XI of The Borough Code, Act 581 of 1965 (approved February 1, 1966), as amended.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46196. Original Section IV of Ord. No. C-196 which immediately followed
this section, adopted and approved 12-28-1976, abolishing the office of elected Borough Auditor, was
deleted during codification.
Article X. Commission of Tax Collector
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961;[1] amended in its entirely 2-22-1977 by Ord. No. C-198,
approved 2-22-1977]
Editor's Note: This Article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 5-32. Compensation established.
The compensation for the office of elected Tax Collector in the Borough of Lititz shall be 1% of all real
estate and per capita taxes[1] collected for and on behalf of said borough until December 31, 1977.
Beginning January 1, 1978, the compensation for the office of elected Tax Collector in the Borough of
Lititz shall be 1% of all real estate and per capita taxes collected for and on behalf of said borough
during the discount period [that is, within two months after the date of the tax notice] and also during
the face period [that is, during the two months following the end of the discount period] and shall be 2%
of all real estate and per capita taxes collected for and on behalf of said borough during the penalty
period [that is, on all taxes not paid within four months after the date of the tax notice].
Editor's Note: See Ch. 110, Taxation.
Article XI. Flood Control Advisory Committee
[Adopted 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. C-332, approved 7-10-1990]
§ 5-33. Title.
This Article shall be referred to as the "Flood Control Advisory Committee Ordinance of the Borough of
Lititz."
§ 5-34. Creation; membership; compensation.
The Flood Control Advisory Committee is hereby created, which Committee shall have seven
members, who shall serve without compensation.
§ 5-35. Appointment; term; vacancy; residency requirement.
All members of the Committee shall be appointed by the Council of the Borough of Lititz without
any limitation upon the number of terms a member may serve.
All members of the Committee shall serve for terms of five years; provided, however, that the
terms of the initial members of the Committee shall be appointed and so fixed that no more than
one member shall be reappointed or replaced during any calendar year. The Chairman of the
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 15/233
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
Committee shall promptly notify the Council concerning a vacancy or vacancies in the Committee.
Whenever vacancies occur other than as a result of the expiration of a member's term, the Council
shall fill such vacancy by appointment for the period of the unexpired term.
All members of the Committee shall be residents of the Borough of Lititz or owners or employees
of businesses located within the Borough of Lititz.
§ 5-36. Conduct of business.
The Flood Control Advisory Committee may adopt such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary to govern its procedures consistent with this Article and the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
The Committee shall elect its own Chairman and Vice Chairman and create and fill such other
offices as it may determine. Officers shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves.
The Committee shall keep a full record of its business in the form of official minutes.
The Committee shall make a written report of its activities annually to the Council by March 1 of
each calendar year. In addition, interim reports shall be made as often as may be deemed
necessary by the Council.
§ 5-37. Powers, duties and responsibilities.
The Flood Control Advisory Committee shall have the powers, duties and responsibilities as
follows:
To perform periodic inspections of flood areas within the borough and recommend flood
control projects to the Council to minimize or control flood problems or the improvement of
flood-prone areas.
To perform periodic inspections of existing storm sewers within the borough and recommend
flood control projects for stormwater management.
To administer, with the aid of engineering and appropriate borough officials, those flood
control projects approved by the Borough Council for flood control and stormwater
management.
To serve as liaison between the Borough Engineer and the Borough Council for work
associated with flood control projects approved by the Borough Council for flood control and
stormwater management.
To serve as a liaison between officials of contiguous municipalities and the Borough Council
when flood control projects approved by the Borough Council have an effect upon flood
control and stormwater management in such other municipalities.
To hold public hearings and other meetings which are deemed desirable for the interest of the
residents of the Borough of Lititz concerning flood control matters.
To undertake, at the request of the Council, the specific site inspection of locations of flood
problems and report to the Council concerning its findings and any recommendations
concerning appropriate remedial action.
To request from other departments and agencies of the Borough of Lititz all information
available which relates to the work of the Committee.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 16/233
(9)
(10)
B.
A.
B.
To be subject to the approval of the Borough Engineer concerning any act or recommendation
which involves engineering considerations.
To be responsible to the Council and the administration for the review and recommendation of
all matters presented to the Council and the administration concerning flood control matters.
In the performance of its functions, the Committee may enter upon any land to make examinations
and surveys with the consent of the owner of such land.
§ 5-38. Expenditure and receipt of funds.
The Flood Control Advisory Committee may employ administrative and technical services as
consultants on particular matters which will aid in carrying out the provisions of this Article,
provided that the same has been authorized by Council.
The Committee may, with the consent of the Council, accept and utilize any funds made available
by the federal government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the County of Lancaster or any
other funds granted by individuals or private agencies for the development or enhancement of
facilities or services relating to flood control which are deemed in the best interest of the residents
of the Borough of Lititz. The Council may enter into agreements or contracts regarding the
acceptance or utilization of funds or assistance as it deems necessary and advisable.
Chapter 7. Civil Service Commission Rules and
Regulations
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 12-18-2012 by Res. No. 12-18-2012,
approved 12-18-2012.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Shared regional emergency services — See Ch. 10, Art. V.
Intermunicipal police assistance — See Ch. 12.
Pensions and employee benefits — See Ch. 16.
Article I. Definition of Terms
§ 7-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases, wherever used in these rules and
regulations, shall be construed to have the meanings indicated herein:
APPLICANT
Any individual who applies in writing to the Commission in response to a legally advertised notice
of vacancy and/or examination for any position in the Borough of Lititz Police Department.
APPLICANT WITH ACT 120 TRAINING
Any individual who applies in writing to the Commission in response to a legally advertised notice
of vacancy and/or examination for any position in the Borough of Lititz Police Department who has
successfully completed training under Pennsylvania Act 120 with satisfactory test scores.
ASSOCIATION
The Lancaster County Chiefs of Police Association, Inc.
BOROUGH
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 17/233
A.
The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH SECRETARY
The Secretary of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania.
CERTIFICATION
The submission to the municipal governing body of names taken from the eligible list.
CHAIRPERSON
The Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania.
COMMISSION
The Civil Service Commission of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania.
ELIGIBLE
A person whose name is recorded on a current eligible list or furlough list.
ELIGIBLE LIST
A list of names of persons who have passed an examination for a particular position in the Police
Department.
EXAMINATION
The series of tests given to applicants to determine their qualifications for a position in the
Borough of Lititz Police Department.
FURLOUGH LIST
The list containing the names of persons temporarily laid off from positions in the Police
Department because of a reduction in the number of officers.
MEDICAL EXAMINATION
Any examination, procedure, inquiry or test designed to obtain information about medical history
or a physical or mental condition which might disqualify an applicant if it would prevent the
applicant from performing, with or without a reasonable accommodation, all of the essential
functions of the position.
MUNICIPAL GOVERNING BODY
The Council of the Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
PHYSICIAN
Shall have the meaning given to it in 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1991 (relating to definitions).
POLICE OFFICER
For purposes of these rules and regulations, an entry-level sworn full-time position in the Borough
of Lititz Police Department.
PROBATIONER
An officer in the Police Department who has been appointed from an eligible list but who has not
yet completed his or her probationary period.
QUALIFIED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL
An individual in collaboration with or under the supervision or direction of a physician, as may be
required by law, who is licensed:
As a physician assistant pursuant to the Act of December 20, 1985 (P. L. 457, No. 112),
known as the "Medical Practice Act of 1985,"[1] or the Act of October 5, 1978 (P. L. 1109, No.
261), known as the "Osteopathic Medical Practice Act";[2] or
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 18/233
B.
[1]
[2]
[3]
A.
B.
C.
D.
As a certified registered nurse practitioner pursuant to the Act of May 22, 1951 (P. L. 317, No.
69), known as "the Professional Nursing Law."[3]
REDUCTION IN RANK
A change to a different position or rank which results in a decrease in salary; provided, however,
that a decrease in salary without a change to a different position or rank shall not necessarily
constitute a reduction in rank.
REMOVAL
The permanent separation of a police officer from the Police Department.
SECRETARY
The Secretary of the Civil Service Commission of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania.
SUSPENSION
The temporary separation of a member of the Police Department from his or her position.
Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 422.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 271.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 211 et seq.
§ 7-2. Gender.
The words "he," "his," "him" and "men," when used in these rules and regulations, represent both the
masculine and feminine genders.
Article II. The Commission
§ 7-3. Civil Service Commission.
The Commission shall consist of three Commissioners who shall be qualified electors of the
Borough of Lititz and shall be appointed by the municipal governing body initially to serve for the
term of two, four and six years, and as terms thereafter expire shall be appointed for terms of six
years.
Any vacancy occurring in the Commission for any reason whatsoever shall be filled by the
municipal governing body for the unexpired term within a period of 30 days after such vacancy
occurs.
Each member of the Commission, before entering upon the discharge of the duties of their office,
shall take an oath or affirmation to support the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to perform their official duties with fidelity.
No Civil Service Commissioner shall receive compensation.
Borough Council may appoint no more than three qualified electors of the Borough to serve as
alternate members of the Commission. The term of office of the alternate members shall be six
years. When seated pursuant to § 7-5 hereof, an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all
proceedings and discussions of the Commission to the same and full extent as provided by law for
Commission members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting member during the
proceedings, and shall have all of the powers and duties set forth in this chapter and as otherwise
provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other office in the Borough. An alternate may participate
in any proceeding or discussion of the Commission but shall not be entitled to vote as a member
of the Commission unless designated as a voting alternate member pursuant to § 7-5.
§ 7-4. Offices incompatible with Civil Service Commissioner.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 19/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
No Commissioner shall at the same time hold an elective or appointed office under the United States
government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any political subdivision of the commonwealth,
except that one member of the Commission may be a member of the Council of the Borough and one
may be a member of the teaching profession in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any political
subdivision thereof.
§ 7-5. Organization of Commission; quorum.
The Commission first appointed shall organize within 10 days of its appointment and shall elect one of
its members as its Chairperson, one as its Vice Chairperson, and one as the Secretary. The
Commission shall thereafter meet and organize on the first Monday of each even-numbered year.
Each Commissioner shall be notified in writing of each and every meeting. Three members of the
Commission shall constitute a quorum. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a
quorum is not reached, the Chair shall designate as many alternate members of the Commission to sit
on the Commission as may be needed to provide a quorum. An alternate member of the Commission
shall continue to serve on the Commission in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the
alternate was initially designated until the Commission has made a final determination of the matter or
case. Designation of an alternate member pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case
basis in rotation according to declining seniority among the alternates. No action of the Commission
shall be valid unless it shall have the concurrence of at least two members.
§ 7-6. Duties of Chairperson.
The Chairperson, or in his/her absence, the Vice Chairperson, shall preside at all meetings and
hearings of the Commission, decide all points of order or procedure and perform any duties required
by law or these rules.
§ 7-7. Duties of Secretary.
The Secretary shall, at the direction of the Commission, see to it that all official correspondence of the
Commission is done and all notices required by law and these rules of procedure are sent out, keep a
record of each examination or other official action of the Commission, and perform all other duties
required by law, by these rules and by the Commission.
§ 7-8. Meetings.
Except for the biennial organization meeting, all meetings shall be held either at the call of the
Chairperson or at the call of two members of the Commission. At least 24 hours' written notice of each
meeting shall be given each member. The Commission shall have the discretion to determine whether
meetings shall be open to the public when not specifically regulated by existing law.
§ 7-9. Meeting agenda.
Regular meetings of the Commission shall be as follows:
Roll call.
Approval of minutes of previous meeting.
Unfinished business.
Hearing of cases.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 20/233
E.
F.
[1]
A.
B.
New business.
Communications and reports.
§ 7-10. Minutes and records.
The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and records of examinations and other
official actions. All records of the Commission shall be preserved and disposed of according to the
Retention and Disposition Schedule for Records of Pennsylvania Municipalities issued by the
Local Government Records Committee under the authority of the Municipal Records Act, 1968,
P.L. 961, No. 428, 53 P.S. § 9001.[1] All recommendations of applicants for appointment received
by the Commission shall be kept and preserved for a period of five years.
Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 9001 was repealed 12-19-1996 by P.L. 1158, No. 177. For current
provisions, see 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 1381 et seq.
Any and all records related to any disciplinary action filed with the Commission shall be open to
public inspection, subject to reasonable regulation. The Secretary shall keep minutes of the
Commission's proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question. If a member is
absent or fails to vote, the Secretary shall indicate that fact in the minutes. All recommendations of
applicants for appointment received by the Commission shall be kept and preserved for a period
of five years, and all records and all written causes of removal filed with the Commission, except
as otherwise provided in § 7-57, shall be open to public inspection and subject to reasonable
regulation.
§ 7-11. Clerks and supplies, etc.; Solicitor.
The municipal governing body shall furnish to the Commission on its requisition clerical assistance that
may be necessary for the Commission. The municipal governing body shall provide a suitable and
convenient room for the use of the Commission. The Commission shall order from the municipal
governing body as necessary stationery, postage, printing and supplies. The municipal governing body
shall also provide the services of a Solicitor for the Commission, to be appointed by the Commission
and paid by the municipal governing body. The municipal governing body shall have the authority to
place a reasonable limit on the amount allowed each year for the services of the Commission Solicitor.
The elected and appointed officials of every borough shall aid the Commission in all proper ways in
carrying out the provisions of this chapter relating to civil service.
§ 7-12. Amendment and enforcement of rules and regulations.
The Commission shall have power to prescribe, amend and enforce rules and regulations for carrying
into effect the provisions of this chapter and shall be governed thereby. Before the effective date of the
rules and regulations, or amendments thereto, the same shall be first approved by the municipal
governing body. When the rules and regulations, or amendments, have been approved, they shall not
be annulled, amended, or added to without the approval of Council. All rules and modifications shall be
made available by the municipal governing body for public distribution or inspection.
§ 7-13. Investigations.
The Commission shall have the power to make investigations concerning all matters relating to the
administration and enforcement of these rules and regulations. The Chairperson of the Commission is
authorized to administer oaths and affirmations in connection with such investigations.
§ 7-14. Subpoenas.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 21/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
The Commission shall have the power to issue subpoenas over the signature of the Chairperson,
or designee, to acquire and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of records and
papers pertaining to any investigation or inquiry. The fees of such witnesses for attendance and
travel shall be the same as for witnesses appearing in the courts and shall be paid from
appropriations for the incidental expenses of the Commission.
All officers and public service employees of the Borough of Lititz shall attend and testify when
required to do so by the Commission.
If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena issued by the Commission, upon
conviction of such refusal or neglect in a summary proceeding, that person shall be sentenced to
pay a fine not to exceed $100 and in default of the payment of such fine and costs shall be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days.
If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena, the Commission may apply by petition
to the Court of Common Pleas of Lancaster County for its subpoena, requiring the attendance of
such persons before the Commission or the court to testify and to produce any records and
papers necessary, and in default thereof shall be held in contempt of court.
§ 7-15. Annual report.
The Commission shall make an annual report to the municipal governing body containing a brief
summary of its work during the year and a full accounting for any expenditures of public monies. The
annual report shall be available for public inspection.
Article III. Applications and Qualifications
§ 7-16. Advertisements for vacant positions.
In seeking applicants for positions within its Police Department, the Borough of Lititz may advertise for
applicants or may limit its search and advertising to applicants with Act 120 training, at the sole
discretion of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 7-17. General provisions relating to examinations.
The Commission shall make rules and regulations, to be approved as provided in § 7-12,
providing for the examination of applicants for positions in the police force and for promotions,
which rules and regulations shall prescribe the minimum qualifications of all applicants to be
examined and the passing grades. All examinations for positions or promotions shall be practical
in character and shall relate to matters and include inquiries as will fairly test the merit and fitness
of the persons examined to discharge the duties of the employment sought by them. All
examinations shall be open to all applicants who have the minimum qualifications required by the
rules and regulations. Each applicant for an original position shall:
Be subject to the regulations adopted by the Commission;
Either before or after the written examination, be required to submit to a physical fitness or
agility examination that is job-related and consistent with business necessity;
If made a conditional offer of employment, be given a physical and psychological medical
examination as provided in § 7-33; and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 22/233
(4)
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
Be subject to a background investigation. Background investigations may be restricted to
those candidates on an eligibility list or those to be certified to Borough Council for
appointment.
Each applicant for promotion shall be subject to the regulations adopted by the Commission and
to examination and selection in accordance with these rules and regulations. Physical fitness or
agility examinations that are job-related and consistent with business necessity and physical and
psychological medical examinations may, but need not, be required for promotions.
Public notice of the time and place of every examination, together with the information as to the
kind of position or place to be filled, shall be given by publication once in a newspaper of general
circulation, at least two weeks prior to each examination, and a copy of the notice shall be
prominently posted in the office of the Commission or other public place.
The Commission shall post in its office the eligibility list, containing the names and grades of those
who have passed the examination.
§ 7-18. Eligibility for examination.
Each person desiring to apply for examination shall file with the Commission a formal application
in which the applicant shall state under oath or affirmation:
His full name and residence or post office address;
His citizenship, place and date of birth;
His condition of health and physical capacity for public services;
His business or employment and his residence for the past five years;
In cases where the municipal governing body has advertised for applicants with Act 120
training, proof that such training has been satisfactorily completed;
Other information as may be required by the Commission's rules and regulations, showing the
applicant's qualifications for the position for which the applicant is being examined.
The applicant must make an oath or affirmation that the application is completely truthful, and the
applicant is subject to the penalties of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904 relating to unsworn falsification to
authorities. The application shall be substantially in the same form as that attached hereto and
incorporated herein as Exhibit A.
The application shall contain no falsification, omission or concealment of material fact. Should any
investigation of the Commission disclose any willful misstatement, falsification or concealment with
respect to an application:
The application shall be invalid and the application applicant shall be disqualified from
examination; or
If the applicant shall have been examined and certified as eligible, the name of such applicant
shall be removed from the eligibility list; or
If the applicant shall have been appointed to a position within the Borough of Lititz Police
Department, such willful misstatement, falsification or concealment shall constitute grounds
for dismissal from the Borough of Lititz Police Department. Further, no person who shall make
any willful false application shall be permitted to make future application for any position in the
Police Department of the Borough of Lititz.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 23/233
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
§ 7-19. Discrimination.
The Borough of Lititz is an equal opportunity employer. It is the Borough of Lititz's and the
Commission's policy to grant equal employment opportunities to qualified persons without regard
to race, religion, color, national origin, gender, age, veteran status, marital status or disability. The
Borough of Lititz and the Commission will provide equal opportunities in employment and
promotion.
No question in any form of application for examination or in any examination shall be so framed as
to elicit information concerning the political or religious opinions or affiliations of any applicant, nor
shall inquiry be made concerning the opinion or affiliations, and all disclosures of opinion or
affiliation shall be ignored.
No discrimination shall be exercised, threatened or promised by any person against or in favor of
any applicant or employee because of the political or religious opinions or affiliations or race, and
no offer or promise or reward, favor or benefit, directly or indirectly, shall be made to or received
by any person for any act done or duty omitted or to be done under this chapter.
§ 7-20. Filing applications.
Applications for positions in the Police Department may be received only at the times designated by
the Civil Service Commission when available positions in the Police Department exist. They can be
obtained during normal business hours in the office of the Municipal Secretary and by such other
offices and officers as the Commission may designate. The receipt of such applications shall be
subject to the following conditions:
No application received after 12:00 noon on any day that is 14 calendar days prior to the date
fixed for the written examination in the public announcement shall be considered for such
examination; and
An application shall become invalid one year after the date upon which it was received.
§ 7-21. Age requirements.
All applicants for the position of police officer must be no less than 18 years of age before the deadline
for submitting completed applications. Each applicant shall present satisfactory evidence of date of
birth, if requested.
§ 7-22. General qualifications - all applicants.
Every applicant for any position in the Borough of Lititz Police Department shall possess a diploma
from an accredited high school or graduate equivalency diploma. In addition, every applicant must be a
United States citizen, be of good moral character, be physically and mentally fit to perform the full
duties of a police officer, and, prior to appointment, possess a valid motor vehicle operator's license
issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 7-23. General qualifications - applicants for promotion.
Promotions shall be based on merit to be ascertained by examinations to be prescribed by the
Commission. All questions relative to promotions shall be practical in character and will fairly test
the merit and fitness of persons seeking promotion. The municipal governing body shall notify the
Commission of a vacancy in the police force in the Borough which is to be filled by promotion and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 24/233
B.
C.
shall request the certification of an eligibility list. The Commission shall certify for each vacancy
the names of three persons on the eligibility list who have received the highest average in the last
preceding promotional examination held within a period of two years preceding the date of the
request for the eligibility list. If three names are not available, the Commission shall certify the
names remaining on the eligibility list. The municipal governing body shall make an appointment
from the names certified, based solely on the merits and fitness of the candidate, unless the
Council makes objections to the Commission regarding one or more of the persons so certified for
any reason provided under § 7-24 of these rules and regulations. If the Commission sustains an
objection, the provisions of § 7-26 shall be applicable. The municipal governing body shall have
the power to determine in each instance whether an increase in salary shall constitute a
promotion.
In addition to meeting the qualifications in § 7-23A above, all applicants for a promotional position
(a promotion) shall not have been suspended without pay for more than five days in the three
years prior to the deadline for submitting applications. Any suspension which the applicant has
timely appealed pursuant to a contractual grievance procedure shall be disregarded unless the
appeal is resolved prior to the creation of the eligibility list.
In addition to meeting the qualifications fixed for each applicant for a position in the Police
Department, all applicants for the position of Sergeant and Lieutenant shall have been
continuously employed in a municipal police service for at least five years on the date of
application in the case of Sergeant and at least seven years for all other officers, and completed
their one-year probationary period in the Borough Police Department.
§ 7-24. Rejection of applicant.
The Commission may refuse to examine, or if examined, may refuse certify as eligible after
examination, any applicant who is found to lack any of the minimum qualifications for examination
prescribed in these rules and regulations for the particular position for which the applicant has applied.
In addition, the Commission may refuse to examine, or if examined, may refuse to certify, any applicant
who is physically unfit for the performance of the duties of the position applied for, or who is illegally
using a controlled substance, as defined in Section 201 of the Controlled Substances Act (Public Law
91-513, 21 U.S.C. § 802), or who has been guilty of any crime involving moral turpitude, or of infamous
or notoriously disgraceful conduct, or who has been dismissed from public service for delinquency or
misconduct in office, or who is affiliated with any group whose policies or activities are subversive to
the forms of government set forth in the Constitutions and laws of the United States of America and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 7-25. Recording applications.
Applications will be received by the Municipal Secretary, who shall be designated to receive such
applications in the public advertisement. Applications may also be received by the Municipal
Secretary's official designee. The Municipal Secretary, or the Municipal Secretary's official designee,
shall record the receipt of all applications and provide the applicant with notice of the time and place for
the first portion of the testing procedure, the written examination. Any application containing material
errors or omissions may, at the discretion of the Commission, be returned to the applicant for
correction prior to the deadline for filing applications, after which no new applications or amended
applications will be accepted.
§ 7-26. Hearing for disqualified applicant.
If any applicant or person is aggrieved by refusal of the Commission to certify the applicant as eligible
after examination, or a person is aggrieved by refusal of the Commission to examine the person, the
Commission shall, at the request of the applicant or person aggrieved, within 10 days, appoint a time
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 25/233
A.
B.
C.
and place for a public hearing. At the hearing, the applicant or person aggrieved may appear with or
without counsel, and the Commission shall take testimony and review its refusal to provide
examination or certification. The deliberations of the Commission, including interim rulings on
evidentiary or procedural issues, may be held in the nature of a closed executive session. The
Commission's disposition of the matter shall constitute official action which shall occur at a public
meeting held pursuant to 65 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 7 (relating to open meetings). The decision of the
Commission shall be final.
§ 7-27. Public notice.
The Commission shall conspicuously post in the Borough Municipal Building an announcement of the
hiring or promotional testing and set forth the time and place of every examination, together with the
information as to the type of position to be filled, the requirements for that position, where applications
may be obtained, and the deadline for filing those applications. In addition, at least two weeks prior to
the close of the application, publication of the notice shall occur in at least one newspaper of general
circulation or a newspaper circulating generally in the Borough of Lititz.
§ 7-28. Investigation of applicant.
A background investigation of the character and reputation of the applicant may be made by the
Commission or its agent and may include *credit reports and reports of investigations from recognized
agencies. *Credit reports are not sufficient to disqualify an applicant. If information from credit reports
or criminal record investigations forms a part of the basis for disqualification of an applicant, the
applicant will be so notified.
Article IV. Announcement of Examinations
§ 7-29. Public notice.
Public notice of the time and place of the examination, together with information as to the position(s) to
be filled, shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. The
public notice shall be published at least two weeks prior to an examination, and a copy of the notice
shall be posted in the Municipal Building. Additional public notice by publication, posting or otherwise
may be given at any time at the discretion of the Commission.
§ 7-30. Notice of oral examination.
In addition to the public announcement of the examination, the Borough Secretary shall give written
notice to each applicant deemed eligible after successfully completing the written examination as
follows:
By mailing or otherwise delivering to each applicant who has scored among the top in the written
examination the date, time, and place of the interview.
The maximum number selected to be interviewed shall be determined by multiplying the number
of vacancies by six. Those selected will include the applicants scoring at the top of the written
examination plus others who have Act 120 certification and a passing score.
Each notice shall be mailed or otherwise delivered at least five days prior to the date fixed for the
interview.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 26/233
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
Failure to report for the oral interview in accordance with the written instructions shall disqualify
the applicant.
Article V. Medical, Psychological, and Polygraph
Examinations
§ 7-31. Medical and psychological examinations.
An applicant selected from the eligibility list shall receive a conditional offer of employment. The
offer of employment shall be conditioned upon the conditional appointee undergoing a physical
and psychological medical examination and a determination that the conditional appointee is
capable of performing all of the essential functions of the position. Physical medical examinations
shall be under the direction of a physician or other qualified medical professional. Psychological
medical examinations shall be under the direction of a psychiatrist or psychologist.
The physician or other qualified medical professional and the psychiatrist or psychologist shall be
appointed by the municipal governing body and shall render an opinion as to whether the
conditional appointee has a physical or mental condition which calls into question the person's
ability to perform all of the essential functions of the position for which the person was
conditionally appointed.
If the opinion rendered by the physician, other qualified medical professional, psychiatrist or
psychologist calls into question the conditional appointee's ability to perform all essential functions
of a position, a person designated by the municipal governing body shall meet with the conditional
appointee for the purpose of having one or more interactive discussions on whether the
conditional appointee can, with or without reasonable accommodation, perform all of the essential
functions of the position.
If, at the conclusion of the interactive discussion under Subsection C, the municipal governing
body determines that the conditional appointee does not qualify, the municipal governing body
shall give written notice to the conditional appointee and the Commission.
There shall be no physical or psychological medical examination prior to conditional appointment.
§ 7-32. Polygraph examinations.
Polygraph examinations will be completed on the individual or individuals being extended an offer of
employment by the municipal governing body.
Article VI. Examination Elements
§ 7-33. Examination for police positions.
The examination for the position of police officer shall consist of the following parts:
Step Element Passing Score Points
1 Application P/F ---
2 Written examination 70% 4-20
3 Oral interview 80
4 Background investigation P/F ---
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 27/233
B.
C.
A.
B.
Step Element Passing Score Points
_____
100
The number of points an applicant can receive on the written examination is based on the
following scale:
Score of 100 - 96 = 20 points
Score of 95 - 91 = 18 points
Score of 90 - 86 = 16 points
Score of 85 - 81 = 12 points
Score of 80 - 76 = 8 points
Score of 75 - 70 = 4 points
The examination for promotion to the positions of Sergeant and Lieutenant shall consist of the
following parts:
Step Element Passing Score Points
1 Performance rating --- 35
2 Written examination 70% 30
3 Oral interview --- 35
_____
100
§ 7-34. Passing grade.
The minimum passing grade for the written examination for the position of police officer, Sergeant
or Lieutenant shall be a score of 70%. Any candidate receiving a deficiency in a subtest of the
written examination must have Act 120 certification.
Every applicant for the position of police officer who receives a passing score on the written
examination and who is entitled by law to an additional 10 points' credit for service in the Armed
Forces of the United States shall have his or her written examination score adjusted accordingly
by 10 points. Applicants claiming veteran's preference shall submit additional satisfactory proof of
active service and honorable discharge whenever the Commission shall so demand.
§ 7-35. Notice of applicant's grade.
When the grading of the written examination is completed, the grades shall be filed in the office of the
Municipal Secretary. A list of names and scores of those who passed the examination shall be posted
at the Municipal Building.
§ 7-36. Ineligibility for future examinations for six months.
If an applicant fails to obtain a passing grade on the written examination, he or she shall not be eligible
for a subsequent examination for any position in the Police Department of the municipality for a period
of six months.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 28/233
§ 7-37. Administering examinations.
The Commission may designate the individual responsible as the examiner for the written examination.
The oral interview and evaluation of the service or performance record of any applicant shall be the
responsibility of the Commission; provided, however, that the Commission may designate, from time to
time, such persons qualified in oral examining procedures and techniques, or qualified to evaluate
performance or service records, as are considered necessary to assist in such examinations and
evaluations.
§ 7-38. Conduct of written examinations.
The Commission shall prepare a statement of instructions and rules for the conduct of written
examinations. The regularly appointed examiner shall administer each examination in accordance with
the instructions of the Commission and be responsible for enforcing the rules of conduct for written
examinations.
§ 7-39. Delegation of authority.
As an alternative to the examination and grading procedures set forth in Article VI, the Borough of Lititz
may delegate to the Lancaster County Chiefs of Police Association, Inc., the tasks of recruiting,
advertising, testing of applicants and/or applicants with Act 120 training and certification of the eligibility
list to the Borough of Lititz. This delegation will take place in accordance with a memorandum of
understanding of June 16, 2010, between the Lancaster County Chiefs of Police Association, Inc., and
member agencies.
§ 7-40. Penalty for improper conduct.
Should an applicant be found guilty of any act tending to defeat the proper conduct or the result of any
examination, his or her name shall be removed from the eligible list resulting from the examination, and
the applicant shall not be permitted to make future application for any position in the Police
Department.
Article VII. Eligible Lists
§ 7-41. Creation of eligible list.
At the completion of the examination requirements set forth in Article VI hereof (written examination,
oral examination, background investigation, physical fitness test and polygraph examination), the
Commission shall rank all passing applicants on a list, with the applicant receiving the highest score at
the top of the list and the applicant receiving the lowest passing score at the bottom of the list.
Applicants who qualify for veterans' preference points shall have those points added to their passing
score prior to being ranked on the eligibility list testing process, including any physical agility or other
examination, with the exception of any background investigation to be conducted after the
establishment of an eligibility list and physical and psychological medical examination pursuant to § 7-
33. The Commission shall rank the candidates who have satisfied the minimum requirements for
appointment on an eligibility list. The eligibility list shall contain the names of individuals eligible for
appointment listed from highest to lowest based on their scores on the examinations administered by
the Commission and any points for which the applicant was entitled by virtue of 51 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 71,
relating to veterans' preference.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 29/233
§ 7-42. Filing of eligibility list.
As soon as possible after the completion of the ranking process, the eligible list shall be filed in the
office of the Municipal Secretary and copy posted at the Municipal Building. The names on the eligible
list shall be arranged, from highest to lowest, in the order of the final score received by each eligible
applicant.
§ 7-43. Promotional requirements.
For positions of promotion, fulfilling the performance requirements set forth in § 7-23 is also required.
§ 7-44. Breaking tie scores.
When two or more eligible applicants shall receive the same final score, the order in which the names
of such persons shall appear on the eligible list shall be determined by their respective scores on that
part of the examination assigned the greatest weight. In the event that two or more qualifying
applicants also receive identical scores on that part of the examination assigned the greatest weight,
the order of the listing shall be determined by the order in which the applications were numbered for
recording purposes.
§ 7-45. Life of eligible lists.
The eligibility list will be valid for one year from the date the Commission formally adopts the eligibility
list. Prior to the expiration of the one-year period, the Commission may extend the validity of the
eligibility list for up to an additional 12 months by a majority vote of the Commission at a duly
authorized Commission meeting. In the absence of a lawful extension by the Commission, the list shall
expire.
§ 7-46. Furlough lists.
Whenever the municipal governing body shall determine the need for a reduction in the number of
police officers, the Commission shall prepare and maintain a list of the names of all such furloughed
officers, together with the position held by each such officer at the time of furlough. The names on the
furlough list shall be arranged in priority order based on the length of service of each furloughed officer.
Article VIII. Certification and Appointments
§ 7-47. Filling vacancies.
When a vacancy is to be filled in the Police Department, the municipal governing body shall submit a
written request to the Commission for certification of eligibles. In making the request, the title of the
position to be filled shall be specified.
§ 7-48. Furlough list to fill appointments.
Upon receipt of a request from the municipal governing body, the Commission shall first certify the
names of those eligible who were furloughed because of a reduction in force. In filling a vacancy from
the furlough list, the Commission shall certify the top name only. If more than one vacancy is to be
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 30/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
filled, the Commission shall certify from the top of the list a number of names equal to the number of
vacancies to be filled. No examination, other than a physical examination as directed by the Civil
Service Commission, shall be required in any case of reappointment or reinstatement.
§ 7-49. Certification from eligible lists.
If no furlough list exists or if the total number of vacancies cannot be filled from the available names on
the furlough list, the Commission shall certify for each vacancy from the eligibility list the names of
three persons, or a lesser number where three are not available, who have received the highest
average. The municipal governing body shall make a conditional appointment from the three names
certified, based solely on the merits and fitness of the candidates, unless Borough Council makes
objection to the Commission regarding one or more of the certified persons for any of the reasons
stated in § 7-24. Should the objections be sustained by the Commission, or if the conditional appointee
is determined to be unqualified in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 7-26, the Commission
shall strike the name of the person from the eligibility list and certify the next-highest name for each
name stricken from the eligibility list. As each subsequent vacancy occurs in the same or another
position, precisely the same procedure shall be followed. The number of available eligibles certified
from the eligible list shall exceed by two for each vacancy to be filled from such eligible list. If there are
fewer than three available eligibles on the eligible list, the municipal governing body may make a
selection from such lesser number of available eligibles or may request that the Commission hold
another examination.
§ 7-50. Removal of names from furlough and eligible lists.
In addition to the other reasons stated as grounds for removal in these rules, the name of any
person appearing on a furlough list or an eligible list shall be removed by the Commission if such
person:
Is appointed to a position in the Police Department; or
Declines an appointment to a permanent position in the Police Department; or
Fails to make written reply to the Commission seven calendar days from the date of mailing of
a notice of certification; or
Indicates availability for appointment and is appointed to fill a vacancy but fails to report for
duty at the time prescribed, unless, in the opinion of the municipal governing body, such
person can show good and sufficient reasons for failure to report.
The name of any person on an eligible list also shall be removed by the Commission if certified for
appointment consideration three times as the top name and he/she is not appointed. Nothing in
this section, however, shall be construed as authorizing the removal of the name of a person from
a furlough list or eligible list who refuses or accepts a position of a lower rank than that from which
furloughed or for which eligible on a Commission list.
§ 7-51. Appointment procedures.
Whenever the name of a person is certified from either the furlough list or the eligible list, the person
shall be notified immediately of such certification. The notice shall include the title of the position and
the compensation to be paid and shall request a written reply within seven days from the date of
mailing.
§ 7-52. Probationary period.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 31/233
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
All initial appointments to positions in the Police Department shall be for a probationary period of one
year from the date of appointment. During the probationary period, an appointee may be dismissed
only for a cause specified in § 7-54 or because of incapacity for duty due to the use of alcohol or drugs.
The Chief of Police shall review the adjustment, performance and general acceptability of each
probationer quarterly to determine whether such probationer is fully qualified for permanent
appointment. The Chief of Police shall make a report to the municipal governing body recommending
termination of employment of a police officer found not to be acceptable in his or her position and/or
shall submit a final probationary report, not less than 10 nor more than 15 calendar days before the
next regular meeting of the municipal governing body immediately preceding the end of the
probationary period. Each final probationary report shall include the recommendation of the Chief of
Police to retain the probationer. Each report shall be submitted in writing to the municipal governing
body. Within five calendar days after receiving a probationary report from the Chief of Police
recommending retention or rejection of a probationer, the municipal governing body shall notify the
Commission, in writing, of its decision to retain or remove the probationer. The Commission, in turn,
shall notify the probationer of such decision within five calendar days and in no event beyond the last
day of the probationary period.
§ 7-53. Appointment of Chief of Police.
In the case of a vacancy in the office of Chief of Police, the municipal governing body has full
discretion in selecting the individual to fill the position of Chief of Police. If the municipal governing
body requests the Commission to subject that person to a noncompetitive examination, and if that
person successfully passes the noncompetitive examination, then the Commission shall notify the
municipal governing body of the results of the examination and that person may only be removed
from the position of Chief of Police for reasons set forth in § 7-54.
A Police Chief may be appointed by the municipal governing body without civil service status. If
the municipal governing body takes this route, the individual appointed to Police Chief may be
returned to a prior rank within the Borough of Lititz Police Department if promoted within or
dismissed from an outside appointment, without implicating civil service hearing rights.
Article IX. Suspensions, Removals and Reduction in Rank
§ 7-54. Grounds for disciplinary action.
No person appointed to a position in the Police Department pursuant to these rules and
regulations may be suspended without pay or removed and no person promoted in rank pursuant
to these rules and regulations may be reduced in rank except for the following reasons:
Physical or mental disability affecting the officer's ability to continue in service, in which case
the officer shall receive an honorable discharge from service;
Neglect or violation of an official duty;
A violation of any law which provides that such violation constitutes a misdemeanor or felony;
Inefficiency, neglect, intemperance, immorality, disobedience of orders or conduct
unbecoming an officer;
Intoxication while on duty;
Engaging or participating in or conducting any political or election campaign while on duty or
in uniform or while using Borough property, otherwise than to exercise the person's own right
of suffrage; or
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 32/233
[1]
(7)
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
Engaging or participating in the conduct of a political or election campaign for an incompatible
office as provided in Section 1104(f) of the Civil Service Law for boroughs.[1]
Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1104(f).
No officer shall be removed for religious, racial or political reasons.
A written statement of any charges made against any officer so employed shall be furnished to the
officer within five days after those charges have been adopted by the municipal governing body.
The person so employed shall have 10 days from the date of receiving the notice in which to
submit a written request for a hearing to the Civil Service Commission under § 7-57.
§ 7-55. Furloughs.
If, for reasons of economy or other reasons, it shall be deemed necessary by the municipal governing
body to reduce the number of full-time police officers in the Department, then the municipal governing
body shall furlough the person or persons, including probationers, last appointed to the force. Such
removal shall be accomplished by furloughing in numerical order commencing with the person last
appointed until such reduction shall have been accomplished. In the event the said police force shall
again be increased, the employees furloughed shall be reinstated in the order of their seniority in the
service. The provisions of this section as to reduction in force are not applicable to Chief of Police.
§ 7-56. Notice of suspension, removal or reduction in rank.
Whenever a police officer is suspended, removed or reduced in rank, the specific charges
warranting such action shall be stated in writing by the municipal governing body. The charges
shall be stated clearly and in sufficient detail to enable the officer to understand the charges and to
allow the officer an opportunity to respond to those charges. The charges shall specify the
subsection of § 7-54 which provides the basis for the disciplinary action as well as an explanation
of the factual circumstances upon which the municipal governing body relied in finding a violation
of § 7-54.
Within five days after the municipal governing body has voted to impose the disciplinary action, a
written statement of the charges shall be delivered to the officer either by personal service or by
certified and registered mail. In addition, the charges shall notify the officer of the right to appeal
under § 7-57 of these rules and regulations. A copy of the statement of charges shall also be
served upon the members of the Commission.
§ 7-57. Hearings on suspensions, removals and reductions in
rank.
The officer who has been suspended, removed or reduced in rank may appeal the decision of the
municipal governing body by written notice to the Secretary at 7 South Broad Street, Lititz,
Pennsylvania, 17543, requesting a hearing. This request shall be received by the Commission
within 10 days after the officer received notice of the discipline. The officer may make written
answers to any charges filed not later than the date fixed for the hearing. Failure of the officer to
provide written answers to any of the charges shall not be deemed an admission by the officer.
The Commission shall grant the officer a hearing within 10 days from the officer's written request
for a hearing, unless continued by the Commission for cause at the request of the Commission,
the municipal governing body or the officer. Notwithstanding this provision, the failure of the
Commission to hold a hearing within 10 days from the filing of the charges in writing shall not
result in the dismissal of the charges filed. The Council may suspend the person, without pay,
pending the determination of the charges against the person; but in the event the Commission
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 33/233
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
A.
(1)
B.
fails to uphold the charges, then the person sought to be suspended, removed or reduced in rank
shall be reinstated with full pay for the period during which the person was suspended, removed or
reduced in rank, and the charges shall be sealed and not be available for public inspection in the
event the charges are dismissed. At any such hearing, the officer against whom the charges have
been made may be present and represented by counsel, may call witnesses and may present
testimony and documentation in defense. The municipal governing body may also be represented
by counsel, call witnesses and present evidence as is necessary to support the charges. A
stenographic record of all testimony shall be taken at every hearing and preserved by the
Commission. In the event the charges are dismissed, the record shall be sealed and not be
available for public inspection. Notice of the date, time and place for each hearing shall be given in
the following manner:
Either by personal service or certified or registered mail to each of the principals involved in
the case; and
By regular, first-class mail to all other persons who have stated an interest in the hearing;
provided, however, that any failure to give the notice required by this subsection shall not
invalidate any subsequent action taken by the Commission.
In conducting the hearing, the Commission's standard of review shall be to determine whether
sufficient evidence has been presented to support the statutory reason for the disciplinary action.
If the Commission finds that sufficient evidence has been introduced to support the charge, the
Commission shall not modify the penalty imposed by the municipal governing body unless it finds
that the penalty imposed was arbitrary, discriminatory or an abuse of the municipal governing
body's discretion. In considering the appropriateness of the discipline, the Commission shall not
substitute its judgment for that of the municipal governing body. The Commission may request
post-hearing briefs and shall issue a written decision containing specific findings of fact and
conclusions of law within 60 days of receipt of the hearing transcript.
Unless the municipal governing body or the person sought to be suspended, removed, or reduced
in rank requests that the proceedings before the Commission be open to the public, the
proceedings before the Commission pursuant to this section shall be held in the nature of a closed
executive session that shall not be open to the public. Any such request shall be presented to the
Commission before the civil service hearing commences. The deliberations of the Commission,
including interim rulings on evidentiary or procedural issues, may be held in private and shall not
be subject to request for being open to the public, the municipal governing body or to the person
sought to be suspended, removed, or reduced in rank. The Commission's disposition of the
disciplinary action shall constitute official action which shall occur at a public meeting held
pursuant to 65 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 7 (relating to open meetings). All parties concerned shall have
immediate right of appeal to the court of common pleas of the county, and the case shall there be
determined as the court deems proper. No order of suspension made by the Commission shall be
for a longer period than one year. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days from the date of entry
by the Commission of its final order and shall be by petition.
§ 7-58. Hearing procedure.
All testimony shall be given under oath administered by the Chairperson, or in the absence of the
Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson of the Commission. The Commission shall have the power to
issue subpoenas as set forth in § 7-14 hereof. The hearing shall be open to the public unless, prior
to the commencement of the hearing, a written or oral request to close the hearing is made by
either the charged officer or the municipal governing body.
Each hearing shall be conducted in substantially the same format as follows:
The Chairman shall state the general purpose of the hearing;
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 34/233
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
C.
Upon direction from the Chairman, the Secretary shall read the written charges against the
accused, together with the record of action taken against such police officer;
The Secretary shall read any written reply of the accused;
The Chairman shall afford each person making charges, or that person's counsel, an
opportunity to make further statements in support of the charges and to produce witnesses;
The Chairman shall afford the accused, or the accused's counsel, an opportunity to question
or cross-examine the person making charges and to question or cross-examine any
witnesses produced by such person;
The Chairman shall afford each person making charges an opportunity to examine the person
accused;
The Chairman shall permit each person making charges, or their counsel, to make a
summation;
The Chairman shall permit the person accused, or the accused's counsel, an opportunity to
produce any witnesses, who may be cross-examined by the person making the charges or
such person's counsel;
The Chairman shall permit the person accused or the accused's counsel to make summation;
and
The Commission, at any time during the course of the hearing, may question or crossexamine
the person making charges, the accused or any witness.
If the Commission sustains the charges, the officer who was suspended, removed or reduced in
rank may file an appeal with the Court of Common Pleas within 60 days of the date of entry by the
Commission of its final order. No order of suspension shall be made by the Commission for a
period longer than one year. In the event that the Commission fails to uphold the charges, then the
person sought to be suspended, removed or demoted shall be reinstated with full pay for the
period of suspension, removal or demotion, and no charges related to the suspension, removal or
reduction in rank shall be officially recorded in the officer's record.
Article X. Inspections
§ 7-59. Inspection in general.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, all of the records of the Commission shall be open to the
public and available for inspection during normal business hours. A member of the Commission, or any
person who may, from time to time, be designated by the Commission, shall be present at all times
during any inspection of any record of the Commission.
§ 7-60. Reports of character and reputation.
The initial application and all reports of investigations and inquiries into the character and reputation of
applicants shall be kept in the strictest confidence and shall not be open to public inspection.
§ 7-61. Examination material.
All examination materials shall be confidential and shall not be open to general public inspection.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 35/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
Article XI. Commission Forms
§ 7-62. Official forms.
The following forms and their titles become the official forms of the Commission and a part of the rules
and regulations of the Commission, a copy of which may be obtained from the Borough Secretary:
Application for Examination.
Minimum Qualifications of Applicants.
Report of Medical Examination.
Report of Psychological Examination.
Confidential Inquiry Letter.
Confidential Inquiry Form.
Instructions to Applicants.
Notice of Medical Examination.
Notice of Psychological Examination.
Notice of Oral Examination.
Rating Form - Oral Interview.
Letter of Conditional Employment.
Article XII. Amendments
§ 7-63. Amendments.
The Commission, with the approval of the municipal governing body, may, from time to time, amend
any part of these rules and regulations, insofar as such amendments do not run contrary to the
applicable Municipal Code.
Chapter 10. Intermunicipal Agreements
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regional Planning Commission — See Ch. 5, Art. VII.
Intermunicipal police assistance — See Ch. 12.
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 36.
Article I. Warwick Area Appeals Board
[Adopted 6-29-2004 by Ord. No. C-455, approved 6-29-2004]
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 36/233
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
§ 10-1. Incorporation of caption and recitals by reference.
The caption of and recitals to this article as set forth above are incorporated herein by reference.[1]
Editor's Note: The "caption and recitals" referenced herein can be found in Ord. No. C-455, the full text
of which is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-2. Agreement; inclusion by reference.
This municipality agrees that the Borough of Lititz, Warwick Township and Elizabeth Township shall join
with each other in accordance with the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act by entering
into the intermunicipal agreement which is adopted by reference with the same effect as if it had been
set out verbatim in this section and a copy of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at
which this article was enacted.
§ 10-3. Authorization to enter agreement.
This municipality is authorized to enter into the intermunicipal agreement for the purposes contained
therein. This action is to be taken by the officials or employees of the municipality designated for this
purpose, pursuant to general or specific instructions issued by the governing body.
§ 10-4. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters are specifically found and
determined:
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the intermunicipal agreement referred to in § 10-2.
The intermunicipal agreement shall commence on July 1, 2004, and shall continue for a period of
five years. Thereafter the intermunicipal agreement shall be terminable by either party at any time
upon written notification to the other party of the party's election to terminate the intermunicipal
agreement. Such termination shall become effective 90 days after the date of such written notice
by the party electing to terminate the intermunicipal agreement.
The purposes and objectives of the intermunicipal agreement are to provide for the formation of
the Warwick Area Appeals Board (the "Appeals Board") to serve as a Joint Construction Code
Board of Appeals for all participating Municipalities.
Each municipality shall bear the costs related to the administration and enforcement of the
Uniform Construction Code within that municipality. Each municipality will establish a fee structure
so that persons filing appeals shall pay the costs associated with the administration of the Uniform
Construction Code.
A new organizational structure, the Appeals Board, will be formed by the intermunicipal
agreement. The membership of the Appeals Board is established in the intermunicipal agreement.
The manner of making appointments to the Appeals Board is set forth in the intermunicipal
agreement.
The intermunicipal agreement does not contemplate the purchase of any real or personal property.
Each municipality shall acquire, manage or dispose of such personal property as it desires and
deems necessary to administer the Uniform Construction Code.
Each municipality has the power to enter into contracts for policies of insurance or other employee
benefits.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 37/233
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Article II. Warwick Regional Recreation Commission
[Adopted 2-22-2005 by Ord. No. C-462, approved 2-22-2005]
§ 10-5. Incorporation of caption and recitals by reference.
The caption of and recitals to this article as set forth above are incorporated herein by reference.[1]
Editor's Note: The caption and recitals can be found in Ord. No. C-462, the full text of which is on file in
the Borough offices.
§ 10-6. Agreement; inclusion by reference.
This Borough shall join with Elizabeth Township, Warwick Township, Warwick School District and Lititz
Community Center (collectively the "participants" and individually a "participant") in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act by entering into the intergovernmental agreement
of cooperation (the "intergovernmental agreement"), which is adopted by reference with the same
effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a copy of which shall be filed with the
minutes of the meeting at which this article was enacted.
§ 10-7. Authorization to enter agreement.
This Borough is authorized to enter into and execute the intergovernmental agreement for the
purposes contained therein. This action is to be taken by the officials or employees of the Borough
designated for this purpose, pursuant to general or specific instructions issued by Borough Council.
§ 10-8. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters are specifically found and
determined:
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Intergovernmental Agreement referred to in
§ 10-6.
The intergovernmental agreement shall become effective as of January 1, 2005, and shall remain
in effect for four calendar years until December 31, 2008. Thereafter, the intergovernmental
agreement shall be automatically renewed on a yearly basis. Any participant may withdraw at the
end of any calendar year, including as of December 31, 2008, by giving written notice of the desire
to withdraw to all other participants and to the Warwick Regional Recreation Commission (the
"Commission") one year in advance of the date of withdrawal.
The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental agreement are to enter into an
intergovernmental contract to form the Commission and to share the costs of providing
recreational services for the residents of the municipalities.
Each municipality shall share in the cost of operation of the Commission and its programs on a pro
rata basis determined by the population of the municipalities. The municipalities, the school
district, and the community center shall also make in-kind contributions by making available
without charge the use of real property of each participant and paying costs to maintain their
respective properties.
The Commission shall consist of seven members. Warwick Township shall appoint two members,
Lititz Borough shall appoint two members, and Elizabeth Township, the school district, and the
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 38/233
F.
G.
[1]
[1]
community center shall each appoint one member.
All property, real or personal, shall be managed and disposed of by the owner of such property.
The Commission shall have the right to acquire equipment for regional recreation facilities.
The Commission shall not have the power to enter into contracts for policies of insurance or other
employee benefits. Each participant has the power to enter into contracts for policies of insurance
and other employee benefits. Subject to the requirements of any grant funding, any director of the
Commission shall be an employee of the community center.
§ 10-9. Modification of agreement.
The Borough Council reserves the right to modify, supplement or amend the intergovernmental
agreement from time to time by resolution or ordinance.
Article III. Intergovernmental Insurance Cooperative
[Adopted 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. C-500, approved 11-24-2009]
§ 10-10. Incorporation of caption and preamble by reference.
The caption and preamble of this article as set forth above are incorporated herein by reference.[1]
Editor's Note: Said caption and preamble can be found in Ord. No. C-500, the full text of which is on file
in the Borough offices.
§ 10-11. Agreement; inclusion by reference.
This political subdivision hereby approves entering into the agreement, a copy of which is attached
hereto[1] and incorporated herein by reference (and which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting
at which this article was enacted), with the intent and effect that this political subdivision shall be bound
by the agreement.
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-12. Authorization to enter agreement.
The Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the governing body, acting alone or together with the
Secretary or Assistant Secretary, are hereby authorized and directed on behalf of the political
subdivision to execute and deliver the agreement and to execute and deliver such additional
instruments, and to take such further actions, as may be necessary or appropriate to carry forth the
agreement and the transactions to be effected under the agreement, including payment to the IIC of
such amounts as are due by the political subdivision pursuant to the agreement.
§ 10-13. Ratification and approval of action of officers or agents.
All actions of any officer, agent or other representative of this political subdivision heretofore taken in
the pursuit of the establishment of the IIC and/or the political subdivision's participation therein, are
hereby ratified and approved in all respects.
§ 10-14. Authorization of necessary actions.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 39/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
[1]
[1]
The governing body of the political subdivision is hereby authorized to take such other action as may
be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this article and of the agreement.
§ 10-15. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters are
specifically found and determined:
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement;
The political subdivision shall participate in the IIC for an initial term of three years. All renewal
terms shall be as further set forth therein;
The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as set forth in the preamble of this article and in
the agreement;
The manner and extent of financing the agreement are that no borrowing will be required by the
political subdivision, funds to implement the political subdivision's obligations under the agreement
same shall come from normal and usual budgeted amounts for such matters, and other provisions
governing the manner and extent of the financing of the IIC shall be as set forth in the agreement;
The IIC shall be managed by its Board of Directors pursuant to the terms of the agreement;
All property, real or personal, of the IIC, shall be acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by
the IIC in accordance with the terms of the agreement; and
The IIC created by the agreement shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits pursuant to the terms of the agreement.
Article IV. Susquehanna Municipal Trust
[Adopted 1-31-2012 by Ord. No. C-516, approved 1-31-2012]
§ 10-16. Incorporation of caption and preamble by reference.
The caption and preamble of this article set forth above are incorporated herein by reference.[1]
Editor's Note: Said caption and preamble can be found in Ord. No. C-516, the complete text of which is
on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-17. Agreement; inclusion by reference.
This political subdivision hereby approves entering into the agreement, a copy of which is attached
hereto and incorporated herein by reference (and which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting
at which this article was enacted),[1] with the intent and effect that this political subdivision shall be
bound by the agreement and shall join and participate in the Trust.
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-18. Authorization to enter agreement.
The President or Vice President of the governing body, acting alone or together with the Secretary or
Assistant Secretary, is hereby authorized and directed on behalf of the political subdivision:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 40/233
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
F.
G.
To execute and deliver the agreement; and
To execute and deliver such additional instruments, and to take such further actions, as may be
necessary or appropriate to carry forth the agreement and the transactions to be effected under
the agreement, including payment to the Trust of such amounts as are due by the political
subdivision pursuant to the agreement.
§ 10-19. Authorization of necessary actions.
The governing body of the political subdivision is hereby authorized to take such other action as may
be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this article and of the agreement.
§ 10-20. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters are
specifically found and determined:
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement.
This political subdivision shall participate in the Trust for a minimum initial term of two years, as set
forth in the agreement.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as set forth in the preamble of this article and in
the agreement.
The manner and extent of financing the agreement are that:
No borrowing will be required by the political subdivision;
Funds to implement the political subdivision's obligations under the agreement shall come
from normal and usual budgeted amounts for such matters; and
Other provisions governing the manner and extent of the financing of the Trust shall be set
forth in the agreement.
The Trust shall be managed by its own Plan Committee and Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the agreement.
All property, real or personal, of the Trust shall be acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by
the Trust in accordance with the terms of the agreement.
The Trust created by the agreement shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of
group insurance and employee benefits, including social security, pursuant to the terms of the
agreement.
§ 10-21. Effect on existing actions.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding in any court, or any
rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause of action existing prior to the enactment of this article.
Article V. Regional Emergency Services
[Adopted 8-27-2013 by Ord. No. C-528, approved 8-27-2013]
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 41/233
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
§ 10-22. Incorporation of caption and recitals by reference.
The caption of and recitals to this article as set forth above are incorporated herein by reference.[1]
Editor's Note: Said caption and preamble can be found in Ord. No. C-528, the complete text of which is
on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-23. Agreement; inclusion by reference.
This Borough shall join with Elizabeth Township and Warwick Township in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act by entering into the intermunicipal agreement which
is adopted by reference with the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a
copy of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article was enacted.[1]
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-24. Authorization to enter agreement.
This Borough is authorized to enter into the intermunicipal agreement for the purposes contained
therein. This action is to be taken by the officials or employees of the Borough designated for this
purpose, pursuant to general or specific instructions issued by the Borough Council.
§ 10-25. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters are specifically found and
determined:
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the intermunicipal agreement referred to in § 10-
23.
This Borough's participation in the Warwick Area Regional Emergency Services Program shall be
for a period of three years, which may be extended thereafter from year to year, or as otherwise
set forth in the intermunicipal agreement referred to in § 10-23.
The purpose and objectives of the intermunicipal agreement are to enter into an intergovernmental
contract to form a regional emergency services program for the purpose of sharing the costs to
provide a professional Emergency Response Director to the municipalities, which will provide
more-efficient emergency services.
Each municipality shall share in the cost of the salary and benefit package of the Director to be
hired who will administer the program and in the expenses of the program on a pro-rata basis
determined by the population of the municipalities. The contribution of the municipalities shall be
lessened if grants for the program are received from the Department.
A Warwick Emergency Services Commission composed of one member from the governing body
of each municipality, one member from each participating fire company, one member from the
Warwick Community Ambulance Association, and one member who is a citizen at large shall be
established to administer the Warwick Area Regional Emergency Services Program.
All property, real or personal, shall be acquired, managed or disposed of by each municipality. If a
grant for the purchase of equipment later becomes available, the Warwick Emergency Services
Commission shall coordinate the application for such grant and shall determine who shall hold title
to such equipment.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 42/233
G.
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
C.
[1]
D.
E.
The Warwick Emergency Services Commission shall have the power to enter into contracts for
policies of insurance and other employee benefits. The Director shall be an employee of the
Warwick Emergency Services Commission and shall receive such employee benefits as may be
provided to the Director by the Warwick Emergency Services Commission.
Article VI. Capital Funding for the Lititz Rec Center
[Adopted 1-27-2015 by Ord. No. C-538, approved 1-27-2015]
§ 10-26. Incorporation of caption and recitals by reference.
The caption of and recitals to this article as set forth above are incorporated herein by reference.[1]
Editor's Note: Said caption and preamble can be found in Ord. No. C-538, the complete text of which is
on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-27. Agreement; inclusion by reference.
This Borough shall join with Elizabeth Township, Penn Township and Warwick Township in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act by entering into the intergovernmental
agreement of cooperation (the "intergovernmental agreement") which is adopted by reference with the
same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a copy of which shall be filed with the
minutes of the meeting at which this article was enacted.[1]
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-28. Authorization to enter agreement.
This Borough is authorized to enter into and execute the intergovernmental agreement for the
purposes contained therein. This action is to be taken by the officials or employees of the Borough
designated for this purpose, pursuant to general or specific instructions issued by the Borough Council.
§ 10-29. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters are specifically found and
determined:
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the intergovernmental agreement referred to in
§ 10-27.
The intergovernmental agreement shall become effective as of January 1, 2015, and shall remain
in effect for four calendar years until December 31, 2018. Thereafter, the intergovernmental
agreement may be renewed for an additional four-year term by the consent of the municipalities.
The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental agreement are to enter into an
intergovernmental contract to provide capital funding for Lititz RecCenter to enable continued
recreational services for the residents of the municipalities.
Each municipality shall make capital contributions in accordance with Exhibit A to the
intergovernmental agreement from its general fund.[1]
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
No new organizational structure is proposed by the agreement.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 43/233
F.
G.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
All property, real or personal, shall be managed and disposed of by the owner of such property.
Each municipality has the power to enter into contracts for policies of insurance and other
employee benefits.
§ 10-30. Modification of agreement.
Borough Council reserves the right to modify, supplement or amend the intergovernmental agreement
from time to time by resolution or ordinance.
Chapter 12. Intermunicipal Assistance, Police
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 3-30-1999 by Ord. No. C-420, approved 3-
30-1999.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 5, Art. VI.
Police Pension Fund — See Ch. 16, Art. III.
Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Ch. 12, Intermunicipal Assistance, Police, adopted 4-
29-1969 by Res. No. 173, approved 5-9-1969.
§ 12-1. Agreement authorized.
This borough shall enter into an agreement (the "agreement") with the Township of Warwick, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania (the "township"), with respect, inter alia, to the provision of mutual aid by the
police officers of the municipalities, which agreement is to supplement any existing agreements
relating to police mutual aid and statutes providing for statewide municipal police jurisdiction and which
agreement sets forth appropriate and necessary covenants and agreements of the respective parties
thereto. The agreement shall be substantially in the form presented to this meeting, which agreement
and the form thereof are approved.
§ 12-2. Findings and purpose.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, 53 P.S. § 481 et seq., the following matters are
specifically found and determined:
The conditions of the agreement are that borough police officers shall have the power and
authority of a township police officer when performing police duties in the township, and township
police officers shall have the power and authority of a borough police officer when performing
police duties in the borough, and each municipality shall retain control over their respective police
officers and shall obtain such insurance to protect against liability to the extent deemed
appropriate by such municipality.
The agreement shall continue until modified, in writing, by the mutual consent of both parties
thereto or until terminated by a party giving the other 10 days' written notice of the desire to
terminate the agreement.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement are to supplement existing agreements relating to
police mutual aid and statutes providing for statewide municipal police jurisdiction.
There is no financing currently contemplated to implement the agreement.
No organizational structure is necessary to implement the agreement.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 44/233
F.
G.
[1]
No property is contemplated to be acquired under the terms of the agreement. Each municipality
shall retain ownership of its respective Police Department vehicles and equipment.
No separate entity will be created under the agreement which will be empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits.
§ 12-3. Agreement on file.
A copy of the agreement, in the form so presented to this meeting and so approved, shall be filed with
the Secretary of this borough and shall be made available for inspection at reasonable times by
interested persons requesting such inspection.
§ 12-4. Authority to execute agreement.
The Mayor, the President or Vice President of the Council and the Secretary or Assistant Secretary of
this borough, as applicable, are authorized and directed to execute, to attest and to deliver the
agreement, in behalf of this borough, in the form so approved.
§ 12-5. Authority to enforce agreement.
Proper officers of this borough and the Chief of Police are authorized and directed to execute all
documents and to do all other acts that may be necessary and proper to carry out this chapter and the
undertakings of this borough in the agreement.
Chapter 14. Municipal Claims
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz: Art. I, 6-25-1996 by Ord. No. C-386,
approved 6-25-1996. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Fees — See Ch. 55.
Taxation — See Ch. 110.
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Exhibit A
Article I. Legal Fees for Collection
§ 14-1. Approval of fee schedule.
The borough does hereby approve a schedule of attorney's fees pursuant to Act 1 as set forth on
Exhibit A attached hereto.[1]
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 14-2. Notice required prior to fee assessment.
At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney's fees in connection with the collection of a
delinquent account, the borough will mail to the owner, notice that the borough intends to impose or
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 45/233
[1]
[1]
[1]
assess attorneys' fees. Said notice shall include instructions on how the recipient of the letter may
avoid the payment of attorneys' fees.
§ 14-3. Statutory authority.
This Article is ordained and enacted pursuant to Act 1 which amends 53 P.S. § 7106(a).
Chapter 16. Pensions and Employee Benefits
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Social Security
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 16-1. Participation authorized.
The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, shall become a participant in the social security
system, and the benefits of old age and survivors insurance shall be extended to its eligible full-time
employees.
§ 16-2. Contributions authorized; payroll deductions.
The Borough Treasurer is hereby authorized to make all required payments into the Contribution Fund
established by Section 7 of Enabling Act. No. 491 of the 1951 session of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania[1] and to establish such system of payroll deductions from salaries of
covered employees as may be necessary to their coverage under said old age and survivors insurance
system.
Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 207.
§ 16-3. Amount of contributions.
Contributions to such Contribution Fund accruing for all periods of employment shall be paid 1/2 by the
covered employees and 1/2 by the Borough of Lititz.
§ 16-4. Appropriation of amounts to be paid into Contribution
Fund.
The Borough of Lititz does hereby appropriate from the proper fund or funds from which wage or salary
payments of covered employees are issued to employees of the Borough of Lititz the amounts
necessary to pay into the Contribution Fund as provided in Section 4 of the Enabling Act[1] and in
accordance with this article and with the plan or plans and agreement.
Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 204.
§ 16-5. Administration.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 46/233
[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]
[2]
The proper officials of the Borough of Lititz are hereby authorized and empowered to do all things in
accordance with the provisions contained in the plan and agreement necessary to the continued
implementation of said old age and survivors insurance system.
Article II. Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan
[Adopted 8-31-1999 by Ord. No. C-442, approved 8-31-1999[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Art. II, Employee Pension Plan, adopted 2-22-1966 by
Ord. No. C-61, approved 2-26-1966, as amended.
§ 16-6. Repealer.
This article specifically replaces all other ordinances or parts of ordinances establishing provisions for
the Nonuniform Pension Plan. This ordinance replaces the retirement plan for the nonuniformed
employees of Lititz Borough through the adoption of the Lititz Borough Nonuniform Retirement Plan.
§ 16-7. Establishment.
This article establishes a retirement plan for the nonuniformed employees of Lititz Borough through the
adoption to the pension document effective January 1, 1999.[1]
Editor's Note: A complete copy of the Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan is on file in the borough
offices.
§ 16-8. through 16-23. (Reserved)
Article III. Police Pension Fund
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961;[1] amended in its entirety 12-30-2008 by Ord. No. C-495,
approved 12-30-2008]
Editor's Note: This article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 16-24. Amendment and restatement.
The attached amendment and restatement of the Borough of Lititz Police Pension Plan is enacted.[1]
The agent of the employer is authorized and directed to execute the attached amendment and
restatement of the plan.[2]
Editor's Note: A complete copy of the amended and restated Police Pension Plan is on file in the
Borough offices.
Editor's Note: This section designated Sue Ann Barry as the agent of the employer.
§ 16-25. through 16-38. (Reserved)
Article IV. Firemen's Relief Association
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 47/233
[1] Editor's Note: This Article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 16-39. Official recognition; purpose.
The Borough Council officially recognizes the Lititz Firemen's Relief Association of Lititz, Pennsylvania,
as an organization formed for the purpose of maintaining an association for beneficial and protective
purposes to its members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or permanent
disability or accident from funds collected therein.
§ 16-40. Association designated to receive funds.
The aforesaid Lititz Firemen's Relief Association be and it is hereby designated by the Borough
Council of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania, as the proper association to receive such funds as are
due and payable to the borough treasury by the Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, from
the tax of 2% on premiums from foreign fire insurance companies.
§ 16-41. Annual appropriation.
There is hereby annually appropriated from the borough treasury all such sum or sums of money that
may hereafter be paid into the aforesaid borough treasury by the Treasurer of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, on account of taxes paid on premiums by foreign fire insurance companies.
Chapter 18. Planning Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz during codification 10-31-1978 by Ord. No.
C-217, approved 10-31-1978; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 108.
Zoning — See Ch. 122.
§ 18-1. Creation.
There is hereby created a Borough Planning Commission which shall have all the powers and duties
conferred upon it by law and any other powers vested in it by law or ordinance.
§ 18-2. Membership; compensation.
The Borough Planning Commission shall consist of five members who will be appointed by the Council
and shall serve without compensation, except that they shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred in
carrying out their Commission duties.
§ 18-3. Annual report; employment of personnel; funding;
contracts.
The Borough Planning Commission shall make an annual report to the Borough Council showing its
transactions and recommendations. It may employ planning technicians and other persons whose
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 48/233
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
[1]
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
B.
C.
salaries and wages, together with other necessary expenses of the Commission, shall be provided for,
at the discretion of the Borough Council, by proper appropriations and resolutions. The Commission
may also receive and expend, for the purposes of its planning work, any gifts, grants and
appropriations of money from any other source, including commonwealth, federal or local funds, and
may contract with governmental or private agencies or individuals with respect thereto.
§ 18-4. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall, at the request of the Borough Council, have the power and shall
be required to:
Prepare the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the borough and amendments
thereto, as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act No. 247 of 1968,
(53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.), as amended and supplemented, and present such plan and
amendments for the consideration of the Borough Council.
Maintain and keep on file records of its action. All records and files of the Planning
Commission shall be in the possession of the Borough Council.
The Planning Commission, at the request of the Borough Council, may:
Make recommendations to the Council concerning the adoption or amendment of an Official
Map.
Prepare and present to the Council a Zoning Ordinance and make recommendations to the
Council on proposed amendments to it, as set forth in said Planning Code.
Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision and land development and planned
residential development regulations,[1] as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 108, Subdivision of Land.
Prepare and present to the Council a Building Code and a Housing Code and make
recommendations concerning proposed amendments thereto.
Do such other acts or make such studies as may be necessary to fulfill the duties and
obligations imposed by said Planning Code.
Prepare and present to the Council an environmental study.
Submit to the Council a recommended capital improvements program.
Promote public interest in and understanding of the Comprehensive Plan and planning.
Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private agencies and individuals as to the
effectiveness of the proposals of such agencies and individuals.
Hold public hearings and meetings.
Require from other departments and agencies of the borough such available information as
relates to the work of the Planning Commission.
In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make examinations and surveys
with the consent of the owner.
In the performance of its powers and duties, any act or recommendation of the Planning
Commission which involves engineering consideration shall be subject to the review and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 49/233
[1]
[1]
comments of the Borough Engineer, which comments shall be incorporated and separately set
forth in any report, written act or recommendation of the Planning Commission.
Chapter 24. Real Estate Registry
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961.[1] Sections
24-1 and 24-7 amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Other
amendments noted where applicable.]
Editor's Note: This chapter was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 24-1. Establishment.
For the purpose of procuring accurate information with reference to the ownership of real estate in the
Borough of Lititz, there is hereby established a real estate registry in accordance with the provisions of
53 P.S. § 48001.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 24-2. Books, maps and plans to be made.
The Borough Secretary shall cause to be made books, maps or plans showing the location and the
name of the owner or owners of all real estate in the Borough of Lititz, with blank spaces for the name
of the owner of each lot and with provisions for the names of future owners and the dates of future
transfers of title. The registry books, maps and plans shall be carefully preserved and shall be so kept,
by additions from time to time, as to show the ownership of every lot or piece of real estate or
subdivision thereof within the Borough of Lititz, with succeeding transfer of title from the time of the
commencement of such registry.
§ 24-3. Title search authorized.
The Borough Secretary may cause a search to be made for any evidence of title not reported to him as
herein required and which may be requisite for the completion of such registry books, maps and plans.
§ 24-4. Owners to furnish copy of deeds.
Within 30 days after the date on which this chapter is advertised, it shall be the duty of all owners of
real estate within the Borough of Lititz and of every subsequent purchaser, devisee or person acquiring
title to real estate in any manner to furnish to the Registry Clerk hereinafter designated descriptions of
their respective properties upon blanks to be furnished by the borough and at the same time to have
their deeds stamped as evidence of the registration thereof.
§ 24-5. Sheriff to furnish copy of deeds; stamp required prior to
recording.
The Sheriff of Lancaster County shall present for registration the deeds of all properties within the
Borough of Lititz sold by him at a Sheriff sale, and the Recorder of Deeds of Lancaster County shall
not admit for record any deed for any property within the Borough of Lititz bearing a date subsequent
to the advertisement of this chapter unless the same shall first have been duly stamped as herein
provided.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 50/233
[1]
[1]
[1]
§ 24-6. Appointment of Registry Clerk and Deputy.
The Borough Secretary is designated to act as Registry Clerk, and he is authorized to appoint the
Deputy Recorder of Deeds as Deputy Registry Clerk and to compensate the Deputy Registry Clerk at
the rate of $10 per month. The Borough Secretary is authorized to procure the materials for making the
necessary books, maps and plans and to provide the forms for registering the transfers of title to real
estate and the necessary stamps to stamp transfers of title to real estate "registered."
§ 24-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons neglecting or refusing to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable to pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days; provided,
however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is without the financial means to pay
the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall be permitted to pay the
fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 27. Sewer Authority
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961.[1]
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 100.
Editor's Note: This chapter was adopted and approved 8-17-1981 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz. Ord. No. C-197, adopted and approved
1-25-1977, which ordinance authorizes an agreement and the form thereof between Lititz Sewer
Authority and the Warwick Township Municipal Authority with respect to collection, treatment and
disposal of sewage and industrial waste; an agreement of lease, dated as of 2-1-1951, by and between
Lititz Sewer Authority and the Borough of Lititz with respect to the lease of certain tracts of land and
Interests in land heretofore acquired by the Authority; and a supplemental agreement of lease, dated as
of 10-1-1952, providing for additional security for bonds already issued and outstanding under the
original indenture and additional bonds to be issued thereunder by extending the term of the original
lease and by the payment of additional rental were deleted from the Code during codification and are
on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 27-1. Intention to organize.
The corporate and municipal authorities of the Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, a
municipality, do hereby signify and express their intention and desire to organize the Lititz Sewer
Authority under the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended,[1] for the purpose of constructing,
improving, maintaining, operating, owning or leasing sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof and
sewage treatment works.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 27-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary of the Borough Council of the Borough of Lititz are hereby authorized and
directed to execute on behalf of the Borough of Lititz the Articles of Incorporation of said Lititz Sewer
Authority, which Articles of Incorporation shall be as follows:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 51/233
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE - COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
In compliance with the requirements of the Municipal Authorities Act, being the Act of May 2, 1945,
P.L. 382, as amended, the Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, desiring to incorporate
the Lititz Sewer Authority, does hereby certify:
1. The name of the Authority is Lititz Sewer Authority.
2. Said Lititz Sewer Authority is formed under the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.
3. No other authority is in existence in or for the Borough of Lititz, the incorporating municipality
herein, either under the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended, or the Act of June 28,
1935, P.L. 463, as amended,_ or under any other Act of Assembly.
4. The name of the incorporating municipality is Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania. The names and addresses of the municipal authorities are as follows:
Burgess: Victor Wagner, Lititz, Pa.
President of Council: Harry R. Way, Lititz, Pa.
Secretary of Borough Council: Elam E. Habecker, Lititz, Pa.
Councilmen: Elmer H. Bomberger, Lititz, Pa.
Frank Ditzler, Lititz, Pa.
C. H. Nissley, Lititz, Pa.
Thomas W. Steffy, Lititz, Pa.
Harry R. Way, Lititz, Pa.
5. The names, addresses and term of office of the first members of the Board of said Authority
are as follows:
Name Addresses
Term of Office
(years)
Norman Badorf Lititz, Pa. 1
Newton W. Buch Lititz, Pa. 2
Owen Hershey Lititz, Pa. 3
H. Lloyd Hess Lititz, Pa. 4
J.M. Leed Lititz, Pa. 5
In witness whereof, the Borough of Lititz has executed these Articles of Incorporation, under its
municipal seal, this 26th day of August, A. D. 1947.
BOROUGH OF LITITZ
By Harry R. Way
President of Borough Council
Attest: E. E. Habecker
Secretary of Borough Council
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
County of Lancaster
SS:
Be it remembered that on this 26th day of August, A. D. 1947, before me a notary public in and for
the County aforesaid, personally appeared Harry R. Way, President of the Borough Council of the
Borough of Lititz, and Elam E. Habecker, Secretary of the Borough Council of the Borough of Lititz,
who being severally duly affirmed according to law did dispose and say that they were personally
present at the execution of the foregoing Articles of Incorporation and saw the municipal seal of the
Borough of Lititz; that the foregoing Articles of Incorporation were duly signed, sealed and delivered,
by and as and for the act and deed of the Borough of Lititz, by the authority and at the direction of the
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 52/233
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
Borough Council of the Borough of Lititz, pursuant to an ordinance, duly enacted and approved by the
Burgess of Lititz Borough on the 26th day of August A. D. 1947; and that the names of Harry R. Way,
as president of Borough Council and of Elam E. Habecker, as Secretary of Borough Council of the
Borough of Lititz, subscribed thereto, are in their proper respective handwritings.
HARRY R. WAY
ELAM E. HABECKER
Affirmed and subscribed to before me this 26th day of August, A. D. 1947
M.E. STAUFFER
Notary Public
6. The term of existence of said Authority shall be 50 years from the date of approval of these
Articles of Amendment to the Articles of Incorporation. (See Ordinance No. C-160,[1]
entitled "Adopting a Resolution Submitted to Said Council by Lititz Sewer Authority,
Pursuant to the Provisions of the Act of Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as Amended, Proposing to Amend the Articles of
Incorporation of Said Authority by Extending the Term of Its Corporate Existence," enacted
by Council of the Borough of Lititz October 29, 1974, and approved by the Mayor on
October 29, 1974.)
Editor's Note: The provisions of this ordinance extended the term of the authority for a period of 50
years beginning 10-29-1974.
§ 27-3. Authorization to execute and file Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary of the Borough Council of the Borough of Lititz are hereby authorized and
directed to execute and file Articles of Incorporation for the Lititz Sewer Authority, as and for the act
and deed of the Borough of Lititz, and to do any and all things necessary, appropriate and proper, in
their several judgments, or in the judgment of the Borough Solicitor of the Borough of Lititz, to lawfully
effect the incorporation of said Lititz Sewer Authority.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Article 8.2, Assignment of Right-of-Way to Sewer Authority; Article 8.3,
Authorization for Lease to Operate Sewer System; and Article 8.4, Authorization for Supplemental
Lease, of the ordinance adopted and approved 8-17-1961 were deleted from the Code during
codification and are on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 32. Alcoholic Beverages
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 5-26-1998 by Ord. No. C-405, approved 5-
26-1998. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 41.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 84.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
§ 32-1. Consumption; possession of open containers.
It shall be unlawful for any person while on any public street, sidewalk or alley or while in or on any
other property owned, operated or supervised by the Borough of Lititz to either:
Consume any alcohol, liquor or malt-brewed beverages;
Be in possession of any open container of alcohol, liquor or malt-brewed beverages.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 53/233
§ 32-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof by summary
proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and costs of prosecution and, in default
of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the Lancaster County Prison for not more than
30 days, or both. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 32-3. Severability.
In the event that any provisions, section, sentence, clause or part of this chapter shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or part of
this chapter, it being the intent of the Borough of Lititz that such remainder shall be and shall remain in
full force and effect.
Chapter 33. Alarms
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 5-26-1998 by Ord. No. C-406, approved 5-
26-1998. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 55.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 59.
§ 33-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for various types of intrusion,
burglar, fire and other emergency alarm devices which require response thereto by the Police
Department, Fire Department and other municipal agencies.
§ 33-2. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who operates, maintains or owns any alarm
device, dial alarm or local alarm designed to summon the police, Fire Department and other local
municipal agencies to any location in response to an alarm signal.
§ 33-3. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
ALARM CONSOLE
The console or control panel of devices giving a visual or audio response, or both, and located
within the confines of Lancaster County Control or elsewhere.
ALARM DEVICE
Any type of alarm system actuating equipment in the alarm console providing warning of intrusion,
fire, smoke, flood or other peril.
ALARM SYSTEM
An alarm device, dial alarm or local alarm or any combination thereof.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 54/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
DIAL ALARM
That type of a device using telephone lines transmitting an alarm directly to Lancaster County
Control or other approved site.
FALSE ALARM
Any alarm actuated by inadvertence, negligence or unintentional act of someone other than any
intruder and shall include, but not be limited to, alarms caused by malfunctioning of the alarm
system or other relevant equipment. The term shall not include alarms caused by malfunction of
the alarm console.
LOCAL ALARM
Any alarm or device which, when activated, produces a signal not connecting to the alarm
console, such as a store or home burglar alarm actuating a bell or horn device.
PERSON
Deemed to include any natural person, sole proprietorship, partnership, association or corporation.
§ 33-4. False alarms.
In the case of a false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall immediately notify the Lititz
Borough Police Department in a manner to be prescribed by rules and regulation of the Lititz Borough
Police Department. In addition, in the case of false alarms, the Borough Police Chief or his designee
shall cause an investigation to be made and shall keep a record of said false alarms on file. For such
false alarms, Borough Council prescribes the following penalties:
For the third false alarm in any given calendar year, a warning shall be issued.
For the fourth false alarm in any given calendar year, the Borough Police Chief or his designee
shall notify the person occupying the premises upon which the alarm system is located that a false
alarm has been received and that any further false alarms during the same calendar year will
result in penalties as set forth in this chapter.
For the fifth false alarm received in the same calendar year, an administrative fee of $25, payable
to Lititz Borough, shall be imposed. The administrative fee hereby imposed shall be payable in lieu
of a fine hereinafter imposed by this chapter.
For the sixth false alarm received in the same calendar year, an administrative fee of $50, payable
to Lititz Borough, shall be imposed. The administrative fee hereby imposed shall be payable in lieu
of a fine hereinafter imposed by this chapter.
For the seventh and any subsequent false alarms received in the same calendar year, an
administrative fee of $100, payable to Lititz Borough, shall be imposed. The administrative fee
hereby imposed shall be payable in lieu of a fine hereinafter imposed by this chapter.
§ 33-5. Service of notice.
Notice shall be given by the Borough Police Chief or his designee to the person occupying the
premises upon which the alarm system is located by mailing a copy of the notice, certified mail, returnreceipt
requested, to such person at the address where the alarm system is located. A notice may also
be given by personal service of the notice by handing a copy of the same to the occupant of the
premises upon which the alarm system is located or to an adult resident thereof or an employee
located thereon. If the service is made by personal service, the Borough Police Chief or his designee
shall file a proof of service which shall be under oath and which shall designate the person and title
upon whom service was made.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 55/233
[1]
[1]
§ 33-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating the terms of this chapter or any person who shall fail to pay the
administrative fee for false alarms in excess of four in the same calendar year shall, upon conviction
thereof by summary proceedings, be subject to a fine of not more than $300 and costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the Lancaster County Prison for
not more than 30 days, or both.
§ 33-7. Severability.
In the event that any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this chapter shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provision, section, sentence, clauses or part of
this chapter, it being the intent of the Borough of Lititz that such remainder shall be and shall remain in
full force and effect.
Chapter 34. Bicycles
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961;[1]
amended in its entirety 12-30-1975 by Ord. No. C-177, approved 12-30-1975. Sections 34-3 and 34-
5D amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Other amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 55.
Editor's Note: This chapter was originally adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1,
which ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 34-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BICYCLE
A device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride and having two tandem
wheels, either of which is 20 inches or more in diameter.
§ 34-2. License required.
No person shall operate a bicycle on streets, lanes or alleys of the borough unless such bicycle has
been licensed and a license tag attached thereto as provided herein.
§ 34-3. License fee.
Application for a bicycle license and license tag, entitled "bicycle registration application," shall be
made to the Mayor or his delegate, and upon receiving the properly completed application therefor plus
a license fee in the amount as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees, the Mayor or his delegate is
authorized and directed to issue a bicycle license, which shall be effective for as long as said bicycle
belongs to the applicant, except as provided in §§ 34-5C and D and 34-6.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 34-4. Refusal of license.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 56/233
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
[1]
D.
A.
B.
C.
The Mayor or his delegate shall not issue a license for any bicycle when there are reasonable
grounds to believe that the applicant is not the owner or entitled to the possession of said bicycle.
The Mayor or his delegate shall have the right to inspect any bicycle before licensing same and
shall refuse a license for any bicycle which is determined to be in unsafe mechanical condition.
§ 34-5. Use of license.
Upon issuing a bicycle license, the Mayor or his delegate shall also issue a license tag bearing the
license number assigned to the bicycle and the name of the borough. Such license tag shall be
serially numbered and shall be provided by the borough.
Such license tag shall at all times be firmly attached to the rear of the bicycle for which issued in
such position as to be plainly visible from the rear.
No person shall remove from a bicycle or alter such license tag except upon a transfer of
ownership or in the event the bicycle is dismantled and no longer operated upon any street, lane
or alley of this borough.
In the event a license tag is stolen or lost or becomes illegible, another one shall be issued by the
Mayor or his delegate upon payment of a fee as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 34-6. License valid only for specified owner and bicycle.
Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the licensee shall remove the license tag and
shall surrender same to the Mayor or his delegate.
§ 34-7. Records.
The Mayor or his delegate shall maintain a record of:
The number of each license, the date issued and the name, date of birth and address of the
person to whom issued.
The number on the frame of the bicycle for which issued.
A record of all bicycle license fees collected by him.
§ 34-8. Revenue.
All fees received by the Mayor or his delegate under the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the
Borough Treasury prior to each regular meeting of the Council.
Chapter 36. Construction Code, Uniform; Property
Maintenance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Warwick Area Appeals Board — See Ch. 10, Art. I.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 57/233
[1]
A.
B.
(a)
(1)
A.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 50.
Fees — See Ch. 55.
Smoke detectors — See Ch. 59, Art. II.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 103.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 108.
Zoning — See Ch. 122.
Article I. Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 12-27-2006 by Ord. No. C-481,[1] approved 12-27-2006]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 36, Construction Codes, Uniform, adopted 6-
24-2004 by Ord. No. C-456, approved 6-24-2004.
§ 36-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Lititz Construction Code Ordinance."
§ 36-2. Intent.
By Act 45 of 1999, the Pennsylvania Legislature provided for the adoption of a Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code and directed the Department of Labor and Industry to promulgate
regulations for the Uniform Construction Code. In 2002, the Department of Labor and Industry
adopted final regulations governing certification and training of persons to administer the Uniform
Construction Code, and on January 10, 2004, the Department issued final regulations for the
administration of the Uniform Construction Code. The Uniform Construction Code incorporates the
International Building Code/2003, the International Residential Code/2003, the International
Existing Building Code/2003, the standards incorporated into such publications by reference, and
other publications as set forth in the Labor and Industry Regulations. The Borough Council desires
to adopt and administer the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code and establish administrative
and enforcement regulations.
In accordance with Section 302(a) of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, this article does
not adopt the International Property Maintenance Code and shall not be considered as a property
maintenance code. All Borough regulations governing the maintenance of properties shall be in
ordinances separate and distinct from the Borough of Lititz Construction Code.
§ 36-3. Adoption of standards.
The Borough hereby adopts the standards which the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
has made part of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code identified in § 403.21 of the Labor and
Industry Regulations as the Borough of Lititz Construction Code with the following additions to the
International Building Code/2003:
Labor and Industry Regulations amendments.
Labor and Industry Regulations § 403.21(c) concerning items incorporated into the UCC is
amended to incorporate the provisions of the Borough Building Code in existence as of May
11, 1998, and is amended to include the following regulations:
Private garage fire separation. Private garages shall be separated from the dwelling by
means of 5/8 inch type "X" gypsum board applied to all walls and ceilings of the garage.
Doors from the garage to the dwelling shall be a minimum of 1 3/4 inch solid wood or a
listed 20 minute fire-rated steel door. Attic access openings or stairs shall be covered
with a minimum of one layer of 5/8 inch type "X" drywall.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 58/233
(2)
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
Subsection (b) under § 403.28, Uncertified Buildings, of Part XIV of the Uniform Construction
Code be adopted in its entirety as an addendum to the Uniform Construction Code previously
adopted by the Borough, pertaining to uncertified buildings within the Department's
jurisdiction, to utilize the standards of Subsection (b) for the issuance of certificates of
occupancy to uncertified buildings.
[Added 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. C-493, approved 11-25-2008]
International Building Code amendments.
Section 202, Definitions, shall be amended by inserting the following definitions in
alphabetical order:
BOROUGH COUNCIL. The governing body of the Borough.
BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL. A Borough official certified by Labor and Industry under
Section 103 of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act. The term includes an individual
certified in a category established under Chapter 401 of the Labor and Industry Regulations
to manage building code enforcement activities, supervise building inspectors or plans
examiners, issue building permits, occupancy permits, notice of violations and orders to
vacate, and initiate prosecutions.
CONSTRUCTION CODE OFFICIAL. A Borough official or a third party agency appointed by
the Borough to serve as the Borough construction code official or a third party agency
certified by Labor and Industry under Section 103 of the Pennsylvania Construction Code
Act in an appropriate category established under Section 701(b) of the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act to perform plan review of construction documents, inspect
construction or administer and enforce codes and regulations in that category under the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act or related statutes which an applicant retains to
perform plan review.
DEP. The Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
INTERMUNICIPAL AGREEMENT. The agreement among Borough of Lititz, Elizabeth
Township and Warwick Township as of June 29, 2004, establishing the Warwick Area
Appeals Board.[1]
LABOR AND INDUSTRY. The Department of Labor and Industries of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
LABOR AND INDUSTRY REGULATIONS. All regulations adopted by Labor and Industry to
implement the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act.
PENNSYLVANIA CONSTRUCTION CODE ACT. Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et
seq., as amended.
THIRD PARTY AGENCY. A person, firm or corporation certified by Labor and Industry as a
construction code official and which may be contracted to perform plan review of
construction documents, inspect construction or administer and enforce codes under the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act.
BOROUGH. The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE. The Code adopted pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act and the Labor and Industry Regulations.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 10, Intermunicipal Agreements, Art. I, Warwick Area Appeals.
Section 1612.3 is amended by inserting "Borough of Lititz" and "May 19, 1980," in the
respective blanks.
Section 3410.2 is amended by inserting the date of January 1, 1991, for residential dwellings
and January 1, 1991, for nonresidential structures.
The Borough hereby adopts the listed versions of the following codes as the official codes of the
Borough to be effective as of December 31, 2006. To the extent that these Code(s) are updated or
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 59/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
[2]
(8)
(9)
(10)
(1)
(2)
A.
amended in the future, the Borough hereby automatically adopts the updated version(s) of the
Code(s) in their entirety as required by the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code as of the
effective date of the updated Code(s) as the official codes of the Borough.
2006 International Building Code.
2006 International Residential Code.
2006 International Existing Building Code.
2006 International Fire Code.
2006 International Mechanical Code.
2006 International Plumbing Code.
2006 International Fuel Gas Code.
2006 International Property Maintenance Code.[2]
Editor's Note: See Art. II, Property Maintenance, of this chapter.
2006 International Energy Conservation Code.
2006 ICC Electrical Code.
§ 36-4. Administration and enforcement.
The Borough hereby adopts the provisions of Chapter 1, Administration, of the International Building
Code/2006 and the provisions of the Labor and Industry Regulations set forth below to govern
administration and enforcement of the Construction Code. The administrative provisions of other codes
which Labor and Industry has made part of the UCC, including but not limited to the International
Residential Code/2003, are not part of the Borough of Lititz Construction Code. The provisions of this
Construction Code govern if there is a conflict with the provisions of the Codes set forth in Section
403.21 of the Labor and Industry Regulations or the Labor and Industry Regulations relating to
administration or enforcement. Changes from the International Building Code/2003, Chapter 1, and the
Labor and Industry Regulations to the Borough of Lititz Construction Code are as follows:
International Building Code amendments.
In Section 101.1, insert "Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania."
Section 101.2 shall provide as follows:
101.2 Scope. These regulations shall control all matters concerning the construction,
alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, location, occupancy and maintenance of all
buildings and structures and shall apply to existing or proposed structures, except as such
matters are otherwise provided for in other ordinances or statutes, including, but not limited
to, the Borough Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,
Stormwater Management Ordinance[1] or in the rules and regulations authorized for
promulgation under the provisions of this construction code. Whenever there is a conflict
between the provisions of this construction code and any other Borough ordinance, including
but not limited to the Zoning Ordinance, it is the intent of the Borough Council that the more
stringent requirement shall apply. All construction which the Pennsylvania Construction
Code Act or the Labor and Industry Regulations exempt from compliance with the Uniform
Construction Code are exempt from the provisions of this construction code. Items
exempted from compliance with the Uniform Construction Code by Sections 403.1(b) and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 60/233
[1]
(3)
(4)
(5)
403.1(e) of the Labor and Industry Regulations do not have to comply with the construction
code but shall comply with all other applicable Borough ordinances.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 122, Zoning, Ch. 108, Subdivision and Land Development, and Ch.
103, Stormwater Management, respectively.
Section 101.3 shall be amended by adding the following sentence to the existing section: "It is
the further intent of the Borough Council that all construction within the Borough shall comply
with the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act and all applicable regulations to
implement the Americans with Disabilities Act promulgated by federal and state regulatory
agencies and with the Code Requirements for Housing Accessibility, and this Code shall be
interpreted in a manner which fulfills this intent. It is also the further intent of the Borough
Council to comply with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act and the
Labor and Industry Regulations."
Section 101.4.5 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 103, Department of Building Safety, shall be deleted in its entirety and a new Section
103, Administration, shall be inserted which shall provide as follows:
SECTION 103
ADMINISTRATION
103.1 Building Official. The Borough Council shall appoint a person or persons to serve as
a Building Code Official and a Construction Code Official as those terms are defined in the
Labor and Industry Regulations. Both the Building Code Official and the Construction Code
Official shall be considered the Building Official as such term is defined and used in this
construction code.
103.2 Powers and duties of building code official and construction code official. The
Building Code Official shall have all powers set forth in the Labor and Industry Regulations
and shall have the powers and duties of the Building Official set forth in this construction
code. The Construction Code Official shall have the powers set forth in the Labor and
Industry Regulations and may also have the powers of the Building Official set forth in this
construction code. The respective duties and responsibilities of the Building Code Official
and the Construction Code Official shall be determined by the Borough Council and shall be
within the limitations of any certifications required or issued by Labor and Industry.
103.2.1 The Building Code Official shall serve at the pleasure of the Borough Council.
The Building Code Official shall provide supervision of the Construction Code Official,
receive uniform construction code permit applications, address citizen inquiries,
concerns and complaints, issuing building permits, occupancy permits, and manage
code enforcement activities, including, but not limited to, issuing notice of violations and
orders to vacate, and initiation of prosecutions.
103.2.2 The Construction Code Official shall serve at the pleasure of the Borough
Council. The Construction Code Official shall perform plan review of construction
documents, issue construction code permits, inspect construction, provide the Building
Code Official with reports of inspections and recommendations upon issuance of
certificates of occupancy, and administer and enforce this construction code. The
Construction Code Official may be a third party agency.
103.2.3 An applicant for a construction code permit shall submit two complete copies of
the application to the Building Code Official. The Building Code Official shall transmit a
complete copy of the construction code permit application to the Construction Code
Official for plan review, issuance of the construction code permit, and inspection of
construction. The Construction Code Official shall notify the applicant when plan review
has been completed, and the applicant shall pay plan review and estimated inspection
fees to the Construction Code Official prior to issuance of the construction code permit.
The Construction Code Official shall notify the Building Code Official when the work is
complete and has successfully had its final inspection. The Building Code Official shall
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 61/233
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(8)
issue the certificate of occupancy after receipt of notification from the Construction Code
Official that the work has been finally inspected and all fees have been paid.
103.2.4 As an alternative to the procedure set forth in Section 103.2.3 above, an
applicant for a construction code permit shall submit one complete copy of the
application to the Building Code Official together with plans which a third party agency
has reviewed and has certified to meet all requirements of this construction code and the
fee imposed by the Borough for administrative processing of an application when the
applicant has a third party agency review the plans. If the documents are in satisfactory
form, the Building Code Official shall issue a construction code. The permit holder shall
arrange for all inspections with the Construction Code Official who shall notify the
Building Code Official when the work is complete and has successfully had its final
inspection. The Building Code Official shall issue the certificate of occupancy after
receipt of notification from the Construction Code Official that the work has been finally
inspected and all fees have been paid.
103.3 Organization. The Borough Council shall appoint such other officers, technical
assistants, inspectors and other employees as shall be necessary for the administration of
this construction code.
Section 104.4 shall be amended by inserting the following language after the first sentence:
"The Building Official shall have the right to reject any report performed by any individual or
agency unless the permit holder has requested and obtained the prior approval of the Building
Official for such individual or agency to perform such inspection. Any individual or agency
performing such inspection and providing such report shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Building Official that such individual or agency has obtained all necessary certifications
from Labor and Industry."
Section 104.8 shall provide as follows:
104.8 Liability. The Borough and the Building Official shall have all immunities and rights
granted by the Pennsylvania Judicial Code, including, but not limited to Chapter 85.
Sections 105, Permits, 106, Construction Documents, and 111, Service Utilities, of Chapter 1
of the International Building Code/2003 shall not be a part of the Borough Construction Code.
The Borough hereby adopts and incorporates Sections 403.41, 403.42, 403.42a, 403.43,
403.44, 403.47, 403.48, 403.61, 403.62, 403.62a, 403.63 and 403.66 of the Labor and
Industry Regulations to govern applications for and issuance of construction code permits for
nonresidential and residential construction with the changes set forth below:
Sections 403.42(a) and 403.62(a) shall be amended by inserting the following at the end
of the existing sections: "It shall be the joint responsibility of the owner, lessee, if any, and
the contractor to determine that a Construction Code permit (and all other required
permits and approvals) has been obtained before performing any work. It shall be
unlawful for any contractor or subcontractor to perform any work for which a Construction
Code permit is required unless the owner and contractor obtain and post a Construction
Code permit as required by this Construction Code."
Sections 403.42a(b) and 403.62a(b) shall be amended by inserting the following at the
end of the existing sections "At the time of filing an application for a construction code
permit, the applicant shall present to the Building Code Official adequate evidence that
the applicant has obtained from all governmental authorities having jurisdiction, all
permits, licenses, approvals and/or variances required in connection with the proposed
use, occupancy, construction, enlargement, alteration or demolition. Such agencies shall
include but not be limited to the Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board, Lancaster County
Conservation District, Borough of Lititz Municipal Authority (where public sewer or water
service is proposed), Sewage Enforcement Officer (where on-lot sewage disposal is
proposed), State Police Fire Marshal, DEP, Labor and Industry and the Pennsylvania
Departments of Community and Economic Development and Transportation. No
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 62/233
(c)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(a)
(12)
(a)
(b)
(13)
(14)
application for a construction code permit is complete without a copy of any required
zoning permit and proof of any required subdivision and/or land development approval,
and stormwater management plan approval.
Sections 403.43(h) and 403.63(h) shall be amended by inserting the following at the end
of the existing sections: "The applicant shall post a copy of the Construction Code permit
at a location on the property clearly visible to members of the public."
A new Section 108.1.2 shall be inserted which shall provide as follows:
108.1.2 Time of payment of fees. An applicant for a permit under this construction code
shall pay the Borough's administrative fee to the Borough at the time of application. If the
applicant has not retained a third party agency for plan review, prior to the issuance of a
construction code permit, the applicant shall pay to the Construction Code Official the plan
review fee and the estimated fee for all inspections required. If additional inspections
become necessary during the course of construction, the applicant shall reimburse the
Construction Code Official for all such costs within 15 days after the date of an invoice for
such costs. An applicant shall pay to the Construction Code Official all fees and costs
incurred for all inspections required during the course of construction prior to the issuance of
a certificate of use and occupancy for the structure for which a construction code permit has
been issued.
Section 108.4 shall be revised to provide:
108.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work
on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the
necessary construction code permits shall be subject to an additional fee for expedited
processing which shall be equal to the fee which should have been paid at permit
application. The expedited processing fee shall be paid in full in addition to the normal
application fee prior to the issuance of a construction code permit.
Section 108.6 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Sections 109.3, 109.4, 109.5, and 109.6 of the International Building Code/2003 shall be
deleted and the Borough hereby adopts Sections 403.45, 403.64, and 403.86 of the Labor
and Industry Regulations governing inspections with the changes set forth below:
Sections 403.64(g) shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 110, Certificate of Occupancy, of the International Building Code/2003 is deleted. The
Borough adopts Sections 403.46 and 403.65 of the Labor and Industry Regulations governing
certificates of occupancy. Sections 403.46 and 403.65 of the Labor and Industry Regulations
are amended as follows:
Section 403.46(b) is amended by adding the following subsections:
(10) A statement that the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be deemed
permission to occupy the structure or commence a use if any other ordinance requires
the issuance of a permit or certificate prior to use and occupancy.
Section 403.65(b) is amended by adding the following subsections:
(9) A statement that the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be deemed
permission to occupy the structure or commence a use if any other ordinance requires
the issuance of a permit or certificate prior to use and occupancy.
Section 112, Board of Appeals, shall be amended in its entirety to provide as follows:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 63/233
(15)
112.1 Board of Appeals. The Borough hereby appoints the Warwick Area Appeals Board
as the Board of Appeals under the Borough of Lititz Construction Code. Members of the
Warwick Area Appeals Board shall be selected in accordance with the intermunicipal
agreement.
112.2 Authority of Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall hear and rule on
appeals, requests for variances and requests for extensions of time. An application or
appeal shall be based upon, and the board of appeals in making its decisions shall consider,
those factors set forth in the Labor and Industry Regulations.
112.3 Membership of Board of Appeals. A member of the Board of Appeals shall be
qualified by training and experience to pass on matters pertaining to building construction.
Members of the governing body may not serve on the Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals
member may not cast a vote or participate in a hearing in any appeal, request for variance
or request for extension of time in which the member has a personal, professional or
financial interest.
112.4 Operation of board. The Board of Appeals may establish policies and procedures
necessary to carry out its duties in accordance with the intermunicipal agreement. The
Board shall annually select one of its members to serve as Chairperson and one of its
members to serve as Vice Chairperson. The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its
meetings and file a written decision on all appeals under this construction code. The Board
of Appeals shall provide notice of and conduct its meetings in accordance with the Sunshine
Act, 65 Pa. C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
112.5 Procedures for applications and appeals. Any person desiring to file an application
or appeal to the Board of Appeals may file such appeal with the Building Code Official. All
applications and appeals to the Board of Appeals shall be in writing and shall specify the
section of this construction code from which relief is sought or the action of the Building
Official which is the subject of the appeal. The written application or appeal shall state all of
the grounds for the application or appeal and shall include any necessary plans or
specification to provide the Board of Appeals with information to evaluate the application or
appeal and shall include the fee. No application appeal will be considered complete without
the necessary appeal fee. Any appeal from a determination of the Building Official shall be
filed within 20 calendar days of the determination.
112.5.1 Hearings. An applicant or appellant who desires to present testimony to the
Board of Appeals shall request a hearing in the application or appeal. If the applicant or
appellant does not request a hearing, it will be assumed that the Board of Appeals may
render its determination based on the written information submitted with the application or
appeal and any additional information available to members of the Board of Appeals.
112.5.2 Parties. The Borough shall be considered a party to all appeals or applications
filed with the Board of Appeals. Other persons affected by the appeal or application who
have made timely appearances of record may also be recognized as parties to the appeal
or application.
112.5.3 Decision. The Board of Appeals shall render its decision in writing within any
time periods imposed in state laws or Labor and Industry Regulations. The Board of
Appeals shall provide the applicant or appellant, the Building Official and the Borough
with copies of the appeal.
Section 113, Violations, shall provide as follows:
113.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy, or to permit the erection,
construction, alteration, extension, repair, removal, demolition, use or occupancy of, any
building or structure or equipment regulated by this construction code, or cause same to be
done, in conflict with or in violation of this construction code. It shall also be unlawful for any
person to place inaccurate or misleading information on an application or plan or to omit
relevant information from an application or a plan submitted to the Borough.
113.2 Notice of violation. The Building Official may serve a notice of violation on any
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 64/233
(16)
person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, removal,
demolition, use, permission to use, occupancy, or permission for occupancy of a building or
structure or equipment in violation of the provisions of this construction code, or in violation
of a detailed statement or a plan approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this construction code. Such notice shall order
discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be a defense to an enforcement action that the
building official did not serve or that the defendant did not receive a written notice of violation
prior to the institution of the enforcement action.
113.2.1 If an inspection reveals a violation of this construction code, the Construction
Code official shall discuss the inspection results with the permit holder at the completion
of the inspection.
113.2.2 When a violation relates to an unsafe building, structure, or equipment, the
Building Official shall proceed in accordance with Section 403.84 of the Labor and
Industry Regulations.
113.3 Prosecution of violation. If the Building Code Official has served a notice of violation
and the notice of violation is not complied with within the time specified by the Building
Official, or if the Building Code Official determines that there is insufficient time to serve a
notice of violation or that such notice of violation will have no practical or beneficial effect,
the Building Code Official shall notify the Borough Council of the violation and shall request
the Borough Council to authorize institution of enforcement proceedings against the violator
and/or authorize the Borough Solicitor to institute the appropriate proceedings at law or in
equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require the removal or termination of
the unlawful use of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this construction
code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Building Code Official may institute summary enforcement proceedings without prior
authorization of the Borough Council.
113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this construction
code or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy, or permit the use or
occupancy of, any building or structure or equipment regulated by this construction code in
violation of the provisions of this construction code or of an approved plan or of a directive of
the Building Official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
construction code or who shall permit the use, occupancy, erection, construction, alteration,
extension, removal, demolition or repair of the building or structure or equipment in violation
thereof, shall, upon being found guilty in an enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Borough, pay a penalty of not less than $200 and not more than $1,000 for each violation,
plus all costs of prosecution, which fines and penalties may be collected as provided by law.
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and each section of
this construction code which is violated shall be deemed a separate offense. The Building
Official may request the Police Department to make arrests for any offense against this
construction code or orders of the Building Official affecting the immediate safety of the
public.
113.5 Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the Borough Solicitor or the Building Official from instituting appropriate action to
prevent the unlawful construction or to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent
illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to stop an illegal act, conduct,
business, or use of a building or structure on or about any premises.
Section 114.3 shall provide as follows:
114.3 Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the
structure after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person
is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall commit a violation of
this construction code and shall be subject to penalties or fines as provided in Section 113.4
and remedies as provided in Section 113.5.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 65/233
(17)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(1)
B.
(1)
A.
Section 115, Unsafe Structures and Equipment, of the International Building Code/2003 is
deleted. The Borough adopts Section 403.84 of the Labor and Industry Regulations governing
unsafe buildings, structures, or equipment.
International Residential Code.
Table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Code/2003 is hereby completed by inserting
the following information:
Ground snow load: 30 pounds per square foot.
Wind speed (mph): 80 miles per hour.
Seismic design category: zero.
Weathering: severe.
Frost line depth: 36 inches.
Termite: moderate to heavy.
Decay: slight to moderate.
Winter design temperature: 10°.
Ice shield underlayment required: yes.
Flood hazard: May 19, 1980.
Air freezing index: 750.
Mean annual temperature: 50°.
Article II. Property Maintenance
[Adopted 12-27-2006 by Ord. No. C-480, approved 12-27-2006]
§ 36-5. Modification of standards.
The Property Maintenance Code,[1] is amended by adding/modifying the following provisions:
Section PM-107.3 is amended to add the following:
PM-107.3.4 Service Fees for Reoccurring Violations. When a property has been declared
a "public nuisance" due to refuse accumulation, insect, vermin or rodent infestation, lack of
required utilities, facilities, equipment or other property maintenance violations, deemed a
detriment to the occupants of a property or the public-at-large and/or cause a blighting
condition, the Borough Code Official will notify the responsible party. In the event of a
reoccurrence of the violation within a twelve-month period, the following service charges will
be assessed against the responsible party:
(1) First reoccurrence: $100
(2) Second reoccurrence: $150.
(3) Third through sixth reoccurrence: $200 per occurrence.
(4) Seventh or subsequent reoccurrence: $300 per occurrence.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 66/233
[2]
(2)
(3)
Repeat offender service fees shall be payable to the Borough within 15 days of receipt of the
Borough invoice setting forth the service fee. Failure to timely pay said fee will result in the
Borough instituting appropriate action against the offender to recover both the service fee
and any related administrative fees.
PM-107.3.5 Public Safety Official Notice and Quick Ticket Citation Procedures. In
addition to other enforcement mechanisms available to the Borough under this chapter, the
Borough Code Official is authorized to issue public safety official notices for Property
Maintenance Code violations and quick ticket citations for code violations regarding high
weeds and grass, garbage and rubbish, animal waste and health code violations. The fines
for the above-referenced violations shall be payable within 15 days. Repeat offenders shall
be subject to additional penalties. Failure to pay the citation within 15 days may result in a
summary citation being issued through the local district judge's office. The forms of the
Public Safety Official Notice and Quick Ticket Citation are attached to this article.[2] The
forms of the Public Safety Official Notice and the Quick Ticket Citation may be changed by
resolution by Borough Council from time to time.
Editor's Note: Said forms are on file in the Borough offices.
Add the following definition to PM-302.1:
Blighted Property/Public Nuisance. Blighted property/public nuisance is defined as any
one of the following:
(1) Any premises which because of physical condition or use is regarded as a public
nuisance and has been declared as a public nuisance in accordance with the local
housing, building, plumbing, fire or related codes;
(2) Any premises which because of physical condition, use or occupancy is considered
an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells,
shafts, basement, excavations, unsafe fences or structures;
(3) Any dwelling which because it is dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, insect or vermin
infested or lacking in the facilities and equipment required by this chapter, and has
been designated by the Borough Code Official as unfit for human habitation or
occupancy;
(4) Any structure which is a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to the safety of
person or property;
(5) Any structure from which the utility, plumbing, heating, sewage or other facilities
have been disconnected, destroyed, removed, or rendered ineffective so that the
property is unfit for its intended use;
(6) Any vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of ground in a predominantly built-out
neighborhood, which by reason of neglect or lack of maintenance, has become a
place of accumulation of trash and debris or a haven for rodents and other vermin;
(7) Any unoccupied property which has been tax delinquent for a period of two years
prior to the effective date of this article, and those in future having a two-year tax
delinquency; and
(8) Any property which is vacant but is not tax delinquent, which as not been
rehabilitated within one year of the receipt of notice to rehabilitate from either the
Borough Code Official of Borough Council.
PM-303.8.2 The existing PM-303.8.2 is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:
PM-303.8.2 Unlicensed or uninspected vehicles. Only one currently unregistered or
uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises in the Borough
and in no event, for more than 10 days. Motor vehicles that do not have current license,
current inspection or current registration must be stored within a completely enclosed
structure, unless a vehicle storage permit is issued by the Code Official. A vehicle storage
permit may be issued only after an inspection is conducted by the Code Official. A vehicle
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 67/233
[1]
A.
B.
storage permit shall be valid for 90 days and may be extended by the Code Official for an
additional 90 days if special circumstances exist. The permit fee for a vehicle storage permit
shall be $75 and such fee may be adjusted from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council. However, no motor vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly,
disrepair or in the process of being stripped or dismantled.
This provisions of this section shall not apply to the storage of motor vehicles on premises
which otherwise comply with applicable zoning regulations, such as automobile repair
garages or motor vehicles towing establishments. Such establishments shall be permitted to
store unlicensed or uninspected motor vehicles for a period of not more than 60 days.
Editor's Note: See § 36-3C(8) for adoption of standards.
Chapter 38. Burning, Open
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 3-27-1973 by Ord. No. C-140, approved 3-
30-1973. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 59.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 66.
Junkyards — See Ch. 72.
§ 38-1. Bonfires or rubbish fires.
The following regulations shall apply to all bonfires or rubbish fires within the Borough of Lititz:
No person shall ignite or feed an open fire to burn any paper, refuse or matter of any kind or make
a bonfire in any public or private place outside of any building.
No person shall burn any paper, refuse or matter of any kind except in an incinerator which is a
refuse device specifically designed for the destruction of refuse by burning and is equipped with a
stack and with an auxiliary source of fuel such as gas, oil or electricity. The subject incinerator may
be the small domestic type which does not require a permit from the commonwealth, provided that
its stack gas emission does not exceed standards established by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources. Commercial-type incinerators are permitted, provided that they have a
current operating permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources,
Bureau of Air Quality and Noise Control.
§ 38-2. Outdoor grill fires.
Outdoor grill-type fires maintained solely for the cooking of food are permitted.
§ 38-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of § 38-1 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100 and costs of prosecution for the first violation nor more
than $200 and costs of prosecution for the second and subsequent violations or, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the Lancaster County Prison for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 41. Curfew
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 68/233
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 10-29-1968 by Ord. No. C-85, approved 10-
30-1968; amended in its entirety 9-29-2015 by Ord. No. C-540, approved 9-29-2015. Subsequent
amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 84.
§ 41-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Lititz Borough Curfew Ordinance."
§ 41-2. Legislative intent.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Lititz, recognizing the problem of crimes committed by and
against juveniles during the nighttime and believing that it can be dealt with more effectively by
regulating the hours during which minors less than 18 years of age may remain in public places and
certain establishments without adult supervision and defining more clearly certain duties and
responsibilities upon those who have the custody and responsibility for the care of such minors, hereby
enacts this chapter for the purpose of promoting the general welfare and protecting the general public
through reduction of juvenile violence and crime within the Borough of Lititz, promoting the safety and
welfare of the Borough's citizens under the age of 18 whose youth and inexperience renders them
particularly vulnerable to becoming participants in criminal activity and in being victimized by
perpetrators of crime, and fostering and strengthening parental responsibility for children.
§ 41-3. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AFTER HOURS
The period of time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday
nights and 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday nights.
EMERGENCY
Unforeseen circumstances, or the status or condition resulting therefrom, requiring immediate
action to safeguard life, limb or property. The term includes but is not limited to fires, natural
disasters, automobile accidents or other similar circumstances.
ESTABLISHMENT
Any privately owned place of business operated for profit, including any place of amusement or
entertainment to which the public is invited.
MINOR
Any person less than 18 years of age. For the purpose of this chapter, any person shall be
deemed to be 18 years of age on the date of his or her 18th birthday and not before this time.
OPERATOR
Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation owning, operating, managing or
conducting any establishment. Whenever used in any provision prescribing a penalty, the word
"operator" shall include the members, partners, officers and managers of any firm, association,
partnership or corporation.
PARENT
The biological or adoptive parent of a minor, a legal guardian or an adult person 21 years of age or
over and who is authorized by a minor's parent or legal guardian to be responsible, either
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 69/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
F.
G.
H.
temporarily or permanently, for the custody or care of any minor or for the control of such minor.
PUBLIC PLACE
Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, vacant lot or any private building,
structure or area to which the public is invited or in which the public is allowed to remain.
REMAIN
To be at or stay at a place.
§ 41-4. Conduct of minors.
It shall be unlawful for a minor to remain in or upon any public place or to remain in any motor vehicle
operating or parked therein or thereon or to remain in or upon an establishment in Lititz Borough after
hours, except as follows:
The minor is accompanied by a parent.
The minor is involved in an emergency.
The minor is engaged in an activity related to his or her employment or his going to or returning
home from such activity without detour or stop.
The minor is on the sidewalk directly abutting a place where he or she resides with a parent.
The minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious or civic organization, by a
public organization or agency, or by another similar organization or entity, which activity is
supervised by adults, and/or the minor is going to or returning from such an activity without detour
or stop.
Errands:
The minor is on an errand at the direction of a parent and the minor has in his or her
possession a written statement signed by the parent containing the following information:
The name, signature, address and telephone number of the parent authorizing the
errand.
The telephone number where the parent may be reached during the errand.
The name of the minor.
A brief description of the errand.
The minor's destination(s) and the hours the minor is authorized to be engaged in the
errand.
No minor or parent shall falsify the documents described above.
The minor is involved in interstate travel through or beginning or terminating in the Borough of
Lititz.
The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such
as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly.
§ 41-5. Conduct of parents.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 70/233
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
No parent shall knowingly permit any minor to remain in or upon any public place or establishment
after hours, unless the minor is engaged in activity permitted in § 41-4 of this chapter. "Knowing" shall
mean knows or has reason to know.
§ 41-6. Conduct of operators of establishments.
No operator of an establishment shall knowingly permit any minor to remain upon the premises of such
establishment after hours.
§ 41-7. Rules and regulations.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized, from time to time, to promulgate such rules and regulations,
including the extension of hours for special occasions, as in his or her opinion shall be necessary or
useful in the enforcement of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall, however, be subject to the
approval of the Borough Council of Lititz Borough.
§ 41-8. Offenses.
Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 41-9. Violations and penalties.
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent
offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that,
based on any response and other circumstances, no exception set forth in § 41-4 applies.
Any minor or parent who violates the provisions of this chapter for the first time may be issued a
citation. The minor may be taken into temporary custody, in which case his or her parents or other
appropriate person shall be notified, and the minor shall be released into the custody of the
appropriate parent or parents of the minor or to a brother or sister 18 years of age or older. If no
such person is available after reasonable efforts have been made to locate such person, then the
minor shall be released to such agencies or institutions as are established for juvenile welfare.
Any minor who violates any provision of this chapter after having received a prior violation/notice
OR any parent who knowingly permits a minor to violate any of the provisions of this chapter is
guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine or
imprisonment as follows:
First offense: up to $25 plus court costs for a parent. For a minor, community service as
directed by the court or enrollment in the Warwick Youth Aid Panel.
Second offense: up to $50 plus court costs.
Third offense: up to $100 plus court costs.
Fourth offense: up to $300 plus court costs. Parents are subject to imprisonment up to 90
days and minors to referral to the juvenile court system.
Fifth and subsequent offenses: up to $600 plus court costs. Parents are subject to
imprisonment up to 90 days and minors to referral to the juvenile court system.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 71/233
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
Any operator convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter for the first time shall be fined
$50 plus court costs and shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Any
operator convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter for the second or subsequent time
shall be fined $300 plus court costs and shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
90 days.
§ 41-10. Annual review.
This chapter and the need for it shall be reviewed annually. By February 1 of each year, the Mayor
and/or the Chief of Police of the Borough of Lititz shall review the chapter and report and make
recommendations to the Lititz Borough Council concerning the effectiveness of and the continuing
need for this chapter. The report shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
The practicality of enforcing the chapter and any problems with enforcement identified by the Lititz
Borough Police Department.
The impact of this chapter and support programs on juvenile crime statistics.
The number of juveniles taken into custody for curfew violations.
The number of official citizen complaints filed regarding the enforcement of this chapter.
Chapter 46. Dogs and Other Animals
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 12-30-2003 by Ord. No. C-453, approved
12-30-2003[1]. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 46, Dogs and Other Animals, which consisted of
the following: Art. I, Dogs, adopted 10-29-1974 by Ord. No. C-159, approved 10-29-1974; and Art. II,
Animals at Large, adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which ordinance adopted
the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
Article I. Dogs
§ 46-1. Dogs restricted from running at large.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog to allow such dog to run at large at
any time, either upon any of the streets, alleys or public grounds in the Borough of Lititz or upon the
property of anyone other than the owner, custodian or keeper of such dog.
§ 46-2. Owner's responsibility at home.
It shall be the duly of the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog and the duty of the parent or guardian
of any minor owner of any dog to keep the dog securely tied or penned in an enclosure in such a
manner that the dog cannot break loose and run at large over the streets, alleys or public grounds in
the Borough of Lititz or upon the property of anyone other than the owner, custodian or keeper of such
dog.
§ 46-3. Owner's responsibility in public.
It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog, while traveling on the streets, alleys
or public grounds in the Borough of Lititz, to have the dog on a leash at all times and to prevent the
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 72/233
dog from entering upon the property of any person in the Borough of Lititz without the property owner's
consent.
§ 46-4. Public annoyance; maintenance of pens in sanitary
condition.
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or other entity whatsoever to harbor, care
for, shelter or maintain any breed of dog or dogs in such a manner as to disturb or unduly annoy the
public through the dog's noise, barking, smell, mischief or other harmful propensities. All dog pens or
other areas in which dogs are kept shall be maintained in a sanitary condition free of offensive,
obnoxious or foul odors.
§ 46-5. Apprehension of dogs; notice of seizure; redemption by
owner.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Borough of Lititz who witnesses any dog running at large
in conflict with the provisions of or who receives information of any dog so running at large to seize
such dog and to convey it to the place designated by the Borough Council as a pound. Notice of such
seizure shall be sent to the owner of such dog in the manner prescribed by law, and such dog may be
redeemed by the owner thereof within the time specified by law, upon payment of the charges incurred
by reason of such detention. Rates for such charge shall be determined from time to time by the
Borough Council.
§ 46-6. Dog defecation on public and private property restricted
and disposal required.
Any person having ownership, possession, custody or control of any dog which commits a nuisance
(i.e., defecation) in any area other than the private property of the owner of such dog shall be required
to immediately remove any and all feces from the ground surface and to place it in a nonleaking
container or bag and to properly dispose of the container or bag in a trash or litter receptacle.
§ 46-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity whatsoever violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof by summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine not to
exceed $300 for any single violation of this article, together with the costs of prosecution. Each day's
continuance of the offense following notice thereof shall constitute a new violation. Upon default of
payment of the fine imposed and the costs, the defendant shall be imprisoned in the Lancaster County
Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that if the District Justice determines
that the defendant is without the financial means to pay the fines and cost immediately or in a single
remittance, such defendant shall be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such
periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
Article II. Animals at Large
§ 46-8. Animals restricted from running at large.
No horses, cattle, sheep, swine or any other animals are permitted to run at large unless someone has
charge of them, keeping them off the railroad, pavements and footwalks or from doing any damage
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 73/233
[1]
A.
[1]
(a)
(1)
A.
whatsoever within the limits of the borough.
§ 46-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, corporation, partnership or other entity whatsoever violating any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed the maximum
fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such costs and prosecution,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that if the District Justice
determines that the defendant is without the financial means to pay the fines and costs immediately or
in a single remittance, such defendant shall be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and
over such periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
Chapter 50. (Reserved)
[Former Ch. 50, Electrical Standards, adopted 12-29-1998 by Ord. No. C-411, approved 12-29-1998,
was superseded 12-27-2006 by Ord. No. C-481, approved 12-27-2006. For current provisions, see Ch.
36, Construction Code, Uniform; Property Maintenance, Art. I, Uniform Construction Code.]
Chapter 55. Fees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 1-29-1985 by Res. No. 373,[1] approved 1-
29-1985. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Editor's Note: This resolution supersedes former Ch. 55, Fees, adopted 12-29-1981 by Res. No. 336,
approved 12-29-1981, as amended.
§ 55-1. Schedule of fees.
[Amended 8-27-1985 by Res. No. 385]
The following schedule of fees is hereby established with respect to licenses, permits and activities
required or regulated under the provisions of various chapters of the Code of the Borough of Lititz.
Applications for and the issuance of such licenses and permits shall be subject to the provisions of the
specific chapter of the Code which is indicated for each type of license or permit. The business, activity
or operation for which the license or permit is required shall be subject to all regulations set forth in the
chapter to which reference is made.
§ 55-1.1. Chapter 34, Bicycles.
Bicycle registration application: $2.
§ 55-1.2. Chapter 36, Construction Code, Uniform.
[Amended 3-31-1992 by Ord. No. C-352, approved 3-31-1992; 8-31-2004 by Res. No. 663, approved
8-31-2004; 11-29-2005 by Res. No. 678]
UCC BUILDING PERMIT FEES
Residential (International Residential Code – IRC – regulated).
Additions/alterations:
Construction inspection, per discipline: $30 for each inspection.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 74/233
[2]
[3]
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(2)
[1]
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
Plan review and consulting: $40 per hour in one-fourth-hour increments.
Reinspections: $30 per trip to job site.
Residential (International Residential Code – IRC – regulated).
New construction:
Construction inspection, per discipline: $50 for each inspection.
Plan review and consulting: $200 per dwelling unit.
Reinspections: $50 per trip to job site.
Additions/alterations:
Plan review and inspections for construction value up to $7,500: $150.
Plans review and inspections for construction value greater than $7,500: $20 per
$1,000 of construction value.
Commercial (International Residential Code – IBC – regulated).
New construction:
Plan review: $0.10 per square foot.
Additional reviews:
Hood and duct system plan review: $300 per system.
Elevators: $200 per bank.
Fire sprinkler system: $350 for the first 100 heads, plus $1 each for any additional
heads.
Fire detection or alarm system: $150 for the first 15,000 square feet, plus $0.01 each
for any additional square feet.
Alternative fire suppression system: $75 per hour of review time.
Other activity:
Inspections: $0.20 per square feet of all areas.
Code consulting: $125 per hour.
All UCC building permits issued will be subject to an administrative fee equal to 10% of the
total plans review and inspection fees, as established within this section.
All building permits issued will also be subject to a per permit state fee of $2 as required by
Act 13 of 2004, payable to the Borough of Lititz.
Uniform Construction Code appeal fee: $500.
§ 55-1.3. Chapter 72, Junkyards.
Annual license fee.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 75/233
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
A.
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(c)
(1)
(2)
A.
Application prior to and including July 1: $200.
Application after July 1: $100.
§ 55-1.4. Chapter 87, Peddlers, Canvassers and Solicitors.
License fee.
Principal:
Per day: $10.
Per week: $25.
Per month: $50.
Per year: $250.
Helper:
Per day: $5.
Per week: $12.
Per month: $25.
Per year: $125.
§ 55-1.5. Chapter 100, Sewers.
Article III.
Connection to sewer system.
[Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. C-323, approved 12-13-1988; 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345,
approved 6-25-1991; 7-26-2005 by Ord. No. C-468, approved 7-26-2005]
Connection fee: actual costs of labor, equipment and materials.
Customer facilities fee: actual costs of labor, equipment and materials.
Tapping fees (per EDU):
The capacity-related tapping fee for the sewer system shall be $2,061.90 per EDU
based on an EDU of 237 gallons per day for the sewer system.
The connection-related tapping fee for the sewer system shall be $497.70 per EDU
based on an EDU of 237 gallons per day for the sewer system.
The total sewer tapping fee shall be $2,559.60 per EDU based on an EDU of 237
gallons per day for the sewer system.
Notwithstanding any other definition of an EDU as set forth in Ord. No. C-345 or the
Code of Ordinances of Lititz Borough, for the purposes of calculating sewer tapping
fees, an EDU shall be calculated on the basis of 237 gallons per day per EDU.
Sewer rental charges. In addition to the sewer service charge, for all connections to the sewer
system imposed in Subsection A(3) below, effective for bills dated December 10, 2010, and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 76/233
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
(1)
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
B.
thereafter, there shall be imposed the following sewer usage charges for usage of 100 cubic
feet and over per quarter:
[Amended 7-29-1986 by Ord. No. C-300, approved 7-29-1986; 7-31-2007 by Ord. No. C-485,
approved 7-31-2007; 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. C-510, approved 10-26-2010; 1-29-2019 by
Ord. No. C-570, approved 1-29-2019]
3 Months' Usage Increments and Ranges Rate per 100 Cubic Feet
100 cubic feet and over $2.47
Sewer service charges.
[Amended 7-29-1986 by Ord. No. C-300, approved 7-29-1986; 7-31-2007 by Ord. No. C-485,
approved 7-31-2007; 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. C-510, approved 10-26-2010; 1-29-2019 by
Ord. No. C-570; 1-29-2019 by Ord. No. C-570, approved 1-29-2019]
The sewer service charge per meter for all connections per quarter shall be $82.09, plus
an additional charge as specified below for each additional EDU over one serviced by the
same meter.
If more than one dwelling unit is served by the same meter, the increase charge shall be
$61.56 for each additional EDU over one serviced by the same meter.
An administrative fee of $25 shall be imposed upon the customer where the Borough posts a
ten-day notice on the customer's property regarding a delinquent sewer bill.
[Added 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. C-391, approved 12-30-1996]
§ 55-1.6. Shows and exhibitions.
License fee for each and every exhibition: $50.
§ 55-1.7. Chapter 105, Streets and Sidewalks.
Permit issuance fees. Issuance fees to defray costs incurred by the Borough in reviewing and
processing the application and plans, including the preliminary review of the site location identified
in the application, and in issuing and processing the permit shall be as follows:
Issuance fee: $50.
General permit inspection fees. General inspection fees to defray costs incurred by the Borough in
spot inspection of permitted work or subsequent inspections after the permitted work has been
completed and to monitor compliance with the permit and this chapter shall be as follows:
Underground facilities (for example, pipelines, buried cable with pedestals, conduit and
manholes). This fee is calculated on the total linear feet of the facility or facilities being
permitted within the right-of-way, regardless of whether the surface is opened.
Physically connected longitudinal facility or facilities (first 100 feet or fraction thereof) in:
Type Fee
Pavement $60.00
Shoulder $40.00
Outside roadway $20.00
Additional physically connected longitudinal facilities (each 100 feet or fraction thereof) in:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 77/233
[1]
[2]
(c)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
TTyyppee FFeeee
Pavement $30.00
Shoulder $20.00
Outside roadway $10.00
Lateral facility or facilities (each crossing) in:
Fee.
Location Fee
Pavement $30.00
Shoulder $20.00
Outside roadway $10.00
If one lateral involves two or more highway areas, only the higher area fee will be
assessed.
Surface openings of less than 25 square feet (for example, service connections performed
independently of underground facility installation, pipeline repairs) (each opening) in:
Fee.
Location Fee
Pavement $30.00
Shoulder $20.00
Outside roadway $10.00
If one opening involves two or more highway areas, only the higher area fee will be
assessed.
Test holes drilled in roadway (each hole): $5.
Additional fees. If the Borough anticipates that the cost of reviewing the required application
information or inspecting the permitted work will exceed the above issuance or inspection fees by
a significant amount, the following additional fees will be assessed:
Additional issuance fee. The Borough will estimate the additional amount of salary, overhead
and expenses and prepare a reimbursement agreement for execution by the applicant.
Borough review of the permit application will commence on the effective date of the
agreement.
If the Borough determines that the permitted work is of sufficient magnitude or importance to
warrant assignment of one or more persons to inspect the permitted work on a more than
spot inspection basis, the permit will so indicate and the permittee shall be charged for all
salary, overhead and expenses incurred by the Borough for inspection.
The Borough will provide an itemized invoice for additional fees owed to the Borough.
Refunds. The Borough will refund the general permit inspection fees on unused permits. In order
to be eligible to receive such a refund, the permittee shall deliver the request with the permittee's
copy of the permit to the issuing district permit office on or before the permit expiration date.
§ 55-1.8. Chapter 108, Subdivision of Land.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 78/233
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(c)
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
B.
Subdivision plans.
[Amended 11-24-2009 by Res. No. 755, approved 11-24-2009]
Sketch plan: $150.
Lot add-on: $250.
Subdivision:
Up to 10 lots: $300.
Up to 40 lots: $400.
Over 40 lots: $500.
Construction plan filing: $75.
Actual costs for Borough Engineers to review water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer facilities will
be assessed to the applicant.
Actual costs for the review of and submittal of DER planning modules will be assessed to the
applicant.
Third review. If subdivision plans are not corrected as recommended upon third review, actual cost
of consultant's review, charges plus advertising will be assessed to the applicant.
§ 55-1.9. Chapter 118, Water.
Article II.
Connection to water system.
[Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. C-323, approved 12-13-1988; 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 346,
approved 6-25-1991; 2-26-2002 by Ord. No. C-440, approved 2-26-2002]
Connection fee: Actual costs of labor, equipment and materials.
Customer facilities fee: Actual costs of labor equipment and materials.
Tapping fees:
[Amended 7-26-2005 by Ord. No. C-469, approved 7-26-2005]
The water capacity tapping fee shall be $273.60 per EDU based on an EDU
valuation of 171 gallons per day per EDU.
The distribution component tapping fee shall be $530.10 per EDU based on an EDU
value of 171 gallons per day.
The total water tapping fee shall be $803.70 per EDU based on an EDU value of 171
gallons per day.
Notwithstanding any other definition of an EDU as set forth in Ord. No. C-440 or the
Code of Ordinances of Lititz Borough, for the purposes of calculating water tapping
fees, an EDU shall be calculated on the basis of 171 gallons per day.
Application fee to test fire-protection lines: actual labor cost.
Article III.
Deposit for meter test.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 79/233
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
[1]
(3)
[2]
(4)
D.
One-inch meter or smaller: $15.
Larger than one-inch meter: actual cost of service.
Article IV.
Service charge to restore service: $50.
Shutoff at request of customer: $25.
Restoration of service: $25.
Administrative costs for posting a ten-day notice: $25.
[Added 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. C-391, approved 12-30-1996]
Article VI.
Water service charges. In addition to the water service charge for all connections to the water
system per quarter imposed in Subsection D(2) below, effective for bills dated December 10,
2010, and thereafter, there shall be imposed the following water usage charges for usage of
100 cubic feet and over per quarter:
[Amended 7-29-1986 by Ord. No. C-299, approved 7-29-1986; 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. C-392,
approved 5-8-1990; 2-26-2002 by Ord. No. C-440, approved 2-26-2002; 12-30-2003 by Ord.
No. C-451, approved 12-30-2003; 7-31-2007 by Ord. No. C-485; approved 7-31-2007; 10-26-
2010 by Ord. No. C-510, approved 10-26-2010; 1-29-2019 by Ord. No. C-570, approved 1-
29-2019]
3 Months' Usage Increments and Ranges Rate per 100 Cubic Feet
100 cubic feet and over $1.00
Water service charges.
[Amended 7-29-1986 by Ord. No. C-299, approved 7-29-1986; 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. C-392,
approved 5-8-1990; 7-31-2007 by Ord. No. C-485, approved 7-31-2007; 10-26-2010 by Ord.
No. C-510, approved 10-26-2010; 1-29-2019 by Ord. No. C-570, approved 1-29-2019]
The water service charge per meter for all connections per quarter shall be $26.35, plus
an additional charge as specified below for each additional EDU over one serviced by the
same meter.
If more than one dwelling unit is served by the same meter, the increase charge shall be
$19.76 for each additional EDU over one served by the same meter.
(Reserved)[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(3), Water service charges, added 5-8-1990 by Ord. No.
C-329, approved 5-8-1990, which enacted a rate increase effective September 10, 1992, was
repealed 9-29-1992 by Ord. No. C-359, approved 9-29-1992. The water service charges
which became effective on September 10, 1990, shall hereby continue in full force and effect
until further modified by action of the Borough Council.
(Reserved)[2]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(4), Minimum water service charge, added 5-8-1990 by
Ord. No. C-329, approved 5-8-1990, which enacted a rate increase effective September 10,
1992, was repealed 9-29-1992 by Ord. No. C-359, approved 9-29-1992. The water service
charges which became effective on September 10, 1990, shall hereby continue in full force
and effect until further modified by action of Borough Council.
§ 55-1.10. Chapter 122, Zoning.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 80/233
(a)
(b)
(1)
A.
(1)
B.
(1)
C.
D.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(3)
E.
Appeal or application to Zoning Hearing Board. Except as provided in § 55-1.9A(1) above, the
fees for an appeal or application to the Zoning Hearing Board required by the Lititz Borough
Zoning Ordinance and/or the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code shall be as follows:
[Amended 3-29-1994 by Ord. No. C-373, approved 3-29-1994]
A nonrefundable administrative filing fee and an assessment for the costs involved for notice,
advertising and postage incidental thereto and an assessment for stenographic costs
incidental thereto, in the following categories:
Four hundred dollars for all appeals and applications to the Zoning Hearing Board other
than those historic cases that revert to § 122-41, Building permit required in historic
district, only.
[Amended 11-24-2009 by Res. No. 755, approved 11-24-2009]
Thirty-five dollars for those historic cases that revert to § 122-41, Building permit required
in historic district, only.
Petition for amendment to the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map. The fees for a hearing on a
petition to amend the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map before the Lititz Borough Council shall be
as follows:
A nonrefundable filing fee of $75, plus a deposit in the amount of $35 for the estimated cost of
advertising and postage incidental thereto. Any balance of the deposit remaining will be
refunded to the petitioner, and any advertising costs in excess of the deposit will be charged
to the petitioner. The total fee plus deposit equals $110.
Petition for a curative amendment to the Zoning Ordinance. The fees for a hearing on a petition for
a curative amendment to the Zoning Ordinance which has been submitted to the Borough Council
shall be as follows:
A nonrefundable filing fee of $600, plus a deposit in the amount of $100 for the estimated cost
of advertising and postage incidental thereto plus the deposit in the amount of $300 for the
estimated stenographic costs incidental thereto. Any balance of the deposits remaining will be
refunded to the petitioner, and costs in excess of the deposits will be charged to the petitioner.
The total fee plus deposits equals $1,000.
Transcription of record. In the event of an appeal from a decision of the Zoning Hearing Board or
the Borough Council, the cost of transcribing the record shall be paid by the person taking such
appeal.
Zoning permit fees (required for all UCC related permits and all other non-UCC permits).
[Added 8-31-2004 by Res. No. 663, approved 8-31-2004; approved 11-29-2005 by Res. No. 678]
Cost/value of improvements for residential and commercial (new/additions/alterations):
Up to $5,000: $30.
Each $1,000 or fraction thereof in excess of $5,000: additional $3.
Residential accessory structures (includes sheds up to 144 square feet, fences and other
landscape structures and walls):
$500 or less: no fee.
$501 to $3,000: $30.
$3,001 and above: $3 per additional $1,000.
Patios/walks/decks less than 30 inches above grade:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 81/233
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(a)
(b)
(15)
(a)
(b)
(16)
F.
A.
$500 or less: no fee.
$501 to $3,000: $30.
$3,001 and above: $3 per additional $1,000.
Electrical/mechanical/plumbing:
Cost up to $1,500: $20.
Cost over $1,500: $30.
Grading/excavating/earthmoving/paving: 1% of contract price.
Curb and sidewalk (exterior or street side): no fee.
Replacement of water/sewer on homeowner side: $15.
Spas and hot tubs: $25.
Pools.
(Seasonal, up to 15 feet in diameter): $25.
All other above ground pools: $50.
In-ground pools: $100.
Sign fee (plus UCC inspection fee if applicable): $25.
Temporary or modular building(s), requires building permit: $20.
Demolition permit (permit not required for small structures as determined by Code Official):
$200 per structure.
Permit extension (valid for one year): $25.
Over two failed inspections per job (residential and commercial): $50 per fail.
Certificate of occupancy:
Commercial and residential new construction: $60.
Commercial additions: $60.
Property maintenance fee:
Rental property maintenance inspection (commercial and residential): $50 per inspection.
Determination of rental properties to meet UCC requirements: (billed to property owner).
Zoning hearing: $400.
[Added 8-31-2004 by Res. No. 663, approved 8-31-2004; amended 11-29-2005 by Res. No. 678;
11-24-2009 by Res. No. 755, approved 11-24-2009]
§ 55-1.11. Chapter 89, Plumbing.
Plumber's license fee: $25.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 82/233
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(4)
A.
§ 55-1.12. Chapter 115, Vehicles and Traffic.
Motor vehicle fees:
Parking ticket (overtime meter): $2.
Parking violation: $5.
§ 55-1.13. Chapter 46, Dogs and Other Animals.
[Added 4-27-2007 by Res. No. 704; amended 3-27-2012 by Res. No. 782, approved 3-27-2012]
Stray animal pickup fee:
Per animal/incident for animals not transported by Critter Catchers but held temporarily at
either the holding pen at Lititz Borough PD and/or the LB Public Works Building: $20. The fee
will be collected from the pet owner at the time of pickup.
Effective January 1, 2012, The Borough of Lititz entered into a contract with Critter Catchers,
Inc., Lititz, Pennsylvania (627-4108), for the transportation, care, and disposition of stray
and/or found dogs located in the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania.
Any dog found running at large inside the Borough will be subject to being picked up and
transported by Critter Catchers, Inc. (627-4108), to a temporary holding facility located at the
Northern Lancaster County Regional Police Department (NLCRPD) located 870 Durlach
Road, Clay Township, Pennsylvania, for a period up to 48 hours. Critter Catchers and/or
police will attempt to locate the dog's owners by reasonable means. Dog owners are
expected to have their pets licensed through Lancaster County. If the owners cannot be
located inside 48 hours, the animal will be transported to the Berks County Humane League.
Owners of pets will be responsible to pay Critter Catchers according to the following fee
structure (dogs will not be returned unless payment is received by Critter Catchers and/or
other vendor):
All work initiated between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. shall be billable at a rate
of $95 per dog.
All work initiated between the hours of 8:01 p.m. and 5:59 a.m. shall be billable at a rate
of $130 per dog.
All work related to the exceptional circumstance requirement (injured animal requiring
drug administration or care, and animals requiring actions to suppress aggressive or
threatening behaviors) shall be provided in a separate detailed billing to the NLCRPD by
the vendor for payment.
In addition, pet (dog) owners will be sent a warning letter (first offense) by the Lititz Borough
Police Department stating that their pet was found running at large; second and subsequent
violations will require a summary nontraffic citation be filed through the local Magistrate for
violation of Borough Ordinance C-453. Fines range up to $300 according to the number of
offenses, plus related court/administrative costs.
§ 55-1.14. Requests for information.
[Added 1-27-2009 by Res. No. 737]
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 83/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
[1]
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
The Borough adopts the following fee schedule with regard to information requests under the Act:
[1]
Copies/photocopies: $0.25 per page.
Certification of a record: $5 per record. The certification fee does not include notarization
fees.
Specialized documents (includes, but is not limited to, blueprints, color copies, nonstandard
size documents): actual cost.
Facsimile/microfiche/other media: actual cost.
Conversion to paper: If the record is only maintained electronically or in other nonpaper
media, duplication fees shall be limited to the lesser of the fee for duplication on paper or the
fee for duplication in the original media unless the requester specifically requests for the
record to be duplicated in the more expensive media.
Postage fees: actual cost of mailing.
Editor's Note: "The Act" refers to Act 3 of 2008, the Right-to-Know Law.
To the extent that the Open Records Office subsequently amends its guidelines for covered
agencies accessing fees under the Act and such amendments are not consistent with the fee
schedule adopted by the Borough, the Borough's fee schedule related to the Act shall
automatically amend to be consistent with the Open Records Office's amended guidelines.
Ordinances.
[Added 11-24-2009 by Res. No. 755, approved 11-24-2009]
Zoning: $40.
Subdivision: $40.
Stormwater: $25.
§ 55-1.15. Chapter 94, Rental Units, Article I, Residential Rental
Unit Regulation.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Res. No. 805, approved 8-6-2013, effective 7-1-2013]
The following fees are adopted in reference to rental inspections:
Residential rental unit licensing:
Application for rental license: $40 per unit per year.
Inspection of residential rental units:
Inspection fee: $50.
Reinspection fee: $35.
No-show inspection fee: $50.
Inspection appeal fee: $500.
Violations and penalties:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 84/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
[1]
Fine to allow occupancy after license revoked: $500; each month is a separate violation.
Fine for failure to obtain a rental license within 30 days of NOV: $500.
Fine for violations of any other provisions of Article I of the chapter: $1,000.
§ 55-1.16. Chapter 103, Stormwater Management.
[Added 5-27-2014 by Res. No. 819, approved 5-27-2014]
A fee of $15 is adopted in reference to an exemption from the stormwater management site plan
preparation and submission requirements as permitted under Section 302 of the Stormwater
Management Ordinance, Ord. No. C-532, dated April 29, 2014.
Chapter 59. Fire Prevention
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz during codification 10-31-1978 by Ord. No.
C-221, approved 10-31-1978; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction code; property maintenance — See Ch. 36.
Installation of fire protection lines — See Ch. 118.
Article I. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former Art. I, General Standards, as amended, was superseded 12-27-2006 by Ord. No.
C-481, approved 12-27-2006. For current provisions, see Ch. 36, Construction Code, Uniform; Property
Maintenance, Art. I, Uniform Construction Code.
§ 59-1. through § 59-9. (Reserved)
Article II. Smoke Detectors
[Added 10-27-1987 by Ord. No. C-312, approved 10-27-1987]
§ 59-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY
The occupancy or use of a building or structure or any portion thereof by persons for whom
sleeping accommodations are provided, including but not limited to one- and two-family dwellings,
lodging or rooming houses, dormitories, apartment buildings, hotels and single-family attached
and detached dwellings.
§ 59-11. Requirements.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each new and existing occupied residential occupancy unit
to install smoke detectors in each such residential occupancy unit as hereinafter provided. Said smoke
detectors shall be capable of sensing visible and invisible particles of combustion and providing a
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 85/233
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
suitable audible alarm thereof; further, they shall be installed by 150 days after adoption of this article
in the manner hereinafter provided. Failure to install smoke detectors as and where required by said
date will subject the property owner to the penalties set forth in § 59-9 of the Code of the Borough of
Lititz, Pennsylvania.
§ 59-12. Location.
At least one smoke detector shall be installed to protect each sleeping area. A "sleeping area" is
defined as the area or areas of the residential occupancy unit in which the bedrooms (or sleeping
rooms) are located. Where bedrooms or rooms habitually used for sleeping are separated by other
use areas (such as kitchens or living rooms, but not bathrooms or closets), they shall be
considered as separate sleeping areas for the purpose of this section.
At least one smoke detector shall be installed at the head (top) of each stairway leading up to an
occupied area.
§ 59-13. Installation; maintenance; removal or destruction.
In new residential occupancy units, smoke detectors shall be wired directly (hard wired) to the
building's electrical system. In all existing residential occupancy units, it is preferred that the
smoke detectors be wired directly (hard wired) to the building's electrical system; however, a
monitored battery-powered unit is acceptable.
It shall be the responsibility of the homeowner(s) and landlord(s) and tenant(s) to maintain smoke
detectors. Such maintenance shall include keeping smoke detectors serviceable by replacing
batteries when necessary or by keeping them connected to an electrical source so that they
remain capable of transmitting an audible signal in the presence of smoke. The removal or
destruction of any smoke detector by any person, except an owner for the purpose of immediate
replacement, is strictly forbidden.
§ 59-14. Certification required at change of occupancy.
At every change of occupancy of every residential occupancy unit occasioned by or incidental to a
sale, lease or sublease of said unit, it shall be the duty of the grantor thereof (i.e., the seller, lessor or
sublessor, as the case may be) to certify, before occupancy, to the new occupant that all smoke
detectors, as required by this article or other applicable laws, are installed and in proper working
condition.
Chapter 60. Fireworks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 10-28-2014 by Ord. No. C-535, approved
10-28-2014. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 59.
§ 60-1. Permit required; applicability; compliance with
regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firms or corporations, amusement parks, fair
associations, or any other organizations or groups of individuals to have or to hold displays of
consumer fireworks and/or display fireworks, as those terms are defined in the Act of May 15,
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 86/233
B.
C.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
A.
B.
C.
1939, P.L. 134, as amended by 35 P.S. § 271, and again amended the statute with Act 204 of
2004, 35 P.S. § 275.2 et seq., within the limits of the Borough of Lititz unless a permit therefor is
first granted by the Borough as hereinafter provided.
This permit requirement applies to any fireworks display occurring totally or partially in the
Borough limits by either a public or private entity.
Any such fireworks display must conform to NFPA (National Fire Protection Association) 1123
Code for Fireworks Display (current edition).
§ 60-2. Application for permit.
Any person, persons, firms or corporations, amusement parks, fair associations, or any other
organizations or groups of individuals desiring to explode any fireworks, as defined in the abovestated
Act, in a public display must complete an application for a fireworks display permit and
submit the completed application to the Borough at least 90 days in advance of the proposed
display.
Applications for a fireworks display permit will be available at the Borough Office during normal
business hours and must be completed and signed by the applicant or an officer or authorized
agent of the applicant.
The permit application will contain, at a minimum, the following:
Name, address, telephone number and fax number (if applicable) of the applicant, and, if the
applicant is an organization, the name, address, telephone number and fax number (if
applicable) of the contact person for the organization;
Name of the individual or organization that will be responsible for providing the fireworks and
detonation;
Proposed site and date and time of the fireworks display;
Number and kinds of fireworks to be discharged, including, but not limited to, shell size and
expectant NFPA fall-out zones;
The manner and place of storage of such fireworks prior to display; and
Site plan explaining all structures, structures occupied, overhead transmission lines, streets,
parking areas, and areas where spectators for the display will be gathered. The site plan shall
include information on the launch site and assembly viewing sites. The site plan shall also
contain a symbol defining North and a sketch of the general area where the fireworks will be
set off and the area they will be directed.
§ 60-3. Review and approval by Borough representative; required
notifications.
A site inspection of the proposed site for the fireworks display shall be conducted by a designated
representative of the Borough ("Borough representative").
The Borough representative shall determine whether or not the display is a fire hazard to any and
all structures in the immediate area of the display.
The Borough representative shall designate the area where the display will originate from and
allow fireworks to be detonated from that area only and shall notify the applicant and the Borough
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 87/233
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
prior to the display as to whether the presence of firefighters and firefighting equipment will be
required at the display.
The approval of the application by the Borough representative will be required prior to the
issuance of a fireworks display permit by the Borough.
The permit holder shall submit a sketch of the launch site/layout to the Fire Chief at least 14 days
prior to the event.
Any and all holders of fireworks display permits will be required to notify the Fire Department at
least 48 hours in advance of the display and further notify the Lancaster County Communications
Center (911) at least two hours in advance of the display, notifying them when and where
fireworks will be displayed. Permit holders will be required to notify the Lancaster County
Communications Center (911) at the conclusion of the display as well.
The Fire Department will not allow fireworks displays if there is a ban on open burning and/or a
declared drought emergency in effect at the time of the notification telephone calls.
§ 60-4. Insurance and liability.
Applicants shall, at the time of the application, provide a certificate of insurance to the Borough
with a minimum limit of insurance of $1,000,000 and naming the Borough as an additional insured.
Applicants/permittees shall agree to hold harmless and indemnify the Borough, its officers, agents
and/or employees from any and all liability arising from or related to the display for which the
permit is issued. This language shall appear on the permit as issued.
The applicant/permittee shall post a bond in the amount of at least $2,500 for possible damages
arising from the proposed display.
§ 60-5. Permit issuance; fee; transferability.
The Borough Secretary, or his or her designee, will issue fireworks display permits after approvals
by the Borough representative have been certified on the application. Permits issued will be valid
for one calendar year beginning on January 1 of each year and concluding on December 31 of
each year.
The cost of the permit will be $250 for each display held by the permittee, payable to the Borough
prior to the issuance of the permit.
Permits are not transferable.
§ 60-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, association, corporation or other entity violating this chapter shall be guilty of a summary
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine in an amount not less than $500 and not
exceeding $1,000.
Chapter 62. Flood Plain Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz: 3-29-2016 by Ord. No. C-544,[1] approved
3-29-2016. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 88/233
[1]
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
Building construction — See Ch. 36.
Sewers — See Ch. 100.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 108.
Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 62, Flood Hazard Control, which consisted of
Art. I, Compliance with Flood Insurance Program, adopted 8-29-1972 by Res. No. 210, approved 8-29-
1972, and Art. II, Building Permits and Subdivision Review, adopted 8-29-1972 by Res. No. 211,
approved 8-29-1972.
Article I. Statutory Authorization
§ 62-1.01. Authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage of the Pennsylvania Flood
Plain Management Act of 1978, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
floodplain management regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Borough Council of Lititz does hereby order as follows.
Article II. General Provisions
§ 62-2.01. Intent.
This chapter is intended to be a supplement to the general provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of
the Borough adopted April 27, 2010.
The provisions of the chapter are to be read and interpreted, where possible, in a fashion
consistent with the provisions of the Borough's Zoning Ordinance and in particular with regard to
Section 215 of the Zoning Ordinance. To the extent the provisions cannot be interpreted in a
consistent fashion, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling regarding floodplain issues. It
is not the intent of this chapter to supersede or repeal any of the regulations or provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance.
This chapter has been enacted pursuant to Pennsylvania Act 166, the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act, and the rules and regulations of Section 60.3(d) of the National Flood Insurance
Program, as administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). As such, the
provisions contained herein are intended to be in compliance with those regulations as they exist
on the date of this enactment.
The intent of this chapter is to:
Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize
flood damage in the future.
Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural drainage.
Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units, and its
residents, by preventing excessive development in areas subject to flooding.
Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
§ 62-2.02. Applicability.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 89/233
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to undertake, or cause to
be undertaken, any construction or development anywhere within the Borough unless a permit has
been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or structures.
§ 62-2.03. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect in identified floodplain
areas. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that
those provisions are more restrictive.
§ 62-2.04. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall be declared
invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the remaining portions of the
chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter
are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 62-2.05. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams
and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside any
identified floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding
or flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough or any officer or employee thereof
for any Flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
Article III. Administration
§ 62-3.01. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Codes Compliance Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this chapter and is
referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may: (A) fulfill the
duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations, (B) delegate duties and responsibilities
set forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and
other employees, or (C) enter into a written agreement or written contract with another agency or
private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations. Administration of any
part of these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities
pursuant to the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in
the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain Administrator duties are to
be fulfilled by the Borough Manager.
§ 62-3.02. Permits required.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 90/233
A.
[1]
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is undertaken within any area of the
Borough.
§ 62-3.03. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been determined that the
proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the application for the
permit to determine if all other necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-
537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);[1] and the U.S.
Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this determination
has been made.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq., and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.,
respectively.
In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator
shall review the history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss concerns can
be addressed before the permit is issued.
During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized official shall
inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He/she
shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as are necessary.
In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to enter
any building, structure, premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does not comply with the permit
application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the permit and
report such fact to the Borough Council for whatever action it considers necessary.
The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records associated with the
requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to, finished construction elevation data,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a biennial report to FEMA
concerning community participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments of the Floodplain
Administrator can be delegated from the person identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies
with the person identified in this chapter as the Floodplain Administrator/manager.
The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC
and the 2009 IRC or the latest edition thereof adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 62-3.04. Application procedures and requirements.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 91/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
C.
Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the Floodplain Administrator on forms
supplied by the Borough. Such application shall contain the following:
Name and address of applicant.
Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is to occur.
Name and address of contractor.
Site location including address.
Listing of other permits required.
Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a breakout of flood-related
cost and the market value of the building before the flood damage occurred where
appropriate.
A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the proposed construction, as well as
any existing buildings or structures.
If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially within any identified
floodplain area, applicants for permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and conform with
the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances;
All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement;
Building materials are flood-resistant;
Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used; and
Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service
facilities have been designed and located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other pertinent information as may
be required by the Floodplain Administrator to make the above determination:
A completed permit application form.
A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100
feet or less, showing the following:
North arrow, scale, and date;
Topographic contour lines, if available;
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and other improvements,
including the location of any existing or proposed subdivision and development;
The location of all existing streets, drives, and other accessways; and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 92/233
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
[1]
[2]
(e)
(f)
(g)
(4)
D.
The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, identified floodplain areas,
and, if available, information pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, drawn at suitable scale
showing the following:
The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based upon North
American Vertical Datum of 1988;
The elevation of the base flood;
Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa. Code, the 2009 IBC or the
2009 IRC or latest edition thereof adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
The following data and documentation:
Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures and
corresponding elevations.
If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces and other factors associated with a base flood.
Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, to show that
the cumulative effect of any proposed development within any identified floodplain area
(see § 62-4.01) when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will
not cause any increase in the base flood elevation.
A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which states that
the proposed construction or development has been adequately designed to withstand
the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the base flood. Such
statement shall include a description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures
which have been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the development.
Detailed information needed to determine compliance with § 62-6.03F, Storage, and
§ 62-6.04, development which may endanger human life, including:
The amount, location and purpose of any materials or substances referred to in
§§ 62-6.03F and 62-6.04 which are intended to be used, produced, stored or
otherwise maintained on site.
A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of the proposed
structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed in
§ 62-6.04 during a base flood.
The appropriate component of the DEP's "Planning Module for Land Development."
Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements of the
DEP, to implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the municipality based upon
the estimated cost of the proposed construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 62-3.05. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the
Lancaster County Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a permit. The
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 93/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by the Floodplain Administrator for
possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
§ 62-3.06. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any
other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer, etc.) for
review and comment.
§ 62-3.07. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to
the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the
application without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any
such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to Floodplain Administrator for
consideration.
§ 62-3.08. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard, or similar document, which
shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show
the number of the permit and the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 62-3.09. Start of construction.
Work on the proposed new construction project and/or development shall not begin prior to the
issuance of a permit.
Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within 180 days after the date of
issuance of the permit. Work shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance
of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the
Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of permit does not refer to zoning approval.
The actual "start of construction" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the applicant, who sets
forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request
and the original permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the
extension is granted.
§ 62-3.10. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 94/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized municipal representative
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
Be in writing;
Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the performance of any act it
requires;
Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may require; provided, however,
that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other method authorized
or required by the laws of this state;
Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of this
chapter or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the Borough shall be guilty of a summary
offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine to the Borough of not less than $25 nor more than
$1,000 plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby
reserved including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of
a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or
remedy such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated, in
noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the Borough Council to be a public nuisance
and abatable as such.
§ 62-3.11. Appeals.
Any Person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain Administrator concerning the
administration of the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Borough Zoning Hearing Board.
Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or action of
the Floodplain Administrator and shall include any fees as may have been established by
resolution of the Borough Council.
The Codes Compliance Officer shall schedule the matter for a hearing to be held within 60 days of
the receipt of the completed application. Notice of the time and place at which the appeal will be
considered shall be given to all parties, in accordance with standard Borough Zoning Hearing
Board established procedures, as provided by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act
247.
Any Person aggrieved by any decision of the Borough Zoning Hearing Board may seek relief
therefrom by appeal to the Lancaster County Court of Common Pleas, as provided by the laws of
this commonwealth including the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, Act 247, and the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
Article IV. Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 62-4.01. Identification.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 95/233
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
B.
C.
The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the Borough, classified as special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRMs) dated April 5, 2016, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the
Flood Insurance Study.
The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and amendments, are
hereby adopted by the Borough and declared to be a part of this chapter.
§ 62-4.02. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the FIRM as floodway and which
represent the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more than one
foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas which have been identified in other
available studies or sources of information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway
has been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated
through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels
within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
Within any floodway area, no new construction or development shall be allowed, unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the DEP Regional Office.
The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the
FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided.
The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been
provided and a floodway has been delineated.
AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE zone on the FIRM included
in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided but no
floodway has been determined.
No permit shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any
AE Area/District without floodway unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development would not, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE.
No new construction or development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the DEP Regional Office.
The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS
prepared by FEMA and for which no base flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable sources shall be
used when available. Where other acceptable information is not available, the base flood elevation
shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain
area which is nearest the construction site.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 96/233
(1)
D.
A.
B.
C.
In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine the elevation with
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by the municipality.
The AO and AH Area/District shall be those areas identified as Zones AO and AH on the FIRM
and in the FIS. These areas are subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance shallow
flooding where average depths are between one and three feet. In Zones AO and AH, drainage
paths shall be established to guide floodwaters around and away from structures on slopes.
§ 62-4.03. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the the Borough Council where studies or
information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision. However,
prior to any such change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by
submitting technical or scientific data. See § 62-6.01B for situations where FEMA notification is
required.
§ 62-4.04. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be
made by the Borough Planning Commission and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination
may appeal to the Borough Council. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 62-4.05. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are
proposed or have occurred, the community shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to
boundary changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to
annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
Article V. Permitted Uses
§ 62-5.01. Uses permitted by right.
The following uses are permitted by right in any special flood hazard area in compliance with the
requirements of this article:
Up to 1/2 of any required yard setback area on an individual residential lot may extend into the
special flood hazard area.
Municipal parks, including paved paths, trails, courts and recreational accessories (including, but
not limited to, backstops, goal cages and posts, benches, tables and signs), which shall be
appropriately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Open space uses that are primarily passive in character, including construction to establish such
areas, shall be permitted to extend into the special flood hazard area, including:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 97/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, forest preserves, fishing areas, passive areas of public
and private parklands, and reforestation.
Stream bank stabilization.
Floodplain restoration.
Forestry operations reviewed by the Lancaster County Conservation District.
Special flood hazard area crossings:
Agricultural crossings by farm vehicles and livestock.
Driveways serving one or two single-family detached dwelling units.
Driveways serving more than two single-family detached dwelling units, or roadways,
recreational trails, railroads and utilities.
Agricultural uses conducted in compliance with methods prescribed in the latest version of the
Pennsylvania DEP's Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Manual.
Public sewer and/or water lines and public utility transmission lines running along the corridor.
Development of elevated and floodproofed buildings on sites that have secured relief from liability
from the Pennsylvania DEP under its Act 2 Land Recycling Program, except that no such
development shall be permitted in the floodway. Such applications are not required to obtain a
variance; however, they shall be required to meet the technical provisions of Article VI herein, the
elevation and floodproofing requirements as stated in § 62-6.02 herein, and the design and
construction standards as stated in § 62-6.03 herein.
§ 62-5.02. Uses prohibited in special flood hazard area and
riparian buffer area.
Any use or activity not authorized within § 62-5.01 herein shall be prohibited within any special flood
hazard area or riparian buffer area, and the following activities and facilities are specifically prohibited,
except for as part of a redevelopment project in compliance with § 62-5.01 herein:
No new construction, alteration or improvement of buildings, manufactured homes and any other
type of permanent structure, including fences, shall be permitted in the special flood hazard area,
except structures necessary for a use permitted in § 62-5.01 and for improvements or alterations
to an existing structure as permitted in Article VII herein.
No new construction, alteration or improvement of buildings and any other type of permanent
structure, including fences, shall be permitted within a riparian buffer area.
Placement of fill within the special flood hazard area is prohibited, except as required for activities
permitted by § 62-5.01 and Article VII herein.
No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse,
except as permitted in § 62-5.01, and with appropriate approvals by Pennsylvania DEP Regional
Office and the Lancaster County Conservation District.
Clearing of all, existing vegetation, except where such clearing is necessary to prepare land for a
use permitted under § 62-5.01 herein, and where the effects of these actions are mitigated by
reestablishment of vegetation. Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides and/or other chemicals in
excess of prescribed industry standards.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 98/233
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
Roads or driveways, except where permitted as corridor crossings in compliance with § 62-5.01
herein.
Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any area not designed to accommodate adequately the type
and volume.
Parking lots.
Any kind of outdoor storage of items or materials that would become buoyant in flood conditions.
These shall include but not be limited to vehicles, trailers, tires, lumber, plastics and fiberglass.
Outdoor storage of any apparently abandoned material or vehicles that could be deemed to be
landfill, dump and/or a junkyard or salvage operation, regardless of the materials or quantity
associated with the accumulation.
Subsurface sewage disposal areas.
Sod farming.
Stormwater basins, including necessary berms and outfall facilities.
§ 62-5.03. Floodplain restoration activities.
Benefit. It is the expressed intent of the Borough to permit floodplain restoration activities within
the special flood hazard areas because of the multiple benefits that will be derived from such
activities, including but not limited to enhanced conveyance of floodwaters, reduced depth of
flooding, creation of wetlands, groundwater recharge, sediment and nutrient reduction in
waterways, stormwater management, stabilized stream banks, stream quality enhancement,
aquatic improvements and aesthetics.
Permitted activities. The following stream-restoration activities shall be permitted:
Efforts to control erosion and sedimentation.
Implementation of floodplain management techniques.
Creation of groundwater recharge systems using natural features.
Reattachment of the stream to the floodplain. (This effort may result in the removal of large
amounts of sedimentation and embankments that have been deposited over a number of
decades.)
Placement of in-stream habitat structures to improve or provide fishery habitats.
Ponds and/or created wetlands.
Planting of riparian buffer.
Removal of invasive species.
Permitted uses.
Floodproofing and flood-hazard reduction measures and/or structures designed to protect
existing buildings or other existing infrastructure.
Water-oriented structures (excluding buildings); docks, piers, boat launch ramps, hatcheries,
water-monitoring devices, etc.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 99/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
Permitted uses, criteria for approval. The application package must demonstrate that the
improvements that are proposed in conjunction with the floodplain restoration project proposal,
design and implementation package will meet the following:
That the proposed use(s) will not increase the height or frequency of flooding.
That the improvement has been properly designed so as to withstand the maximum volume,
velocity and force of any floodplain water and is floodproof and flotation-proof.
That the use or structure will not create a health, safety or sanitation risk.
That an adequate plan is in place to assure proper maintenance of the structure or use. (An
escrow account may be required.)
That the use or structure will not create or lead to a surface water or groundwater quality
issue or problem.
Prohibited uses and activities.
The outdoor storage of any apparently abandoned material or vehicles that could be deemed
to be a landfill, dump and junkyard or salvage operation, regardless of the materials or
quantity associated with the accumulation.
The storage or accumulation of any cut brush, tree branches, grass clipping or other
harvested product that would serve to divert the flow of floodwaters or which may float and
migrate downstream during a flood event.
Approvals. Stream restoration work shall only be permitted following submission of studies and
plans as may be necessary to obtain required permits from local, county, state and federal
regulatory agencies, including but not limited to the Lancaster County Conservation District,
Pennsylvania DEP, United States Army Corps of Engineers, FEMA, etc.
Letter of map revision. In certain cases, submissions may need to include submission to FEMA
relative to the issuance of a letter of map revision based on the anticipated benefits of the project
and the related changes to the existing flood map(s). In those cases, the Borough will cooperate
with the applicant in the submission process. However, it will be the applicant's responsibility to
provide, at its cost, all of the plans, reports and applications that are required for such filing.
Article VI. Technical Provisions
§ 62-6.01. General.
Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by
the municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first been obtained from the
Pennsylvania DEP Regional Office.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
unless it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
development shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse, if
deemed necessary by the Floodplain Administrator.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 100/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
B.
When a variance is granted and the Borough proposes to permit the following encroachments: any
development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within the floodway; or any
development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will
cause a rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or relocation of a
stream, the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to permitting the encroachments
to occur.
Upon receipt of the administrator's conditional approval of map change and prior to approving
the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased base flood elevations and/or
revised floodway reflecting the post-project condition.
Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide as-built
certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map revision upon receipt of such certifications in
accordance with 44 CFR 67.
Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within any identified floodplain area
shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other
applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 62-6.02. New construction elevation and floodproofing
requirements.
Residential structures.
In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on the FIRM, any new
construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with § 62-
4.02C of this chapter.
In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) at or above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405 as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
Nonresidential structures.
In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement of a
nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or
above, the regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water; and
Has structural components with the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 101/233
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
C.
D.
(1)
E.
In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the FIRM, any new construction
or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in
accordance with § 62-4.02C of this chapter.
In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have their lowest floor
elevated or completely floodproofed above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as
the depth number specified on the FIRM.
Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification
standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood- Proofing Regulations" published by the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other
equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied
by a statement certified by a registered professional engineer or architect which states that
the proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance with the above
referenced standards.
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405 as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
Space below the lowest floor.
Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basements) is prohibited.
Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements) which will be used
solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other than
a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "fully
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided
that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a
substantial improvement, as defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation
that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need not be elevated or
floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall be limited to the
parking of vehicles, or to the storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the principal
use or activity.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 102/233
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(8)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
(1)
C.
Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
The structure will have a low damage potential.
The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least obstruction to the flow of
floodwaters.
Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as furnaces, heaters, washers,
dryers, etc., are prohibited.
Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater
for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, or
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 62-6.03. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and development proposed within any
identified floodplain area:
Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all points;
Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall not be permitted;
Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring, or
settling;
Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless substantiated data justifying
steeper slopes are submitted to, and approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.
Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of stormwater
runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and
provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the
discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be
located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration
of floodwaters.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 103/233
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
I.
(1)
(2)
J.
Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the discharge of untreated
sewage into floodwaters.
No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within any identified floodplain
area except in strict compliance with all state and local regulations for such systems. If any
such system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination
from it, during a flood.
The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA #348, "Protecting Building
Utilities From Flood Damages," and the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be
utilized.
Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems shall be
located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a
flood.
Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than one foot below the
regulatory flood elevation.
Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in times of flooding, could be
injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and not listed in § 62-6.04, Development which may
endanger human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or floodproofed to
the maximum extent possible.
Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures shall be designed, located, and
constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
Anchoring.
All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering
practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or components located
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
Floors, walls and ceilings.
Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be installed to
accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without
causing structural damage to the building.
Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant
variety.
Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will withstand inundation.
Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
made of metal or other water-resistant material.
Paints and adhesives.
Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of marine or
water-resistant quality.
Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or waterresistant
variety.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 104/233
(3)
(1)
(2)
K.
L.
M.
(1)
(2)
N.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
Electrical components.
Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation.
Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.
Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units, and other electrical,
mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood
elevation.
Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration
occurs.
Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and specifications contained in 34 Pa.
Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as amended and not limited to the following provisions, shall
apply to the above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent that they are
more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this chapter.
International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof adopted by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof adopted by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania: Secs. R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and Appendix
J.
§ 62-6.04. Development which may endanger human life.
In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and the regulations adopted
by the Department of Community and Economic development as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or, will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances, shall be subject to the provisions of this
section, in addition to all other applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances
are considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone.
Ammonia.
Benzene.
Calcium carbide.
Carbon disulfide.
Celluloid.
Chlorine.
Hydrochloric acid.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 105/233
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
A.
Hydrocyanic acid.
Magnesium.
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
Phosphorus.
Potassium.
Sodium.
Sulphur and sulphur products.
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.
Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in Subsection A above, shall be
prohibited. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved residential structure of the kind described in § 62-6.04A, above, shall be elevated to
remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation and built in accordance
with §§ 62-6.01, 62-6.02 and 62-6.03.
Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
nonresidential structure of the kind described in § 62-6.04A above, shall be built in accordance
with §§ 62-6.01, 62-6.02 and 62-6.03, including:
Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet
above base flood elevation; and
Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during the course of a base flood.
Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards for completely dry
floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations (U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers. June 1972 as amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent watertight
standard.
§ 62-6.05. Special requirements for subdivisions and
development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres,
whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain areas where base flood elevation data are not available
shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision and letter of map
revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
§ 62-6.06. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Within any floodway area/district, manufactured homes shall be prohibited. If a variance is
obtained in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the provisions of § 62-6.06C shall
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 106/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
apply.
Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured homes, and any
improvements thereto, shall be:
Placed on a permanent foundation;
Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least 1 1/2 feet above base
flood elevation;
Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
Have all ductwork and utilities including HVAC/heat pump elevated to the regulatory flood
elevation.
Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with the manufacturers'
installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the
above information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International Residential Building
Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for
Manufactured Housing, 1984 edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code Chapter 401
through 405 shall apply.
Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the 2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or
the latest edition thereto adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and 34 Pa. Code, as
amended where appropriate and/or applicable to units where the manufacturers' standards for
anchoring cannot be provided or were not established for the proposed unit(s) installation.
§ 62-6.07. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 62-6.06.
Article VII. Prohibited Activities
§ 62-7.01. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of Community and
Economic development to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following
activities shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
The commencement of any of the following activities: or the construction, enlargement, or
expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
Hospitals.
Nursing homes.
Jails or prisons.
The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision, or substantial improvements or expansion to an existing manufactured home
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 107/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
park or manufactured home subdivision.
Article VIII. Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain
Areas
§ 62-8.01. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements to be made to lawfully
existing structures. However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions of
§ 62-8.02 shall apply.
§ 62-8.02. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an existing structure
located within any identified floodplain area:
No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any identified
floodplain area that would cause any increase in BFE. In A Area/District(s), BFEs are determined
using the methodology in § 62-4.02C.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure to
an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement
and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa. Code, as amended, and the 2009
IBC and the 2009 IRC or most recent revision thereof adopted by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure, to
an extent or amount of less than 50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to
the greatest extent possible.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind that meets the definition of
"repetitive loss" shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Article IX. Variances
§ 62-9.01. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in an exceptional hardship to a
prospective builder, developer or landowner, the municipality may, upon request, grant relief from the
strict application of the requirements.
§ 62-9.02. Variance procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough in accordance with the procedures
contained in § 62-3.11 and the following:
No variance shall be granted for any construction. Development, use, or activity within any
floodway area/district that would cause any increase in the BFE.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 108/233
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
G.
(1)
H.
No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any AE
Area/District without floodway that would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
No variance shall be granted for any requirements pertaining specifically to development which
may endanger human life (§ 62-6.04).
If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.
In granting any variance, the Borough shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards
it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the
objectives of this chapter.
Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough shall notify the applicant in writing that:
The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
That there is good and sufficient cause.
That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
That the granting of the variance will:
Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; nor
Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict with any other
applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the
Borough. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to the FEMA.
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and constructed
so as to have the capability of resisting the one-percent annual chance flood.
Article X. Definitions
§ 62-10.01. General.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
§ 62-10.02. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE, STRUCTURE OR BUILDING
A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to,
the principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 109/233
A Flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also
called the "100-year flood" or "one-percent annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE
The volume of water resulting from a base flood as it passes a given location within a given time,
usually expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)
The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that
indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a Flood that has a one-percent or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT
Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides.
BUILDING
A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof. Included shall
be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEP
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, or any agency successor thereto.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the
construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other
structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities; filling,
grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials;
and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which
the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD
A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS)
The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood
profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA
A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an
adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 110/233
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
FLOODPLAIN RESTORATION
The process of fully or partially restoring the floodplain of a watercourse as closely as possible to
its original conditions before having been influenced by anthropogenic activities. Typically includes
the removal of legacy sediment, reestablishing the hydrologic connection of the stream, floodplain
and groundwater, and reestablishing native plant communities and aquatic and terrestrial habitat,
and providing additional flood storage and water quality benefits.
FLOODPROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE
The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls
of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES
Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA
This term is an umbrella term that includes all of the areas within which the community has
selected to enforce floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the special
flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study, but may include
additional areas identified by the community. See §§ 62-4.01 and 62-4.02 for the specifics on what
areas the community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished, floodresistant
partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and
incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of a
building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of
the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 111/233
A.
B.
C.
The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are
placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MINOR REPAIR
The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine
maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion
thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change
of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway
requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of
any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping,
electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after April 5, 2016, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction started after February 22,
1983, and before April 5, 2016, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was
issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
PERMIT
Written authorization from the Codes Compliance Officer to alter, improve, construct and/or make
use of an area of land as regulated by this chapter.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate,
municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974,
or on or after the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated August 15, 1979,
whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant with the regulations of the
National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31,
1974, or before the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated August 15, 1979,
whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with the regulations of the
National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which is:
Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections;
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck,
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 112/233
D. Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION
The base flood elevation (BFE) or estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS
Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA)
An area in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days after the date of the permit and
shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time
extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE
A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs, or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by
lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage or repetitive
loss regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any
project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary,
or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and
which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 113/233
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC)
The statewide building code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to
new construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality, a third party or the
Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the Code
adopted the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain construction. For
coordination purposes, references to the above are made specifically to various sections of the
IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE
A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION
The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5),
(c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
WATERCOURSE
A stream of water; river; brook; creek; or a channel or ditch for water, whether natural or
manmade, having a defined bed and banks with perennial or intermittent flow.
Article XI. Enactment
§ 62-11.01. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on April 5, 2016, and shall remain in force until modified, amended or
rescinded by Lititz Borough, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
§ 62-11.02. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any section, sentence, clause, part or provision
hereof shall be held to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision of the court shall not affect or impair the remaining sections, sentences, clauses, parts or
provisions of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board that this chapter would
have been enacted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or provision
had not been included herein.
Chapter 66. Garbage, Rubbish and Sanitation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and Sanitation Advisory Committee — See Ch. 5, Art. V.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 46.
Housing maintenance and occupancy — See Ch. 69.
Junkyards — See Ch. 72.
Weeds — See Ch. 120.
Article I. Dumping, Collecting and Storing
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 114/233
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
F.
G.
H.
[2]
I.
[Adopted 4-9-1963 by Ord. No. C-17, approved 4-9-1963]
§ 66-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
Definitions.
PERSON
Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or corporation.
WATERS OF THE BOROUGH
Includes any and all streams, dammed water, ponds, springs and all other bodies of surface
and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the
boundaries of this Borough.
The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 66-2. Unlawful actions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do, authorize, aid or abet any of the following described actions,
such regulations or restrictions being intended to promote the general health, safety, welfare, morals
and cleanliness of the Borough:
To place, or cause to be placed, thrown or maintained, in or near any of the streets, alleys or
waters of the Borough, any matter that will decay or become offensive or will render offensive any
of the drains, streets, alleys, waters or sewers within the Borough.
To maintain or permit to be maintained on any property owned or occupied by any person within
the Borough any condition productive of a breeding place for vectors or a nuisance detrimental to
the public health and which may be so declared by the Borough Council.
To permit any body of water that has or may become stagnant to remain on the premises owned
or occupied by any person within the Borough.
To run, cast or deposit, either by means of a drain or otherwise, upon any street or alley in the
Borough or into the waters of the Borough any kitchen slops, wash water, soap suds or any
nauseous or offensive liquid or substance, regardless of source.
To keep hogs within the limits of the Borough.
To permit any animals or fowl to run at large within the Borough.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 46, Dogs and Other Animals.
To keep or suffer to remain on the premises owned or occupied or used by any person any
offensive or unwholesome matter of any kind or to permit same on any vacant lot or on the streets
and alleys within or on the boundaries of this Borough or in the waters of the Borough.
To permit the existence of any plant growth which is harmful to health or throws off any unpleasant
or noxious odor or conceals any filthy deposit.
To allow grass, weeds or plant growth which is inedible and/or not planted for an ornamental
purpose to exceed six inches in height.[2]
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 120, Weeds.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 115/233
[3]
J.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
To dump any garbage, rubbish or junk on any private property or permit private property to be
used for public dumping or for the accumulation of any garbage, rubbish or junk.[3]
Editor's Note: As to junkyards generally, see Ch. 72, Junkyards.
§ 66-3. Notice to abate nuisance within specified time limit.
[Amended 4-29-1969 by Ord. No. C-93, approved 5-9-1969]
Upon receipt of a notice from the Borough Manager that a condition exists upon property owned or
occupied by him in violation of this article, it shall be the duty of such person to abate the nuisance
created hereby within the time limit specified in such notice.
§ 66-4. Control of collection and dumping.
[Amended 3-27-1973 by Ord. No. C-138, approved 3-27-1973]
The collection and removal of garbage and rubbish from within the Borough of Lititz shall be a Borough
function. All garbage and rubbish must be disposed of outside the Borough limits.
§ 66-5. Storage containers.
[Amended 3-27-1973 by Ord. No. C-138, approved 3-27-1973]
Any persons having garbage and/or rubbish to dispose of shall keep it, with all liquid drained
therefrom, pending collection, in watertight metal or plastic cans with lids and/or bags and being of
such size as to be easily handled by one person.
§ 66-6. Time of collection.
[Amended 3-27-1973 by Ord. No. C-138, approved 3-27-1973]
Any person having garbage or rubbish to dispose of shall place it in containers, as described in
§ 66-5 of this article, at the curb in front of his home or place of business not later than 6:00 a.m.
on the day of collection and leave it there until 6:00 p.m. or until collected, as follows:
Monday: west side of Broad Street and western section of the Borough.
Tuesday: east side of North Broad Street, north side of East Main Street and northeastern
section of the Borough.
Wednesday: east side of South Broad Street, south side of East Main Street and
southeastern section of the Borough.
The Borough Council may, from time to time, by resolution, provide other and different times and
places for its collection.
§ 66-7. Alternate collection from commercial establishments.
[Amended 3-27-1973 by Ord. No. C-138, approved 3-27-1973]
The Borough Council may, in its discretion, allow other methods of collection and removal of garbage
and rubbish by or from restaurants, hotels and other large producers of garbage and rubbish.
§ 66-8. Fees; violations and penalties.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 116/233
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
Fees.
Charge for failure to comply within time limit. In case any person shall neglect, fail or refuse to
comply with the notice of violation of this article within five days, the Borough Manager may
cause such garbage, trash and rubbish and/or weeds or vegetation to be removed, trimmed
or cut. There is hereby imposed a charge of $10 plus the actual cost of labor involved for
each time the Borough shall cause such garbage, trash or other rubbish and/or grass, weeds
or vegetation to be removed, trimmed or cut; and the owner or occupant, as the case may be,
of the premises shall be billed after same has been completed.
Quarterly garbage fee. The quarterly garbage fee, to appear on the water and sewer bill, shall
be $55, effective with the billing of March 10, 2008.
[Added 3-8-1988 by Res. No. 427, approved 3-8-1988; amended 1-31-1989 by Res. No. 442,
approved 1-31-1989; 12-11-1990 by motion; 1-29-2008 by Res. No. 717 by approved 1-29-
2008]
Liens. Should any bill or bills for the removing of such nuisance be unpaid on or before November
1 of each year, a penalty of 10% shall be added to such bill or bills, and a lien shall be filed against
the premises in the same manner as municipal claims are filed.
Fines and penalties. Any person who or which shall violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with
any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed
the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such costs and
prosecution, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that if the District
Justice determines that the defendant is without the financial means to pay the fines and costs
immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall be permitted to pay the fines or costs
in installments and over such periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
Fees. The Borough Council may, by resolution, establish fees or assessments on the services of
the authorized collector of garbage in the Borough. The billing from the Borough for these services
may, at the Borough's election, appear on other bills sent to the owner or persons thereof, such as
the water and sewer bill. In the event of failure to pay said bill within 30 days, the Borough shall
assess a penalty of 5% for the overdue payment. Interest on any unpaid bills shall accrue at the
rate of 10% per annum.
[Added 2-26-1985 by Ord. No. C-284, approved 2-26-1985]
Article II. Storage of Unenclosed Material
[Adopted 9-28-1971 by Ord. No. C-125, approved 10-1-1971]
§ 66-9. Accumulation of unenclosed materials prohibited;
exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, corporation, partnership, unincorporated association or
any entity whatsoever to store or to accumulate or to permit the accumulation of materials capable of
being scattered by wind or any of the natural elements, except when stored or accumulated entirely
within a building completely enclosed on all sides, or when entirely enclosed within a fine wire mesh or
other type of enclosure designed to prevent scattering of the materials.
§ 66-10. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 117/233
A.
In the event that any person or persons, corporation, partnership, unincorporated association or any
entity whatsoever shall violate any of the provisions of this article, the Mayor or Borough Manager shall
give them 10 days' written notice of said violation. Any person who, after said 10 days' written notice,
fails to comply with this article shall, upon conviction thereof by summary proceedings, be sentenced to
pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days; provided,
however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is without the financial means to pay
the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall be permitted to pay the
fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
Article III. Solid Waste Disposal
[Adopted 12-30-1986 by Ord. No. C-305, approved 12-30-1986]
§ 66-11. Definitions; word usage.
The following terms shall have the following meanings in this article.
COUNTY
The County of Lancaster.
EXISTING CONTRACT
Any agreement or contract fully executed prior to the effective date of this article for the
collection, disposal or transportation of municipal waste generated within this municipality.
FACILITY
The waste-to-energy incinerator to be constructed by or on behalf of the LCSWMA pursuant
to the plan.
FULL SYSTEM OPERATION OR FULLY OPERATIONAL
That date which is 60 days from the date upon which the county and other municipalities
representing, in the aggregate, not less than 60% of the population of the county, as
determined by the 1980 decennial census of the United States, execute the intermunicipal
agreement and enact waste flow ordinances.
LCSWMA
The Lancaster County Solid Waste Management Authority, its assigns, its successors in
interest and its predecessor in interest, the Lancaster Area Refuse Authority.
MUNICIPALITY
The Borough of Lititz, located within the County of Lancaster, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, cooperative enterprise, trust,
municipal authority, federal institution or agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other
governmental agency or any other entity or any group of such persons which is recognized by
law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine,
penalty, imprisonment or denial or grant of any license, the term "person" shall include the
officers and directors of a corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PLAN
The municipal waste management plan for the county adopted by the county or municipalities
therein and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
POINT OF ENTRY INTO THE SYSTEM
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 118/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
Any delivery site within the system designated by the LCSWMA for delivery of regulated
municipal waste.
RECYCLING
The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of metals, glass, paper, yard waste and
other materials which would otherwise become municipal waste.
REGULATED MUNICIPAL WASTE
Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste and other material, including solid
or semisolid material resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities, and any other solid waste which is
within the definition of "municipal waste" set forth in Section 103 of the Pennsylvania Solid
Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, 35 P.S. § 6018.103 (Purdon
Supplement, 1985), and which LCSWMA, the county or any contractor ("contractor") selected
by the county or LCSWMA to construct and/or operate a resource recovery facility or facilities
to be located within the municipal boundaries of the county by ordinance or regulation is
willing to accept at the facility, but excluding:
Any liquid waste or sludge.
Any waste which is defined by existing or future federal or state law or regulation as
hazardous waste or residual waste.
Infectious waste, pathological waste or other waste for which treatment or handling
requirements different from those normally applicable to municipal waste apply.
Polychlorinated biphenyls.
Any waste which may be marketable and which is intentionally segregated for purposes
of recycling.
Materials specifically excluded under applicable county or LCSWMA ordinances, rules or
regulations.
SOURCE SEPARATION
The segregation and collection, prior to delivery to a point of entry into the system, of
materials for the sole purpose of recycling.
SYSTEM
The overall solid waste management and disposal system and every aspect thereof owned or
operated by or on behalf of the LCSWMA, including, without limitation, equipment, transfer
stations, resource recovery facilities and landfills, owned or operated or to be acquired,
constructed or operated by the LCSWMA or any agent, designee or contractor thereof in
implementation of the plan.
TRANSFER FACILITY
Any solid waste facility which is now or hereafter may be established by the LCSWMA or the
county for the purpose of accepting solid waste for processing and economical consolidation
for subsequent delivery to the facility or another solid waste disposal site.
All other words and phrases shall have the same meanings as set forth in the Pennsylvania Solid
Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. (Purdon
Supplement, 1985), as it may hereinafter be amended or supplemented by legislation regarding
municipal waste planning.
§ 66-12. Collectors' licenses; compliance with rules and
regulations required; administration.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 119/233
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
Licensing. No person who is not duly licensed by the LCSWMA to deliver waste to the county
system may collect or transport municipal waste located or generated within this municipality. This
prohibition shall become effective 120 days from the effective date of this section of this article.
Compliance with rules, regulations and ordinances. In carrying on activities related to solid waste
collection or transportation within this municipality, all municipal waste collectors and all municipal
waste transporters shall comply with all rules, regulations and ordinances pertaining to the
collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste as may be hereinafter enacted by this
municipality or by the county pursuant to a parallel County Waste Flow Ordinance and all rules
and regulations enacted by the LCSWMA pursuant to authority given it under 53 P.S. § 315
(Purdon, 1974, and Purdon Supplement, 1985), as hereafter amended.
Administration. Licenses hereunder shall be issued, revoked and administered by the LCSWMA.
§ 66-13. Designation of disposal sites; recycling exempted.
Delivery to LCSWMA/county sites. All municipal waste collectors and transporters shall deliver
and dispose of all regulated municipal waste collected or generated within the municipality at a
transfer station or disposal facility owned and operated by or on behalf of the LCSWMA, subject to
such reasonable regulations for the operation thereof as may be established by the county or the
LCSWMA.
Disposal at other sites. The disposal of regulated municipal waste collected or generated within
the municipality may occur at other sites only as permitted by rule, regulation, ordinance or order
duly issued by the county or by the written agreement of the county, the LCSWMA and the
municipality. The disposal of regulated municipal waste at an existing facility from sources
reflected on the notice to the municipality, the county and the LCSWMA, as provided in § 66-16C
of this article, shall be permitted.
Recycling. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit source separation or recycling or to affect
any sites at which source separation or recycling may take place.
§ 66-14. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
Compliance with county and LCSWMA regulations. The collection, transportation and disposal of
municipal waste present or generated within the municipality shall be subject to such further
reasonable rules and regulations as may from time to time be promulgated by the county pursuant
to its Waste Flow Ordinance and such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the LCSWMA
pursuant to 53 P.S. § 315 (Purdon, 1974, and Purdon Supplement, 1985), as hereafter amended,
including, without limitation, regulations governing applications and standards for licensing, fees to
be charged for such licensing, the terms of licenses, procedures, recordkeeping, transportation
routes and other matters.
County authorization to adopt regulations. Rules and regulations adopted by the county pursuant
to the parallel County Waste Flow Ordinance to be adopted pursuant to the intermunicipal
agreement described in § 66-21 hereof shall be deemed rules and regulations adopted under this
article, and the county is hereby authorized to adopt such rules and regulations.
Consistency of regulations with this article and other laws. No rules or regulations adopted
pursuant to this article shall be contrary to or less stringent than the provisions of this article, the
plan, the County Waste Flow Ordinance, the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act or
regulations adopted thereunder or such other laws, regulations or requirements as may be
enacted by the United States of America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources or the Pennsylvania Environmental Quality Board
governing municipal waste planning, collection, storage, transportation, processing or disposal.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 120/233
A.
B.
A.
B.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
C.
A.
§ 66-15. Existing contracts.
Noninterference with existing contracts. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to
interfere with or in any way modify the provisions of any existing contract in force in the
municipality on the effective date of this article.
New contracts and renewals of existing contracts. No renewal of any existing contract upon the
expiration of the original term thereof and no new contract for municipal waste collection,
transportation, processing or disposal shall be entered into after the effective date of this article,
unless such renewal or such contract shall conform to the requirements of this article, the County
Waste Flow Ordinance, rules and regulations promulgated thereunder and the terms of licenses
issued thereunder.
§ 66-16. New or expanded facilities restricted; recycling
exempted; existing facilities.
Prohibition of private waste processing and disposal facilities. No person other than LCSWMA, the
United States of America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a county, a municipality, an
authority created by the foregoing or a person acting on behalf of the foregoing shall use or permit
to be used any property owned or occupied by that person within the municipality as a municipal
waste processing or disposal facility, either for municipal waste generated within the municipality
or elsewhere, without the express written approval of the municipality, the county and LARA.
Recycling. The prohibition set forth in § 66-16A of this article shall not interfere with the operation
of any program for recycling.
Existing facilities.
The prohibition set forth in § 66-16A of this article shall not interfere with the operation of any
privately or publicly owned solid waste facility which has been issued a solid waste permit
before the effective date of this article, provided that:
The owner or operator of the facility provides written notice to the county and the
municipality of the facility permit number, address, ownership and existing sources of
waste no later than 60 days after the effective date of this article;
The facility accepts regulated municipal waste from no sources within the county other
than those then authorized by the facility's solid waste permit and then being accepted,
as reflected on the notice provided the county and municipality pursuant to this section;
and
The facility shall not be expanded in capacity, with the exception of facilities owned or
operated by or on behalf of another county, which facilities may expand if such expansion
is consistent with a municipal waste management plan approved by the Department of
Environmental Resources.
Notices under this section shall be submitted to the Business Manager on behalf of the
municipality. The county may, by resolution, designate the LCSWMA or another authority or
agency as the entity which will receive notice pursuant to this section.
§ 66-17. Unlawful conduct to constitute nuisance.
Unlawful conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 121/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
A.
B.
A.
Accumulate or cause to be accumulated municipal waste in an amount greater than 20 tons,
other than waste which has been source separated for the purpose of recycling.
Violate, cause or assist in the violation of any provision of this article, any rule, regulation or
order promulgated hereunder or any rule, regulation or order promulgated by the LCSWMA or
the county consistent with this article.
Process, treat, transfer or dispose of or cause to be processed, treated, transferred or
disposed of regulated municipal waste generated within the municipality at any solid waste
facility other than a solid waste facility owned or operated by or on behalf of the county or the
LCSWMA or at an existing solid waste facility as permitted by § 66-16C of this article without
the express written consent of any municipality within which the facility is located, the county,
and the LCSWMA.
Collect or transport municipal waste present or generated within the county without a valid
license for disposal issued by the LCSWMA.
Hinder, obstruct, prevent or interfere with the municipality, the county, the LCSWMA or their
personnel in the performance of any duty under this article or in the enforcement of this
article.
Act in a manner that it contrary to the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act, regulations
promulgated thereunder, the plan, this article, the county ordinance, rules or regulations
promulgated thereunder or the terms of licenses issued thereunder.
Public nuisance. Any unlawful conduct set forth in § 66-17A hereof shall constitute a public
nuisance.
§ 66-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who engages in unlawful conduct as defined in this article shall, upon conviction thereof in
a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and
not less than $150 and, in default of payment thereof, shall be committed to the county jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days.
§ 66-19. Revocation of license; denial of subsequent application.
Upon finding that any person has engaged in unlawful conduct as defined in this article:
The LCSWMA, the municipality or the county may revoke any license issued by LCSWMA to that
person in accordance with § 66-12 of this article; and
The LCSWMA may deny any subsequent application by that person for a license pursuant to § 66-
12 hereof.
§ 66-20. Additional remedies.
Restraining violations. In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, the municipality, the
county or the LCSWMA may institute a suit in equity where unlawful conduct or public nuisance
exists, as defined in this article, for an injunction to restrain a violation of this article or rules,
regulations, orders or the terms of licenses promulgated or issued pursuant to this article. In
addition to an injunction, the court may impose penalties as authorized by § 66-18 hereof and
revoke any licenses as authorized by § 66-19 hereof.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 122/233
B.
[1]
A.
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
B.
Concurrent remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this article shall be deemed
concurrent. The existence or exercise of any remedy shall not prevent the municipality, the county
or the LCSWMA from exercising any other remedy provided by this article or otherwise provided at
law or equity.
§ 66-21. Intermunicipal agreement.
Entry into intermunicipal agreement. In order to implement the intent and terms of this article, the
municipality, pursuant to the authority of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, Act of July 12,
1972, No. 180, codified at 53 P.S. §§ 481 to 490 (Purdon, 1974, and Purdon Supplement, 1984),
and Article IX, Section 5, of the Constitution of the Common-wealth of Pennsylvania, hereby
enters into the intermunicipal joint cooperation agreement between this municipality, the county
and other municipalities within the County of Lancaster, which is attached hereto as Exhibit A[1]
and incorporated herein, together with such changes consistent with this article, if any, as may be
approved by the officials of the parties executing the same, such execution to be conclusive
evidence of such approval ("intermunicipal agreement").
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
Terms and implementation of intermunicipal agreement. As fully set forth in the intermunicipal
agreement and this article:
Conditions and terms of agreement. In the agreement:
The county agrees to:
Arrange for the provision of municipal waste disposal facilities for the economical
and environmentally sound disposal of municipal waste generated within the
participating municipalities;
Coordinate recycling activities and marketing; and
Assure continuing municipal waste planning for the county and the participating
municipalities by entering into an agreement with the LCSWMA.
The county and participating municipalities representing, in the aggregate, not less than
60% of the population of the county each agree to enact a waste flow ordinance in a form
substantially similar to this article and to assure otherwise that all acceptable municipal
solid waste be delivered to the county system.
The County agrees to:
Enact rules and regulations;
Cause the LCSWMA to enact additional rules and regulations and to administer a
licensing program; and
Enforce this article and the parallel Municipal and County Waste Flow Ordinances.
The county agrees to assure reasonable solid waste disposal fees for residents of the
participating municipalities.
The parties agree to cooperate in the joint enforcement of the intermunicipal agreement
and all ordinances enacted pursuant to the intermunicipal agreement, and this
municipality thereby agrees cooperatively to exercise, to delegate to the county and to
allow delegation of such powers, duties and responsibilities as set forth in the
intermunicipal agreement.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 123/233
(2)
(a)
(b)
[2]
(c)
(3)
(4)
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(c)
(5)
(6)
C.
Duration of term of the agreement. The term of the intermunicipal agreement shall commence
upon the date on which the county and other municipalities representing at least 60% of the
population of the county have executed the intermunicipal agreement and shall terminate 40
years following that date, unless terminated earlier for cause.
Purpose and objectives of agreement. The purpose of the intermunicipal agreement is to
provide a mechanism to;
Finance, construct and operate a municipal waste disposal system to serve this
municipality and other municipalities within the county;
Administer a countywide recycling program; and
Provide continuing municipal waste planning, as more fully set forth in the recitals to the
intermunicipal agreement and this article.[2]
Editor's Note: The recitals (preambles) to the intermunicipal agreement and this Article
are on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
Manner and extent of financing the agreement Enforcement of this article shall be financed by
the county's general revenues, except insofar as the municipality elects to enforce this article;
administration of this article, the recycling program and planning shall be financed by the
LCSWMA with revenues received from the operation of the county system; and construction
and operation of the county system shall be financed by debt instruments issued by the
LCSWMA and operating revenues.
Organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement.
The LCSWMA shall be formed from LARA by amendment of LARA's Articles of
Incorporation.
The LCSWMA shall:
Construct and operate or arrange for the construction and operation of the county
system; and
Administer and enforce this article and parallel ordinances adopted by the county
and other municipalities pursuant to the intermunicipal agreement.
The county and the municipality shall enforce said Waste Flow Ordinances with
assistance from the LCSWMA.
Management and acquisition of property. All property within the county system shall be
acquired, managed and disposed of by the LCSWMA in accordance with its separate
agreement with the county and the powers and duties imposed upon the LCSWMA by law.
Execution. Appropriate officers of the municipality are authorized and directed to execute the
intermunicipal agreement on behalf of the municipality.
§ 66-22. Operations and charges.
The municipality has been advised by the county that the plan proposes to provide for solid waste
processing and disposal facilities which will be operated efficiently and economically by the LCSWMA
and in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations and also that the LCSWMA will impose
reasonable charges, which will be uniform among all classes of the users of the plant or plants from
participating municipalities which execute the intermunicipal agreement within 90 days of the date
upon which the Department of Environmental Resources grants preliminary approval to the plan.
Charges may differ for different categories of waste and for different points of entry into the system.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 124/233
§ 66-23. Construal of provisions.
The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally construed so as best to achieve and to
effectuate the goals and purposes hereof. This article shall be construed in pari materia with the Act of
July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, known as the "Solid Waste Management Act," 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et
seq. (Purdon Supplement, 1985).
§ 66-24. When effective.
Sections 66-15 and 66-21 of this article shall become effective immediately, as provided by law, and
the remainder of this article shall become effective on the date upon which the system becomes fully
operational.
Article IV. Recycling
[Adopted 12-11-1990 by Ord. No. C-335, approved 12-11-1990]
§ 66-25. Definitions.
Any term, if not defined in this article, shall have the meaning as from time to time set forth in the
LSCSWMA rules and regulations. In addition, as used in this article, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
ACT 97
The Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.S. 380, No. 97, as now or hereafter
amended.[1]
ACT 101
The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, Act of July 28, 1988, P.L.
528, No. 101, as now or hereafter amended.[2]
ALUMINUM
All food and beverage cans made of the light in weight, ductile and malleable metallic substance
or element commonly known as "aluminum." This description excludes aluminum foil, trays, plates
and miscellaneous aluminum products.
COMMENCEMENT DATE
January 1, 1990, the date upon which the municipality's mandatory recycling program and the
contract collection services begin.
COMMINGLED
Recyclable materials which have been segregated from regulated municipal waste but which have
not been separated into different types of recyclable materials and which have been placed in a
recycling container for the purpose of collection.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES
Events that are sponsored by public or private agencies or individuals, including but not limited to
fairs, bazaars, socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more individuals
per day.
CONTRACT
The agreement between the municipality and a licensed hauler under which collection services
are to be provided to residential units for contract waste and for recyclable materials other than
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 125/233
A.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
B.
leaves.
CONTRACTOR
The person providing contract waste and recyclable materials collection services under the
contract.
CONTRACT WASTE
Those portions of regulated municipal waste which are to be collected and disposed of under the
contract. "Contract Waste" consists exclusively of refuse and oversized refuse items.
CURBSIDE
The correct location for the placement of refuse containers and recycling containers for the
purpose of collection by the contractor, which shall be adjacent to the residential unit and no more
than five feet from the public street used by collection vehicles.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Those source-separated recyclable materials designated in § 66-30 of this article.
EXISTING CONTRACT
Any contract for the storage, collection, transportation, processing or disposal of regulated
municipal waste or recyclable materials generated or located within the municipality which was
legally entered into prior to the effective date of this article and, when entered into, was legally
enforceable.
EXTRA REFUSE CONTAINERS
Refuse containers which are in excess of the three refuse containers per collection site limit.
EXTRA SERVICE TAG
A label which must be affixed to tires, white goods, oversized refuse items, yard waste and extra
refuse containers in order for such items to be collected by the contractor.
FACILITY
Any specific site or person designated by LCSWMA as the specific place or site or person to
which solid waste or source-separated recyclable materials or any portion of solid waste or
source-separated recyclable materials must or may be delivered or, in the absence of a
specific site or person being designated by LCSWMA, any approved site for the delivery of
any category of solid waste or source-separated recyclable materials.
A site will be deemed an approved site for the purposes of this definition so long as that site:
Is in possession of all applicable local, state and federal permits;
Is operating in accordance with all applicable local, state and federal laws and
regulations; and
Provides LCSWMA with such data and information as LCSWMA requests, including,
without limitation:
The quantity, type, source and date of receipt of solid waste and source-separated
recyclable materials that were generated in Lancaster County and delivered to the
site;
Proof that the site is in compliance with Subsection B(1) and (2) above; and
In the case of source-separated recyclable materials, proof that all such materials
received at the site are, in fact, recycled.
GLASS, CLEAR
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 126/233
Consists only of clear food and beverage containers made of glass, of one gallon or less capacity,
and comprised of the hard, brittle and transparent or partially transparent substance produced by
fusion of silican and silicates or sand containing soda and lime and/or other chemicals and
substances usually included in the manufacture of glass.
GLASS, COLORED
Consists only of green or brown food and beverage containers made of glass, of one gallon or
less capacity, and comprised of the hard, brittle and transparent or partially transparent substance
produced by fusion of silica and silicates or sand containing soda and lime and/or other chemicals
and substances usually included in the manufacture of glass.
LCSWMA
Lancaster County Solid Waste Management Authority, a municipal authority organized and
existing under the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.[3]
LCSWMA FACILITY
Any facility owned or operated by or on behalf of LCSWMA.
LICENSED HAULER
A person who is in possession of all pertinent permits and licenses which may be required by the
municipality and LCSWMA, for the collection, transportation, storage or disposal of solid waste or
recyclable materials.
MULTIFAMILY UNIT
A property with seven or more residential units, including, without limitation, apartment complexes,
condominium complexes, retirement homes and mobile home parks, excluding farms.
MUNICIPALITY
The Borough of Lititz.
MUNICIPALITY'S POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
The rules and regulations adopted and revised from time to time by the municipality which govern
and pertain to the municipality's recycling program and the collection, storage or transportation of
regulated municipal waste within the municipality.
NEWSPRINT
Paper which has been used for the production of daily, weekend and special edition publications
commonly known as "newspapers."
NONRESIDENTIAL UNITS
All commercial, municipal and institutional establishments, all community activities and all farms,
excluding residential units and multifamily units.
OVERSIZED REFUSE ITEMS
Refuse which will not fit into refuse containers but which is not bulky waste, including small
furniture, carpet, portable televisions and the like, but excluding tires and white goods.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, institution, cooperative enterprise,
municipality, municipal authority, governmental entity or agency or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Any material which would be regulated municipal waste but for source separation and which will
be processed into raw materials or products which are beneficially reused.
RECYCLING
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 127/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
The separation, collection, recovery and sale or reuse of metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics
and other materials which would otherwise be disposed of or processed as waste or the
mechanized separation and treatment of solid waste and creation and recovery of reusable
materials or energy.
RECYCLING CONTAINER
For residential units, the term "recycling container" shall refer to the container supplied by the
municipality. For multifamily units and nonresidential units, the term "recycling container" shall
refer to a receptacle which is constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass and has handles of
adequate strength for lifting.
REFUSE
All regulated municipal waste except the following categories of solid waste:
Construction/demolition waste.
Bulky waste.
Putrescible waste.
Uncompatible waste.
Special handling waste.
Household hazardous waste.
Source-separated recyclable materials.
Unacceptable waste.
Oversized refuse items.
REFUSE CONTAINER
A receptacle which is constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass, having handles of adequate
strength for lifting and having a tightfitting lid capable of preventing entrance into the container by
vectors, or a polyethylene bag which is specifically designed for storage and collection, is
protected against animal damage and overloading so as to prevent littering or attraction of insects
or rodents and has a holding strength capable of withstanding normal stresses until it is collected.
With respect to residential units, the weight of a "refuse container" and its contents shall not
exceed 30 pounds nor shall its capacity exceed 32 gallons.
REGULATED MUNICIPAL WASTE
Any solid waste generated or collected within the municipality which is garbage, refuse, industrial
lunchroom or office waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or institutional
establishments and from community activities and any sludge which is not residual or hazardous
waste from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater
treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include designated recyclable
materials.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT
Any single-family detached, semidetached or townhouse dwelling or a dwelling unit within a
multifamily building containing three or fewer dwelling units, excluding farms. When used in this
article or the municipality's policies and procedures, the term "residential unit" shall also refer to
any multifamily unit or nonresidential unit that requests and receives approval from the
municipality to use the collection services provided under the contract.
SCAVENGING
The uncontrolled or unauthorized removal of recyclable materials from the curbside.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 128/233
[1]
[2]
[3]
A.
B.
C.
SOURCE-SEPARATE OR SOURCE SEPARATION
The process of separating or the separation of recyclable materials from other solid waste at the
location where generated for the purpose of recycling.
STEEL AND BIMETALLIC CANS
The ferrous metal food or beverage containers commonly known as "tin cans."
YARD WASTE
All garden residues, grass clippings, shrubbery and tree prunings less than 1/4 inch in diameter
and similar material, but excluding leaves.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 66-26. Mandatory recycling.
All persons within the municipality shall source-separate designated recyclable materials.
§ 66-27. Duties of owner and occupant.
Each person who owns or occupies a residential unit, multifamily unit or nonresidential unit within the
municipality shall ensure that regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable materials
generated at such residential unit, multifamily unit or nonresidential unit are source-separated and
collected, transported and disposed of in accordance with this article, the municipality's policies and
procedures and the LCSWMA rules and regulations.
§ 66-28. Residential units.
Collection services for contract waste and for designated recyclable materials other than leaves shall
be provided to residential units by the contractor. Leaves shall be collected by the municipality. Each
person who owns or occupies a residential unit shall prepare designated recyclable materials and
contract waste for collection in accordance with the municipality's policies and procedures. With
respect to regulated municipal waste which is not contract waste, persons who own or occupy
residential units may elect to provide proper collection, transportation and disposal by either
themselves transporting such materials to a facility or utilizing a licensed hauler to collect and transport
such materials to a facility.
§ 66-29. Multifamily and nonresidential units.
Each person who owns or occupies a nonresidential unit or multifamily unit shall provide proper
collection, transportation and disposal for regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable
materials by utilizing a licensed hauler to collect and transport such materials to a facility. With
respect to contract waste and designated recyclable materials, a person who owns or occupies a
multifamily unit or nonresidential unit may either request municipality approval to receive the
services under the contract or utilize a LCSWMA licensed hauler.
Each person who owns or occupies a multifamily unit or nonresidential unit approved to receive
services under the contract shall comply with the municipality's policies and procedures
established for residential units and, notwithstanding the provisions of § 66-30B and C of this
article, shall source-separate the recyclable materials designated in § 66-30A.
Each person who owns a multifamily unit or nonresidential unit that does not receive services
under the contract shall provide:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 129/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
Recycling containers at easily accessible locations for source separation of designated
recyclable materials:
Written instructions to all persons occupying each multifamily unit and nonresidential unit to
ensure that all designated recyclable materials are source-separated.
Collection and transportation of source-separated designated recyclable materials at a
frequency of not less than once per month.
Each person who owns or occupies a multifamily unit or nonresidential unit shall source-separate
and prepare leaves for collection in accordance with the municipality's policies and procedures.
§ 66-30. Designated recyclable materials.
Each person who owns or occupies a residential unit shall source-separate the following
recyclable materials:
Clear glass.
Colored glass.
Aluminum.
Steel and bimetallic cans.
Newsprint.
Yard waste.
Tires.
White goods.
Each person who owns or occupies a multifamily unit shall source-separate the following
recyclable materials:
Clear glass.
Colored glass.
Aluminum.
Steel and bimetallic cans.
Newsprint.
Yard waste.
Tires.
White goods.
Each person who owns or occupies a nonresidential unit shall source-separate the following
recyclable materials:
Clear glass.
Colored glass.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 130/233
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Aluminum.
Steel and bimetallic cans.
Newsprint.
Yard waste.
High-grade office paper.
Corrugated cardboard.
Tires.
White goods.
§ 66-31. Approved haulers.
With respect to contract waste and designated recyclable materials other than leaves generated at
residential units, no person other than the contractor shall collect, transport, store, process or
dispose of such waste. With respect to regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable
materials other than leaves which are generated at multifamily units or nonresidential units, no
person other than a licensed hauler shall collect, transport, store, process or dispose of such
waste. Collection of leaves will be arranged by the municipality in accordance with the
municipality's policies and procedures. Each licensed hauler that collects or transports regulated
municipal waste or designated recyclable materials generated in any residential unit,
nonresidential unit or multifamily unit shall submit to the municipality, on forms provided by the
municipality, monthly reports concerning the sources, types, weight, etc., of materials collected.
No person who generates, owns or possesses designated recyclable materials or regulated
municipal waste shall, by contract for collection services or otherwise, cause, permit or assist in
the collection, transportation, storage, processing or disposal of such waste by any person other
than the contractor, with respect to contract waste or designated recyclable materials other than
leaves generated at residential units, and a licensed hauler, with respect to regulated municipal
waste other than contract waste generated at residential units and regulated municipal waste or
designated recyclable materials other than leaves generated at multifamily units or nonresidential
units.
No licensed hauler who collects, transports or disposes of designated recyclable materials or
regulated municipal waste shall, by contract for such services or otherwise, cause, permit or assist
in the storage, collection, transportation, processing or disposal of designated recyclable materials
in a manner which treats such materials as regulated municipal waste or which is otherwise
inconsistent with source separation or recycling. Any delivery of designated recyclable materials to
a LCSWMA facility in accordance with the LCSWMA rules and regulations shall be deemed to
satisfy the requirements of this Subsection C.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections A and B above, any person who occupies a
residential unit may transport to a facility the regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable
materials which were generated at such person's residence.
All regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable materials generated or collected in the
municipality shall be transported directly to a facility in accordance with the LCSWMA rules and
regulations and without any intervening transfer, unloading, processing, sorting, salvaging,
scavenging or reuse of any portion of any load of such regulated municipal waste and designated
recyclable materials from the time of its collection until the time of its delivery to the facility.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 131/233
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
§ 66-32. Illegal dumping.
No person shall store, process or dispose of any regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable
materials except at a facility. Notwithstanding the foregoing, yard waste may be composted (in
accordance with the municipality's guidelines) on the property on which such waste was generated.
§ 66-33. Collection service fees.
Fees for services provided by the municipality shall be charged to all residential units within the
municipality. The amount of fees and the schedule for payment of fees shall be as published from time
to time by the municipality.
§ 66-34. Scavenging.
From the time of placement for collection of any designated recyclable materials other than leaves, all
such designated recyclable materials shall be the property of the generator or the licensed hauler who
has contracted to provide collection, as provided in the contract. It shall be a violation of this article for
any person, other than such licensed hauler, to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up
any such designated recyclable materials.
§ 66-35. Existing contracts.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair the obligations of any existing contract.
No renewal or modification of any existing contract and no new contract for the storage, collection,
transportation, processing or disposal of regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable
materials shall be entered into after the effective date of this article unless such renewal or
modification or new contract shall conform to the requirements of this article and the municipality's
policies and procedures.
No contract which is entered into, renewed, extended, modified or assigned after the effective date
of this § 66-35 shall provide for collection services to be performed after the commencement date
for contract waste or designated recyclable materials generated at residential units. This provision
shall not apply to the contract between the municipality and the contractor. With respect to any
contract which violates this Subsection C, such contract shall be deemed void and the hauler that
is a party to such contract shall reimburse to the applicable residential units any funds which have
been paid for such collection services and shall not collect or attempt to collect any funds for such
collection services.
§ 66-36. Powers of municipality; refund of fees.
The municipality shall have the power to establish service fees, record and reporting requirements
and standards and procedures for the issuance, administration and revocation of licenses, as
deemed necessary, including, without limitation:
Application procedures, fees, standards and conditions for licenses;
The fixing of a monetary bond, with or without surety, to secure the compliance by any
licensed hauler with any such requirements, standards or procedures; and
Any other matters deemed necessary or convenient by the municipality.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 132/233
B. In the event of suspension or revocation of any license which is issued by the municipality or
LCSWMA, the person whose license is suspended or revoked shall refund to each customer any
prepaid fees.
§ 66-37. Unlawful activity.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or cause or permit or assist in the violation of any provision
of this article or any provision of the municipality's policies and procedures. All unlawful conduct shall
also constitute a public nuisance.
§ 66-38. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article or any provision of the municipality's policies and
procedures shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced for each violation to
pay a fine of not more than $300 and costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment of such fine
and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than three days. Each violation of any provision of
this article or of any provision of the municipality's policies and procedures, and each day that such a
violation shall exist, shall constitute a separate violation and offense.
§ 66-39. Liability.
For purposes of the obligations established by this article or the municipality's policies and procedures
and for purposes of any fine, penalty, imprisonment or other sanction, the terms "person," "residential
unit," "multifamily unit" and "nonresidential unit" shall include officers and directors of any corporation
or other legal entity having officers and directors, and refer to and impose joint and several liability
upon both the persons residing in or occupying any such residential, multifamily or nonresidential units
and the owner, landlord, condominium owner's association and/or agent of an owner, landlord or
condominium owner's association of such premises.
§ 66-40. Injunctive relief.
In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, the municipality may institute proceedings to
restrain any violation of or to require compliance with this article and/or the municipality's policies and
procedures.
§ 66-41. Concurrent remedies.
The penalties and remedies set forth in this article are in addition to, not in lieu of, any fines, penalties
or remedies provided in the municipality's policies and procedures. The existence or exercise of any
remedy shall not prevent the municipality from exercising any other remedy provided under this article
or the municipality's policies and procedures, or available at law or equity.
§ 66-42. Prior ordinances in effect.
This article is in addition to, and not in lieu of, Ord. No. C-17, adopted and approved 4-9-1963; Ord.
No. C-93, adopted 4-29-1969 and approved 5-9-1969; Ord. No. C-125, adopted 9-28-1971 and
approved 10-1-1971; Ord. No. C-138, adopted and approved 3-27-1973; Ord. No. C-224, adopted and
approved 10-31-1978; and Ord. No. C-305, adopted and approved 12-30-1986.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 133/233
A.
B.
C.
Chapter 68. Holding Tanks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 2-26-1980 by Ord. No. C-247, approved 2-
26-1980. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Authority — See Ch. 27.
Sewers — See Ch. 100.
§ 68-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for the use and maintenance of holding tanks
designed to receive and retain sewage, whether from residential or commercial uses, and it is hereby
declared that the enactment of this chapter is necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of
the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this municipality.
§ 68-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this
chapter shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY
Councilmen of Lititz Borough, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK
A watertight receptacle which receives and retains sewage and is designed and constructed to
facilitate ultimate disposal of the sewage at another site. "Holding tanks" include but are not limited
to the following:
CHEMICAL TOILET
A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a holding tank.
RETENTION TANK
A holding tank to which sewage is conveyed by a water-carrying system.
VAULT PIT PRIVY
A holding tank designed to receive sewage where water under pressure is not available.
IMPROVED PROPERTY
Any property within the township upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous
or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPALITY
Lititz Borough, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any property located in the
Borough.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation or other group or entity.
SEWAGE
Any substance that contains any of the waste products or excrement or other discharge from the
bodies of human beings or animals and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 134/233
[1]
A.
B.
inimical to the public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic water
supply or for recreation.
§ 68-3. Authority to have power.
The Authority[1] is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the Borough the control and
methods of holding tank sewage disposal and the collection and transportation thereof.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 27, Sewer Authority.
§ 68-4. Rules and regulations.
The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and regulations concerning
sewage which it may deem necessary from time to time to effect the purposes herein.
§ 68-5. Conformance with other provisions.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Authority shall be in conformity with the provisions
herein, all other ordinances of the Borough, all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 68-6. Rates and charges.
The Authority shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect rates, assessments and
other charges in the area served by its facilities at reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by
applicable law.
§ 68-7. Collection, transportation and disposal of sewage.
The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property utilizing a holding tank
shall be done solely by or under the direction and control of the Authority, and the disposal thereof
shall be made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the Department of Environmental
Resources of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 68-8. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this chapter or any ordinance of this Borough, the
provisions of any applicable law and the rules and regulations of the Authority and any
administrative agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Permit only the Authority or its agent to collect, transport and dispose of the contents therein.
§ 68-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of § 68-8 shall, upon conviction thereof by summary
proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $300 and costs and,
in default of said fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment in the county prison for a period not in
excess of 30 days.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 135/233
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
§ 68-10. Additional remedies.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violation of § 68-8 above shall constitute
a nuisance and shall be abated by the municipality or the Authority by either seeking appropriate
equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
Chapter 69. (Reserved)
[Editor's Note: Former Ch. 69, Housing Maintenance and Occupancy, adopted 11-14-1972 by Ord. No.
C-132, approved 11-15-1972, as amended, was superseded 12-29-1999 by Ord. No. C-414, approved
12-29-1998. For current provisions, see Ch. 92, Property Maintenance.]
Chapter 70. Hydronic Heaters
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 7-29-2008 by Ord. No. C-489, approved 7-
29-2008. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 38.
§ 70-1. Findings; purpose.
Residences and commercial and industrial establishments located within the Borough are entitled
to clean air and environmental conditions free of unreasonable dust, obnoxious odors and smoke,
as well as an environment free from the storage and use of combustible fuels in adjacent or
exposed exterior areas within densely populated areas.
Research conducted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), including a
project summary dated February 1998 and titled "Emissions from Outdoor Wood-Burning
Residential Hot Water Furnaces" suggests that such devices cause air emission problems that
can impact residents, neighbors, business owners, workers and visitors. In addition, according to
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), these devices produce a large
amount of smoke and this smoke can cause health problems for humans.
This chapter is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to safeguard the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Lititz pursuant to the authority vested in
the Borough under Section 46202(6) of the Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 46202(6), among other
applicable laws by regulating a source of air pollution arising from the use of hydronic heaters, as
hereinafter defined.
§ 70-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HYDRONIC HEATERS
A fuel-burning device that:
Is designed to burn wood or other manufacturer-approved solid fuels;
The manufacturer specifies for outdoor installation and use or installation in structures not
normally occupied by humans (e.g., garages), or to heat structures that have an approved
Lititz Borough use and occupancy permit; and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 136/233
C.
[1]
A.
B.
Heats building space and/or water via the distribution, typically through pipes, of a fluid
heated in the device, typically water or a water/antifreeze mixture.
§ 70-3. Installation and use.
The installation and/or use of hydronic heaters is hereby prohibited within the Borough of Lititz.
§ 70-4. Removal of existing units required.
This chapter shall require the removal of any hydronic heaters in use within the Borough within 60 days
of the effective date of this chapter.[1]
Editor's Note: This chapter became effective five days after its adoption.
§ 70-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and, in default of payment of said fine, to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 72. Junkyards
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 9-28-1965 by Ord. No. C-51, approved 10-
8-1965. Sections 72-4 and 72-7 amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I. Other amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and sanitation — See Ch. 66.
§ 72-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be construed throughout
this chapter to have the meanings herein indicated:
JUNK
Any discarded or partially disassembled material or article, including but not limited to metal,
glass, stone, machinery, equipment and motor vehicles. This meaning, however, shall not
include garbage and other organic wastes nor paper, rags, rubbish, refuse or other flammable
materials or articles.
JUNK DEALER
Any person who engages in the business of buying, selling, salvaging and dealing in junk or
any person who maintains and operates a junkyard within the Borough of Lititz.
JUNKYARD
Any place where junk is accumulated, sorted, salvaged, disposed of or wrecked.
PERSON
A natural person, partnership, association, firm or corporation.
Word usage. Words in the singular shall include the plural, and those in the masculine gender
shall include the feminine and neuter genders.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 137/233
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 72-2. License required; limitations on use.
No person shall maintain a junkyard in the Borough of Lititz without first having obtained a license from
the Lititz Borough Office. The license shall be issued for a calendar year and shall be renewed before
the first day of January of each year. Licenses are not transferable. No person may keep more than
one junkyard in the Borough under any one license.
§ 72-3. Application for license.
Application for a license shall be made in writing to the Lititz Borough Council, which shall issue or
refuse to issue a license to the person applying therefor after an examination of the application and
after taking into consideration the suitability of the property to be used for the purposes of the license,
the character of the properties nearby and the effect of the proposed use upon the health, welfare and
safety of the residents of the Borough.
§ 72-4. License fee.
The annual license fee shall be as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 72-5. Exclusions from licensing provisions.
A person engaged as a dealer in new and/or used machinery, equipment or motor vehicles is excluded
from the licensing provisions of this chapter, provided that the outside area of the premises used as a
junkyard is less than twice the size of the inside service area of the same premises. Such person,
however, shall comply with the regulations set forth under § 72-6.
§ 72-6. Maintenance of premises; storage of junk; hours.
Every person subject to the provisions of this chapter shall maintain the premises on which his
business is conducted in the manner prescribed in this section.
The premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute a nuisance or a menace to
the health of the community or of the residents nearby or not to constitute a place for the breeding
of rodents and vermin.
No garbage or other organic wastes and no paper, rubbish, refuse, rags or other flammable
material or article shall be stored on the premises.
Whenever any motor vehicle or other equipment shall be received on the premises as junk, all
gasoline and oil shall be drained and removed therefrom. No gasoline or oil shall be permitted to
remain upon the premises.
The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage facilities of the premises shall
be such as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water upon the premises and to facilitate
access for fire-fighting purposes.
The premises shall not be open for business nor shall any work be done thereon in connection
with the accumulation, sorting, salvaging, disposing, transporting or removal of junk at any time on
the first day of the week, commonly called "Sunday," or on any other day of the week before 7:00
a.m. or after 6:00 p.m.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 138/233
F.
[1]
Junk may not be stored within 100 feet of any right-of-way line of any street, road or alley or within
100 feet of the property lines of the premises. All junkyards must be concealed by evergreen
plantings or other enclosure approved by the Borough Council. No junk shall be stored on the
premises higher than the enclosure.
§ 72-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter and shall be convicted thereof before
the Mayor or any District Justice in the Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days;
provided, however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is without the financial
means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall be
permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as the District Justice
deems to be just.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 72-8. Variances.
[Added 2-22-1966 by Ord. No. C-62, approved 2-26-1966]
If any of the regulations set forth in § 72-6 are shown by a person to the satisfaction of a majority of the
members of the Borough Council to be unreasonable and to cause unique and undue hardship as they
apply to such person, the Council may grant a variance in writing to such person from the regulation or
regulations in question so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured;
provided, however, that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this
chapter.
Chapter 77. (Reserved)
[Former Ch. 77, Mechanical Standards, adopted 12-29-1998 by Ord. No. C-413, approved 12-29-1998,
was superseded 12-27-2006 by Ord. No. C-481, approved 12-27-2006. For current provisions, see Ch.
36, Construction Code, Uniform; Property Maintenance, Art. I, Uniform Construction Code.]
Chapter 80. Official Map
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 3-27-2001 by Ord. No. C-433, approved 3-
27-2001; amended in its entirety 1-27-2009 by Ord. No. C-497, approved 1-27-2009. Subsequent
amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 108.
Zoning — See Ch. 122.
§ 80-1. Statutory authority; purpose; review; hearing.
Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code[1] (MPC) authorizes the Borough to
prepare and adopt an Official Map of the Borough showing existing and proposed public streets,
pedestrianways, public grounds, public parks, playgrounds, open space reservations, and other public
lands and facilities. In accordance with the MPC, the Borough enacted Ordinance No. 433 adopting an
Official Map, which Official Map was recorded in Plan Book J-210, Page 33, in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds in and for Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. The Borough, in connection with the
implementation of the 2006 update to the Lititz/Warwick Joint Strategic Comprehensive Plan, desires
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 139/233
[1]
[1]
[1]
to amend and reenact in its entirety the Official Map adopted by Ordinance No. 433 to show existing
and proposed streets, access roads, trails, urban growth boundaries, public grounds, public buildings,
parks, swimming pools, schools, bus shelters, and other public lands and facilities within the Borough.
The adoption of an updated Official Map will assist landowners in the determination of the uses and
development of their lands within the Borough. The Borough has solicited reviews of the proposed
Official Map from the Lititz Borough Planning Commission, the Lancaster County Planning
Commission, Warwick Township, the Warwick Township Planning Commission, Penn Township, the
Penn Township Planning Commission, Manheim Township, and the Manheim Township Planning
Commission. Following the receipt of comments and recommendations from such bodies, Borough
Council held a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of Article IV of the MPC.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10401 et seq.
§ 80-2. Adoption of revised Official Map.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Lititz hereby adopts the map prepared by ELA Group, Inc.,
updated January 2009, and entitled "Official Map of the Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania," which indicates thereon existing and proposed streets and highways and existing and
proposed trails together with other public lands and facilities within the Borough, as the Official Map of
the Borough of Lititz. A true and correct copy of the Official Map is attached hereto as Exhibit A and
incorporated herein.[1]
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 80-3. Recording; filing.
The proper officials of the Borough are authorized to take all steps necessary to record the Official Map
in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lancaster County as required by Section 402(c) of the MPC.
[1] The proper officials of the Borough are further authorized to transmit certified copies of the Official
Map to those entities required to be provided with copies by the MPC.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10402(c).
§ 80-4. Amendments.
The Borough retains the right to amend the Official Map adopted by this chapter from time to time by
appropriate action of the Borough Council of the Borough of Lititz taken in accordance with the
procedural requirements of the MPC as it may be hereafter amended.
§ 80-5. Duties and rights of owners.
Those persons who own lands within areas shown on the Official Map as proposed streets or
highways, proposed trails or other proposed public areas shall be subject to the duties and shall have
the rights set forth in Article IV of the MPC.
§ 80-6. Effect on pending plans.
The Official Map adopted by Ordinance No. 433 shall continue in force as to any preliminary or final
plan which is pending action by the Borough Council at the effective date of this chapter.
Chapter 82. Parades and Meetings
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 140/233
[1]
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 5-31-1967 by Ord. No. C-74, approved 6-1-
1967. Section 82-3 amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Other
amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 82-1. Permit required.
No person shall participate in any parade, procession, assembly or meeting upon any highway, street,
lane, alley, way, sidewalk or public square of the Borough of Lititz which interferes with or excludes
other citizens in their legal rights in the use thereof, unless a permit has been procured therefor as
hereinafter provided.
§ 82-2. Written notice of application; conditions of permit.
All parades, processions and assemblages or meetings occupying, marching or assembling upon any
highway, street, lane, alley, way, sidewalk or public square of the Borough of Lititz to the interference or
exclusion of other citizens in their legal rights in the use thereof are forbidden unless written notice of
the character, time, place and route of such procession or parade and the names of the officers of
same are given by the chief officer or person(s) in charge thereof, not less than seven days prior to its
forming, to the Mayor of the Borough of Lititz, and, in case of assemblages or meetings, seven days'
notice of the object, time and place of such meetings or assemblages shall be given to said Mayor by
the person, association, firm or corporation making the application for the permit as hereinafter
provided. In pursuance of the aforesaid requirements, and for the purpose of preventing interference
with and obstruction of the lawful use of said highways, streets, lanes, alleys, ways, sidewalks or public
squares of said Borough of Lititz and the preservation of peace and good order, the Mayor shall have
the power to designate by permit the time and place of such assemblages or meetings and, as to such
processions or parades, how much of the streets, lanes, alleys, ways, sidewalks or public squares they
will occupy and the time they will start. The length of time of such parade or procession shall be
determined by the Mayor, and, when so designated and approved, the person, association, firm or
corporation to whom or to which a permit has been given shall be held responsible for the violation of
any designation or limitation mentioned in said permit.
§ 82-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, association, firm or corporation who or which shall violate the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300,
plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that if the District Justice determines that the
defendant is without the financial means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single
remittance, such defendant shall be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such
periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Chapter 84. Parental Responsibility
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 12-28-1965 by Ord. No. C-57, approved 12-
31-1965. Section 84-3 amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Other amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 41.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 141/233
[1]
A.
§ 84-1. Responsibility of parent or guardian to control activities of
minor.
Every parent, guardian and other adult person having the care and custody of a person under 18 years
of age shall be responsible for the control of the activities of such person so as to prevent such person
from violating any of the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the conduct and safety or
traffic provisions of the Lititz Borough Code between 10:00 p.m., except Friday evening or Saturday
evening when the time shall be 12:00 midnight, and 6:00 a.m.
§ 84-2. Notice of violation.
In the event a person under 18 years of age violates any of the Laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or the conduct and safety or traffic provisions of the Lititz Borough Code between the
hours of the days set forth in § 84-1, the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and
custody of such person under 18 years of age shall be notified of such violation by the Chief of Police
of the Borough by certified mail, return receipt requested.
§ 84-3. Violations and penalties.
In the event that a person under 18 years of age violates any of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or the conduct and safety or traffic provisions of the Lititz Borough Code between the
hours of the days set forth in § 84-1 and the parent, guardian or other person having the care and
custody of such person under 18 years of age has received notice of a prior violation pursuant to § 84-
2, then such parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such person under
18 years of age shall be deemed to have violated § 84-1 and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to pay a fine not to exceed a maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days; provided,
however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is without the financial means to pay
the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall be permitted to pay the
fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 84-4. Construction of provisions.
This chapter shall not be construed to limit, supplant or conflict in any way with the jurisdiction or
procedure of the Juvenile Court Law.
Chapter 87. Peddlers, Canvassers and Solicitors
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 8-26-1969 by Ord. No. C-98, approved 8-
29-1969. Sections 87-4A and 87-10 amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I. Other amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 55.
§ 87-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise stated, the following words and phrases shall be construed throughout this
chapter to have the meanings herein indicated:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 142/233
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
[1]
A.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
CANVASSING OR SOLICITING
The taking of orders for future deliveries of tangible commodities, intangible services or
subscriptions, without appointments or invitation, from house to house, on the streets or in
any public place, regardless of the time of delivery of the commodities, performance of the
services or the collection of the selling price for them.
PEDDLING
The selling of tangible commodities, without appointment or invitation, from house to house,
on the streets or in any public place, regardless of the time of delivery of the commodities or
the collection of the selling price for them.
PERSON
Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or corporation.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the feminine
and neuter gender.
§ 87-2. License required.
No person shall engage in peddling, canvassing or soliciting in the borough without first having taken
out a license as herein provided.
§ 87-3. Application for license.
Every person desiring to engage in peddling, canvassing or soliciting in the borough shall first
make an application to the Mayor of the borough, through the Police Department, for a license.
Upon such application, the person shall give:
His name, address and previous criminal record, if any.
The names and addresses of persons for whom he works, including his immediate supervisor.
The type of tangible commodities he wishes to peddle and/or the type of tangible
commodities, services or subscriptions for which he will canvass or solicit.
The length of time for which he wishes to be licensed.
The type of vehicle he will use.
The number of his helpers.
The foregoing information must be given for each helper, who also must apply for a license. No
license issued hereunder shall be transferable from one person to another.
§ 87-4. License fee.
[Amended 12-30-1975 by Ord. No. C-181, approved 12-30-1975]
No license shall be issued hereunder until the applicant pays to the borough for its use the
appropriate fee based upon the schedule as provided in Chapter 55, Fees.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code: see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 143/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
A.
B.
Notwithstanding the foregoing Subsection A, no license fee shall be charged:
To farmers selling their own produce.
For the sale of goods, wares and merchandise or for the collection of donations, the proceeds
whereof are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose.
To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat
products or milk or milk products.
Any peddler, canvasser or solicitor dealing in one or more of the excepted categories above who
also peddles, canvasses or solicits commodities, services or subscriptions not excepted shall be
subject to the license fee fixed for his activities in connection with the nonexcepted categories.
§ 87-5. Issuance and display of license.
Upon approval of an application thereof and after receiving the appropriate fee from the applicant as
specified above, a license shall be issued to such person. Such license shall contain the information
required to be given upon the application thereof. Every such person shall at all times when engaged
in peddling, canvassing or soliciting in the borough carry such license upon his person and shall exhibit
such license upon request to any borough officer, borough official or citizen. Such person shall peddle,
canvass or solicit only for those commodities, services or subscriptions set forth on his license.
§ 87-6. Permitted hours.
No person licensed as a peddler, canvasser or solicitor under this chapter shall engage in peddling,
canvassing or soliciting at any time on a Sunday or legal holiday or upon any other day of the week
before 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m., prevailing local time, except for those qualifying under § 87-4B(3),
when peddling on the street may continue until 10:00 p.m., prevailing time.
§ 87-7. Disturbance of public quiet.
[Amended 8-14-1990 by Ord. No. 333]
No person licensed as a peddler, canvasser or solicitor under this chapter, unless duly noted as an
exception qualifying under § 87-7B, shall hawk or cry his wares upon any of the streets or
sidewalks of the borough, nor shall be use any loudspeaker or horn or any other device for
announcing his presence.
Notwithstanding the foregoing Subsection A, ice cream vendors shall be permitted to announce
their presence on the streets by ringing bells and/or playing soft music, between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
§ 87-8. Record of licenses issued; supervision of activities.
The Mayor shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this chapter. The Mayor and the Chief of
Police shall supervise the activities of all persons holding such licenses.
§ 87-9. Suspension of license.
The Mayor of the Borough of Lititz or the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to suspend any license
issued under this chapter when he deems such suspension to be beneficial to the public health, safety
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 144/233
or morals or for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or for giving false information upon any
application for a license hereunder.
§ 87-10. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon summary conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30
days; provided, however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is without the
financial means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall
be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as the District
Justice deems to be just.
Chapter 89. (Reserved)
[Former Ch. 89, Plumbing, adopted 12-29-1998 by Ord. No. C-412, approved 12-29-1998, was
superseded 12-27-2006 by Ord. No. C-481, approved 12-27-2006. For current provisions, see Ch. 36,
Construction Code, Uniform; Property Maintenance, Art. I, Uniform Construction Code.]
Chapter 92. (Reserved)
[Former Ch. 92, Property Maintenance, adopted 12-29-1998 by Ord. No. C-414, approved 12-29-1998,
was superseded 12-27-2006 by Ord. Nos. C-480 and C-481, approved 12-27-2006. For current
provisions, see Ch. 36, Construction Code, Uniform; Property Maintenance, Art. II, Property
Maintenance.]
Chapter 94. Rental Units
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Real estate registry — See Ch. 24.
Construction codes — See Ch. 36.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 36.
Fee — See Ch. 55.
Solid waste and recycling — See Ch. 66.
Zoning — See Ch. 122.
Article I. Residential Rental Unit Regulation
[Adopted 6-25-2013 by Ord. No. C-523, approved 6-25-2013]
§ 94-1. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this article and the policy of the Borough of Lititz shall be to protect and promote the
public health, safety and welfare of its citizens, to establish rights and obligations of owners and
occupants relating to residential rental units in the Borough and to encourage owners and occupants to
maintain and improve the quality of rental housing within the Borough. As a means to these ends, this
article provides for a systematic inspection program, registration and licensing of residential rental
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 145/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
units, and penalties. In considering the adoption of this article, the Borough makes the following
findings:
There is a greater incidence of problems with the maintenance and upkeep of residential
properties which are not owner-occupied as compared to those that are owner-occupied.
The Borough is concerned with the condition of a property when EMS responds and for the safety
of the EMS responders and general safety of the occupants.
The Borough is unaware of the exact number of tenant-occupied residences, with knowledge of
such used for the accountability and safety of the occupants and owner/manager.
Borough records indicate there are a greater number of disturbances at residential rental units
than at owner-occupied units.
§ 94-2. Definitions and word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this article, have
meanings indicated as follows:
BOROUGH
The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
A person designated by Borough Council to enforce this article, including performance of
inspections, issuance of residential rental licenses and issuance of citations.
CODES
Any state or local code or ordinance adopted, enacted or in effect in and for the Borough,
including, but not limited to, the Building Code, the Property Maintenance Code, the Zoning
Ordinance, trash collection, and general nuisance ordinances.
COUNTY
The County of Lancaster.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT
Any act by an occupant of a residential rental unit or by a person present at a residential rental
unit involving public drunkenness, consumption of an alcoholic beverage in public, public urination
or defecation, the unlawful deposit of trash or litter on public or private property, damage to or
destruction of public or private property, the obstruction of public roads, streets, highways or
sidewalks, interference with emergency or police services, use of profane or obscene language or
gestures, indecent exposure, fighting or quarreling, or any other act defined as disorderly conduct
in the Pennsylvania Crimes Code or any act which otherwise injures or endangers the health,
safety or welfare of the residents of the Borough residing in the neighborhood or vicinity of the
gathering. It is not necessary that such conduct, action, incident or behavior constitute a criminal
offense, nor that criminal charges be filed against any person, in order for said person to have
perpetrated, caused or permitted the commission of disruptive conduct, as defined herein;
provided, however, that no disruptive conduct shall be deemed to have occurred unless a police
officer shall investigate and make a determination that such did occur and keep written records,
including a disruptive conduct report, of such occurrences.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT
A written report of disruptive conduct to be completed by a police officer who actually investigates
an alleged incident of disruptive conduct and which shall be maintained by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
MANAGER
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 146/233
[1]
(1)
A.
A person retained by an owner to be responsible for one or more residential rental units within the
Borough.
OCCUPANT
Any person over one year of age living and sleeping in a residential rental unit or having actual
possession of said residential rental unit.
OWNER
The person who holds record title and/or the equitable owner under an agreement of sale of a
property upon which a residential rental unit is erected or maintained. If more than one person
owns the residential rental unit as joint tenants, tenants in common, tenants by the entireties, or
tenants in co-partnership, each such person shall be considered an owner and shall have all of the
duties of an owner under this article.
PERSON
A natural individual, unincorporated association, partnership, corporation, estate, trust or any other
legally recognized entity, and the members of such partnership and the officers of such
corporation.
PREMISES
Any parcel of real estate within the Borough, including the land and all buildings and appurtenant
structures, on which one or more residential rental units are located.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
The Borough Property Maintenance Code, adopted as the International Property Maintenance
Code of 2009, and any future amendments.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE
A document issued by the Code Enforcement Officer to the owner of a residential rental unit.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT
A rooming unit; or a dwelling unit let for rent; or a residential unit occupied by any persons other
than one occupied solely by the owner and members of the owner's family. Each individual
townhouse dwelling, each individual apartment unit, each individual unit in a multifamily building,
and each rooming unit shall be considered a separate residential rental unit. If a structure contains
a rooming unit or if any portion of the structure is let for rent, it shall be considered a residential
rental unit whether or not the owner or a relative of the owner also resides in the structure. A
residential rental unit shall not include a hotel unit, excepting, to the extent permitted by applicable
federal and state law, units occupied by the same person or persons for 30 or more consecutive
days. A residential rental unit includes dwelling units under lease-purchase agreements or longterm
(greater than six months) agreements of sale.
ROOMING UNIT
A portion of a dwelling unit including any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not for cooking purposes. Granting of
permission to use shared or common cooking facilities may be associated with the leasing of a
rooming unit.
§ 94-3. Duties of owners and managers.
It shall be the duty of every owner to:
Keep and maintain all residential rental units in compliance with all applicable codes and
provisions of all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances and regulations,
including, but not limited to, the Zoning Ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 122, Zoning.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 147/233
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
B.
C.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
D.
Keep and maintain the premises in good and safe condition.
Be aware of, and to act to eliminate, disruptive conduct in all residential rental units under
his/her control.
Employ policies to and manage the residential rental units under his/her control in compliance
with the provisions of this article and all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances
and regulations.
Pay or ensure payment of all real estate taxes, sewer rates, water rates, and trash collection
fees to ensure that such vital utilities are provided.
Obtain and maintain a residential rental license from the Borough for each residential rental
unit.
Within 30 days of a new occupancy of any residential rental unit or upon a change of
occupancy or a change in the number of occupants, provide the Borough with the names of
all occupants of the residential rental unit.
Provide trash and recyclable collection and disposal services and instruct occupants of the
method of trash and recyclable collection (e.g., curbside or dumpster) and, if applicable, the
day of the week for trash and recyclable pickup.
Provide each occupant with a disclosure statement containing the requirements of this article.
Providing a copy of this article to each occupant will satisfy this requirement.
Take all actions necessary to ensure that each residential rental unit is occupied by a "family,"
as defined by the Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance.
Require a written rental agreement for each residential rental unit, which shall contain the
names of all permitted occupants.
Retain a manager when this article requires that a manager be designated.
If the owner has appointed a manager, the manager shall be jointly responsible to fulfill all of the
obligations set forth in this § 94-3. No owner may relieve himself of the responsibility to perform
the duties set forth in this § 94-3 by appointing a manager.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate or cause to be rented, either as owner or
manager, any residential rental unit within the Borough without having a residential rental license
as required by this article.
It shall be the responsibility of every owner and every manager to display the residential rental
license in the residential rental unit.
The residential rental license shall include the following information:
The name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner or manager.
The evenings on which garbage and recycling are to be placed curbside for collection.
The telephone number to call to register complaints regarding the physical condition of
the residential rental unit.
The telephone number for emergency police, fire and medical services.
The date of expiration of the residential rental license.
A summary of the owner's and occupant's duties under this article.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 148/233
(2)
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A small ID or sticker shall be displayed in a conspicuous window by the front door to provide
contact information for the property owner/manager for use by EMS/police.
No residential rental license shall be issued to any owner residing more than 50 miles from the
municipal limits of the Borough unless the owner provides the Code Enforcement Officer with the
name, mailing address and telephone number of a manager, residing within the fifty-mile radius,
authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the owner. For the purpose of this subsection,
a post office box is not acceptable for the manager's address. This designation shall not be valid
unless signed by the owner and the manager designated to act on behalf of the owner. The owner
shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer within 30 days of any change in manager.
§ 94-4. Exemption from licensing requirements.
All property owned by the county or any housing authority created by the county which is
inspected annually by those agencies to assess conformance with federal standards, or properties
that are inspected annually for compliance with the requirements of the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development or the Pennsylvania Housing Finance Agency, regardless of
the occupants, shall be exempt from the licensing provisions of this article.
Dormitories located within a school facility or use and all nursing home facilities and associated
cottages are exempt from licensing/inspections.
If, in response to a complaint, an exempt unit is found to be in violation of a code, the owner and, if
applicable, the manager shall correct the violation(s) within the time frame cited by the Code
Enforcement Officer. If the violation(s) is/are not corrected within a timely manner, the unit shall
lose its exemption until the violation(s) is/are corrected. If three verified complaints are received in
any twelve-month period, the unit shall lose its exemption from the requirement to obtain a license
for a period of five years.
All occupants of residential rental units, whether or not the residential rental unit is exempt from
the licensing requirements of this article, shall be subject to the provisions of §§ 94-5 and 94-6 of
this article.
§ 94-5. Duties of occupants.
Each occupant of a residential rental unit shall have the following duties:
Comply with all obligations of this article and all applicable federal, state and local laws,
ordinances and regulations.
Conduct himself/herself and require other persons, including, but not limited to, guests on the
premises and within his/her residential rental unit with his/her consent, to conduct themselves in a
manner that will not disturb the peaceful enjoyment of the premises by others and that will not
disturb the peaceful enjoyment of adjacent or nearby dwellings by people occupying the same.
Not engage in, nor tolerate, nor permit others on the premises to cause damage to the residential
rental unit or engage in disruptive conduct or other violations of this article, codes, Borough
ordinances, or applicable state laws.
Use the trash and recyclable collection services provided by the owner.
Use the residential rental unit for no purpose other than as a residence.
Maintain the residential rental unit in a manner meeting all requirements for occupants of
structures set forth in this article.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 149/233
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Allow the Code Enforcement Officer to inspect the residential rental unit at reasonable times.
Not allow persons other than those identified on the residential rental agreement to reside in the
residential rental unit.
Not allow the residential rental unit to be occupied in a way that conflicts with the Borough Zoning
Ordinance.
§ 94-6. Disruptive conduct.
Police officers shall investigate alleged incidents of disruptive conduct. The police officer
conducting the investigation shall complete a disruptive conduct report upon a finding that the
reported incident constitutes disruptive conduct. The information filed in the disruptive conduct
report shall include, if possible, the identity of the alleged perpetrator(s) of the disruptive conduct
and the factual basis for the disruptive conduct described in the disruptive conduct report. A copy
of the disruptive conduct report shall be given or mailed to the occupant and mailed to the owner
and, if applicable, the manager, within 10 working days of the occurrence of the alleged disruptive
conduct.
The occupant or the owner and, if applicable, the manager shall have 10 working days from the
date of a disruptive conduct report to appeal the disruptive conduct report. The appeal shall be
made in writing and submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer.
After three documented disruptive conduct incidents by an occupant in any twelve-month period,
the property owner's rental license shall be revoked unless proof is provided that the eviction
process is started and being diligently pursued by the owner or manager.
The disruptive conduct report shall count against all occupants of the residential rental unit. More
than one disruptive conduct report filed against the occupants of a residential rental unit in a
twenty-four-hour period shall count as a single disruptive conduct report for the purpose of § 94-6.
§ 94-7. Licensing.
Within three months of adoption of this article, the owner and, if applicable, the manager of each
residential rental unit shall apply for a residential rental license with the Code Enforcement Officer,
which shall be valid for one year. Within three months of receiving a rental license, the first
inspection shall be scheduled. The property owner/manager shall apply yearly for a rental license.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue residential rental license if the owner provides the
name, address and phone number of a manager (if applicable), pays the registration fee, submits
a complete and accurate occupant listing for the residential rental unit by the registration deadline
of each year and is current on real estate taxes and sewer/water/trash fees for the residential
rental unit.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall deny and may revoke a residential rental license if the owner
does not provide the name, address and phone number of a manager (if applicable), does not pay
the annual registration fee, is not current on real estate taxes, sewer and water rates or trash
collection fees for the residential rental unit, does not submit a complete and accurate occupant
listing for the residential rental unit upon the renewal date or within one month after a change in
the identity of the occupants of the residential rental unit, does not correct a code violation within
the time frame cited by the Code Enforcement Officer, and/or has not complied with the disruptive
conduct provisions of this article.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall deny and may revoke a residential rental license if the
following occur within the licensed residential rental unit or on the premises:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 150/233
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
F.
A.
B.
(a)
(1)
C.
Failure to abate any violation of this article or any code violation noted in the rental housing
inspection form within the time specified in the notice of violation, unless an appeal is
pending.
Occurrence of three violations of this article and/or of any other Borough codes or ordinances
that apply to the residential rental unit or premises during the term of the license. Before an
occurrence may be considered a violation, there must be either:
A summary conviction; or
The Code Enforcement Officer must send the owner a written notice of the violation
within 30 days of the incident and the period for the owner to file an appeal from the
determination of the Code Enforcement Officer must have expired.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall forward written notice to the owner if the Code Enforcement
Officer will deny, refuse to renew or revoke a residential rental license. The notification shall:
Identify the residential rental unit;
Include the grounds for the denial, nonrenewal or revocation, including the factual
circumstances and the section of this article supporting such determination; and
Inform the owner of the right to appeal the denial, nonrenewal or revocation of the residential
rental license to the Borough Council under this article.
The Code Enforcement Officer may reinstate a residential rental license if the owner or manager
corrects the reason for the revocation of the residential rental license and has paid the residential
rental license reinstatement fee.
§ 94-8. Inspections.
Prior to initial occupancy of newly constructed residential rental units, newly created residential rental
units, or substantially rehabilitated residential rental units (as documented by a certificate of
occupancy), the owner or manager shall register with and make written application to the Code
Enforcement Officer for a residential rental license as herein provided.
Initial inspections will occur in accordance with a phased-in, systematic inspection program to be
prepared and made available upon request by the Code Enforcement Officer. A minimum 30 days'
written notice shall be given for all initial inspections. The penalty for not allowing an inspection
shall be revocation of the residential rental license.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect residential rental units after completion of the initial
inspections under this article in accordance with a systematic program. The Code Enforcement
Officer may also inspect residential rental units upon a change in occupancy of the residential
rental unit, upon receipt of complaints, upon the occurrence of disruptive conduct at such
residential rental unit, or for any other reasonable cause.
If the Code Enforcement Officer, upon completion of the inspection, finds that the applicable codes
have not been met, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue notices and, if appropriate,
commence enforcement actions under the procedure set forth in the code which has been
violated. The following notices shall be issued to the owner of the residential rental unit or the
manager. Notice provided to a manager shall be deemed notice provided to the owner.
If the Code Enforcement Officer finds violations warranting condemnation of the residential
rental unit under this article, in addition to the remedies under this article, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall:
Issue a ten-day notice of violation; and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 151/233
(b)
(a)
(b)
(2)
D.
A.
B.
A.
If, after 10 days from the date of the ten-day notice of violation, a reinspection reveals
that the violations are not corrected and arrangements satisfactory to the Code
Enforcement Officer have not been made, the residential rental license for the residential
rental unit shall be revoked until the issue has been satisfactorily resolved; and if the
residential rental unit is vacant, it shall remain vacant.
If the Code Enforcement Officer finds violations not warranting condemnation of the
residential rental unit under this article, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a thirty-day
notice of violation.
If, after 30 days from the date of the thirty-day notice of violation, the first reinspection
reveals that all violations have not been corrected, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a second thirty-day notice of violation.
If, after 30 days from the date of the second thirty-day notice of violation, a second
reinspection reveals that all violations have not been corrected, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall revoke the rental license for the rental unit; and if the residential rental unit is
vacant, it shall remain vacant.
A fee will be charged for the initial inspection and for each reinspection. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall maintain a list of all residential rental units and their ownership that have been the
subject of prosecution during the preceding five years.
§ 94-9. Sale or transfer of units.
A residential rental license shall not be transferred. In the case of licensed residential rental units that
are sold or transferred, the new owner shall secure a residential rental license for each residential
rental unit and have each residential rental unit inspected. Failure to secure a residential rental license
for each residential rental unit within 60 days of the date of sale or transfer of ownership shall result in
the revocation of the residential rental license.
§ 94-10. Appeals.
An appeal from any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be taken to the Borough
Council. Such appeal shall be made in writing within 10 working days after such decision has been
made. The appeal shall be verified by an affidavit, shall state the grounds therefor and shall be
filed with the Borough Secretary. The appeal shall be accompanied by the appeal fee, which shall
be established by ordinance or resolution of the Borough Council. The appellant or his
representative shall have the right to appear and be heard, if such right is requested in the written
appeal. The Borough Council shall make a decision on such appeal within 45 days. The Borough
Council shall render a written decision, copies of which shall be provided to the Code Official and
the appellant.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of a police officer or Code Enforcement Officer in regard to
a police incident report or the revocation of a residential rental license may appeal to the Borough
Council in accordance with the provisions of Subsection A above. Such appeal must be filed, in
writing, within 10 working days from the date of the report or notice of revocation.
§ 94-11. Violations and penalties.
Violations. It shall be a violation of this article to commit or to permit any other person to commit
any of the following acts:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 152/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(a)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
To lease, let, or allow the occupancy of a residential rental unit without obtaining a residential
rental license where required by this article.
To refuse to permit inspections required under this article for a residential rental unit.
To fail to perform the duties established by § 94-3 of this article if such person is an owner or
a manager of a residential rental unit.
To fail to perform the duties if such person is an occupant of a residential rental unit.
To place false information on or to omit relevant information from an application for a
residential rental license.
To fail to comply with any other provision of this article.
Penalties and remedies.
Allowing occupancy of a residential rental unit after the residential rental license has been
revoked: a fine of not less than $500 per residential rental unit for each month the violation
exists. Each month the violation exists constitutes a separate violation.
Failure to secure a residential rental license:
The owner or manager shall be sent a thirty-day notice of violation, warning him/her of
his/her failure to comply with the terms of this article. If he/she does not comply at the
end of 30 days, there shall be a fine of not less than $500 per residential rental unit for
each month the violation exists. Each month the violation exists is considered a separate
violation.
Whoever violates any other provision of this article shall, upon a first offense, be fined not
more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
In addition to prosecution of persons violating this article, the Code Enforcement Officer, or
any duly authorized agent of the Borough, may take such civil or equitable remedies in any
court of record of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, against any person or property, real or
personal, to effect the provisions of this article.
The provisions of this section and the provisions of this article governing revocation,
suspension or nonrenewal of residential rental licenses shall be independent, non-mutuallyexclusive,
separate remedies, all of which shall be available to the Borough as may be
deemed appropriate. The remedies and procedures in this article are not intended to supplant
or replace, to any degree, the remedies provided to the Borough in the Property Maintenance
Code, Zoning Ordinance or any other code.
Where there are three documented disruptive conduct reports within a twelve-month period
and if the eviction process is started and being diligently pursued by an owner or manager, no
further enforcement by the Borough will occur regarding this residential rental unit during the
eviction process.
Chapter 96. Right-Of-Way Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 4-30-2019 by Ord. No. C-574, approved 4-
30-2019. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Definitions
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 153/233
§ 96-1.1. Terms defined.
Terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, whether or not the terms are capitalized.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, terms not defined in this chapter shall be construed consistently
with Title 47 of the United States Code, and, if not defined therein, with their common and ordinary
meaning.
AERIAL FACILITIES
Poles, wires, cables, equipment, and other facilities located above the surface of the ground,
including their underground supports and foundations. Such term does not include private
driveways, newspaper vending machines, street banners, canopies or other minor obstructions
located in the rights-of-way.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH CODE
The Code of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH PROPERTY
All real property now or hereafter owned by the Borough whether in fee ownership or other
interest.
BOROUGH WORK
All construction work performed by the Borough or any of its departments, either with its own
personnel or under contract, including repair, alteration, replacement, or maintenance of facilities
owned, operated, maintained, or controlled by the Borough or for which the Borough is
responsible.
CABLE ACT
The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as hereafter
amended (47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as hereafter amended).
CABLE FRANCHISE FEE
A fee paid by a cable operator for the cable operator's use of the Borough's rights-of-way. The fee
is calculated as a percentage of the cable operator's gross revenues from the operation of the
cable system to provide cable services in the Borough.
CABLE FRANCHISE or FRANCHISE
Right-of-way use authorization pursuant to this chapter authorizing a cable operator to own,
construct, operate and maintain a cable system to provide cable service within the Borough.
CABLE OPERATOR
An entity providing or offering to provide cable service over a cable system, as that term is defined
in the Cable Act, within the Borough.
CABLE SERVICE
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service and
subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming
or other programming service.
CABLE SYSTEM
Facilities consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation,
reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the Borough; but such term
does not include (i) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 154/233
television broadcast stations; (ii) a facility that serves subscribers without using any right-of-way;
(iii) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of
the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a
cable system [other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 541(c)] to the extent such facility is used in
the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is
solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (iv) an open video system that complies with 47
U.S.C. § 573; or (v) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility.
This definition of "cable system" shall in no way be deemed to circumscribe or limit the valid
authority of the Borough to regulate or authorize the facilities and/or services of any
telecommunications provider that owns, constructs, operates, or maintains facilities in the right-ofway.
CERTIFICATE
A certificate of public convenience issued by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT
The Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 151 et seq., as amended and as hereafter
amended.
DEPARTMENT
The Public Works Department of the Borough of Lititz.
DIRECTOR
The Director of the Public Works Department of the Borough of Lititz. Except for the preparation
and promulgation of policies and procedures, which is solely the function of Borough Council, such
term shall include the employees, agents and assignees of the Director.
EMERGENCY
A condition that (1) constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or safety of
the public, or (2) has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be unusable and
result in loss of the services provided.
FACILITY(IES)
Conduit, cables, wires, lines, towers, optic fiber, antennae, poles, associated equipment and
appurtenances, and any other facilities located in the right-of-way and designed, constructed,
and/or used, by telecommunications providers for transmitting telecommunications services.
FRANCHISE
A right-of-way use authorization pursuant to this chapter that authorizes a cable operator to own,
construct, operate and maintain a cable system to provide cable service within the Borough.
FRANCHISEE
A cable operator that is issued a franchise by the Borough.
INFORMATION SERVICE
The offering of a capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing, retrieving,
utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications (whether over a cable system,
telecommunications system, or any other type of facilities), and includes electronic publishing, but
does not include any use of any such capability for the management, control, or operation of a
telecommunications system or the management of a telecommunications service.
NON-PUC REGULATED ENTITY OR ENTITIES
Any corporation, company, association, joint stock company, firm, partnership, limited liability
company, or other entity; municipal, industrial development, housing, redevelopment, and other
authority or corporation established pursuant to statutes of the State of Pennsylvania not regulated
as a telecommunications provider by the Public Utility Commission.
PERMITEE
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 155/233
The recipient of a right-of-way use permit or cable franchise that is issued by the Borough
pursuant to this chapter, and entities holding existing franchises, special ordinances, or other
authorizations, including the Borough, its departments, agencies, and authorities.
PERSON
Corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies, firms, partnerships, limited liability
companies, and other entities; municipal, industrial development, housing, redevelopment, and
other authorities and corporations established pursuant to statutes of the State of Pennsylvania;
and individuals.
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
The written regulations, standards, operations and/or courses of action established by the
Borough to implement the provisions of this chapter. The preparation and promulgation of policies
and procedures are solely the function of the Borough and not the employees, agents or
assignees of the Borough.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMMISSION or PUC
The state administrative agency, or lawful successor thereto, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications services in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to the extent provided by
law.
PUBLIC UTILITY or UTILITY
Shall be defined as that term is defined in the Pennsylvania Public Utility Code as of the effective
date of this chapter, and as hereafter amended.
PUC REGULATED UTILITY
Any entity which is operating as a telecommunications provider as defined under the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Code, and is subject to regulation by the PUC, regardless of whether or not the entity
has been issued a certificate of public convenience by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission.
RIGHT-OF-WAY USE AUTHORIZATION or ROW USE AUTHORIZATION
A license, right-of-way use permit or cable franchise issued pursuant to this chapter.
RIGHT-OF-WAY USE PERMIT or ROW USE PERMIT
A right-of-way use permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, RIGHTS-OF-WAY OR ROW
The surface of and space above and below any real property in the Borough in which the Borough
has a regulatory interest, or interest as a trustee for the public, as such interests now or hereafter
exist, including, but not limited to, all streets, highways, avenues, roads, alleys, sidewalks, tunnels,
viaducts, bridges, skyways, or any other public place, area or property under the control of the
Borough, and any unrestricted public or utility easements established, dedicated, platted,
improved or devoted for utility purposes but excluding lands other than streets that are owned by
the Borough. The phrase "in the Right(s)-of-Way" means "in, on, over, along, above and/or under
the Right(s)-of-Way."
STREET
A strip of land or part thereof within the right-of-way, whether dedicated or not, that is intended or
used for vehicular and pedestrian traffic. The phrase "in the (a) street(s)" means "in, on, over,
along, above and/or under the (a) street(s)."
STREET OPENING PERMIT
A permit for excavation of a street for the construction or installation of facilities in any right-of-way
in the Borough.
SYSTEM
Any cable system, telecommunications system, or integral part thereof.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 156/233
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's
choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
The plant, equipment and property within the Borough used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide
or offer telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER
A person who provides telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE
The offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to
be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
A system that offers telecommunications service.
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES
Telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground
foundations or supports for aerial facilities.
Article II. PUC-Regulated Utilities
All telecommunications providers regulated by the Public Utility Commission owning or operating
facilities in the Borough’s rights-of-way shall comply with the following requirements.
§ 96-2.1. License.
All telecommunications providers shall be deemed to have a license from the Borough under this
chapter to occupy the rights-of-way.
§ 96-2.2. As-built maps.
On or before December 1, 2019, each telecommunications provider shall submit to the Borough two
paper copies and one electronic copy of as-built map or maps and engineering specifications as set
forth in the policies and procedures depicting and certifying the location of all its existing facilities within
the right-of-way. Such electronic and paper maps and engineering specifications shall be submitted in
a format and include the information required by the Borough in the policies and procedures. If the
maps are not provided electronically in the required format, then the telecommunications provider shall
reimburse the Borough for the cost of converting paper maps into electronic form or the cost of
converting electronic maps in another format into the required format. Such maps are, and shall
remain, confidential documents and are exempt from public disclosure under Pennsylvania's Right to
Know Law, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 708; the telecommunications provider confidential Security Information
Disclosure Protection Act, 35 P.S. §§ 2141.1 through 2141.3; and the Public Utility Commission
Regulations relating to Confidential Security Information, 52 Pa. Code § 102.1. After submission of the
as-built maps required under this section, each telecommunications provider having facilities in the
Borough rights-of-way shall update such maps as required under this chapter.
§ 96-2.3. Right to inspect.
The Borough may conduct inspections of the Borough rights-of-way in order to ensure that
Telecommunications facilities located within such rights-of-way do not constitute a public safety hazard,
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 157/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
and remain in compliance with the standards set forth by the Public Utility Commission. Such
inspections shall be limited to establishing whether such facilities meet relevant PUC standards, and
comply with such Borough construction standards as relate to the opening and closing of Borough
streets, curbs, and sidewalks, as provided under 15 Pa.C.S.A. § 1511(e) and Chapter 105 of the
Borough Code. In the event that the Borough determines that any facilities of a telecommunications
provider are not in compliance with such standards, then the Borough may bring a complaint against
such telecommunications provider before the Public Utility Commission, in accordance with
established PUC procedures. The Borough may also elect, in its discretion, to notify the
telecommunications provider of the existence of any noncompliant facilities, in order to abate such
violations without the need for the filing of a formal PUC complaint.
§ 96-2.4. Construction in rights-of-way.
Street opening permits. Except in the case of an emergency, no telecommunications provider shall
perform any street excavation in the rights-of-way without first obtaining a street opening permit
and paying a permit fee pursuant to Chapter 105, Article I, of the Borough Code. No
telecommunications provider shall perform curb and sidewalk construction replacement or repair
without first obtaining a curb and sidewalk permit and paying a permit fee pursuant to Chapter
105, Article I, of the Borough Code. The procurement of a street opening permit shall only be
necessary when the proposed street excavation and/or construction impacts Borough streets; it
shall not apply to any construction or excavation activities on state roads.
Construction standards. Construction standards shall include those determined by the Public
Utility Commission for the installation of facilities in Borough rights-of-way, as well as such
Borough construction standards as relate to the opening and closing of Borough streets, curbs,
and sidewalks, as provided under 15 Pa.C.S.A. § 1511(e). Compliance with construction
requirements pursuant to PUC-related standards shall remain within the sole and exclusive
jurisdiction of the PUC. Compliance with construction requirements pursuant to Borough
standards shall remain within the jurisdiction of the Borough. The Borough shall retain the right to
file formal complaints pursuant to PUC-related construction as set forth under § 96-2.4.
Recently constructed streets. No street opening permit shall be issued to cut any Borough street
that was constructed, reconstructed or resurfaced fewer than five years prior to application for a
street opening permit, unless the applicant agrees in writing to overlay or pave the surface of the
street, from curb to curb and intersection to intersection, in accordance with applicable Borough
standards. The Borough may grant an exception to this section in the case of an emergency. The
applicant shall pay all street degradation fees and comply with all related requirements as
prescribed in Chapter 105, Article I, of the Borough Code.
Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written notice from the Borough, or
such longer period as the Borough determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in
the case of an emergency, a telecommunications provider shall temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any facilities within the right-of-way, excluding
those underground, whenever the Borough, consistent with applicable PUC regulations, shall have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the
following circumstances: the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Borough or
other public improvement in the right-of-way; the operations of the Borough or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way; vacation of a street or the release of a utility easement; or an emergency
as determined by the Borough. Utilities must relocate and remove facilities consistent with the
regulations and standards of the PUC.
Coordination of construction activities. By March 1 of each year, or at such other time as the
Borough and utilities may agree, each telecommunications provider shall provide the Borough with
a schedule (including plans and projected start and finish dates for each project) of its planned
construction activities for the following year which may affect the rights-of-way. The schedule shall
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 158/233
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
depict all planned construction activities the telecommunications provider is planning to perform
within the current year.
Damage to facilities or property. A telecommunications provider, including any contractor working
for a telecommunications provider, shall avoid damage to any facilities and/or public or private
property. If any facilities and/or public or private property are damaged by the telecommunications
provider, including any contractor working for the telecommunications provider, the
telecommunications provider shall promptly repair and restore such property within 10 business
days. The telecommunications provider shall utilize the Pennsylvania One Call System prior to any
disturbance of the rights-of-way and shall adhere to all other requirements of the Pennsylvania
Underground Utility Line Protection Act.
Facilities maps. Each telecommunications provider issued a street opening permit shall submit to
the Borough, not later than 30 days after completion of the permitted construction (or any part
thereof, if required by the Borough), two paper copies and one electronic copy of updated as-built
map or maps and engineering specifications as set forth in the policies and procedures depicting
and certifying the location of the new facilities constructed or updated. Such documents shall be
submitted in a format and include the information required by the Borough in the policies and
procedures. If the maps are not provided electronically in the required format, then the
telecommunications provider shall reimburse the Borough for the cost of converting paper maps
into electronic form or the cost of converting electronic maps in another format into the required
format. Such maps are exempt from public disclosure under Pennsylvania's Right to Know Law,
65 Pa.C.S.A. § 708; the Telecommunications Provider Confidential Security Information Disclosure
Protection Act, 35 P.S. §§ 2141.1 - 2141.3; and the Public Utility Commission Regulations relating
to Confidential Security Information, 52 Pa. Code § 102.1.
Field marking. Each telecommunications provider shall field mark the locations of its underground
facilities upon request by other utilities or the Borough, consistent with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Underground Utility Line Protection Act and at no cost to the Borough.
§ 96-2.5. Right-of-way fee.
Compensation for right-of-way use. Occupancy of Borough rights-of-way by any telecommunications
provider is subject to the Borough's right to fix a fair and reasonable compensation for such occupancy,
which shall be directly related to the Borough's actual right-of-way costs pertaining to the
telecommunications provider.
Article III. Non-Puc Regulated Entities
§ 96-3.1. Right-of-way use authorization required.
Right-of-way use authorization. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no non-PUC
regulated entity shall own, construct, operate and/or maintain facilities in any right-of-way of the
Borough to provide or to enable others to provide services to telecommunications providers or
areas in the Borough or outside the Borough without a right-of-way use authorization. The types of
right-of-way use authorization are a right-of-way use permit and a cable franchise.
Telecommunications providers regulated by the PUC shall not be subject to this section, and shall
comply with Article II above.
Permit required. Pursuant to this chapter, all non-PUC regulated entities that own, construct and/or
maintain facilities in any public right-of-way shall obtain a right-of-way use permit. If any such
entity is subject to a cable franchise agreement, the Permitee shall not be required to remit both a
cable franchise fee and an annual right-of-way maintenance fee to the Borough. Such permitee
shall pay the higher amount of the two fees to the Borough.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 159/233
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 96-3.2. Right-of-way use permit.
Permit required; term and scope of permit. No non-PUC regulated entity, other than a franchisee,
may own, construct, operate and/or maintain facilities that occupy the right-of-way without first
obtaining a ROW use permit. Any ROW use permit shall be subject to such conditions as the
Borough may from time to time establish and shall otherwise conform to the requirements of this
chapter and applicable law. A ROW use permit shall be for a term of five years. A ROW use permit
and the rights, benefits and permissions conferred thereby shall apply to the entire geographic
area of the Borough.
Approval by Borough. A ROW use permit shall be authorized only by the Borough and shall not
become effective unless or until so authorized. In addition to the other requirements contained
herein, the applicant shall demonstrate:
That it has a history of compliance with applicable laws and regulations relating to the
management, construction and maintenance of facilities in streets and rights-of-way,
wherever located; and
That it possesses all licenses, permits, authorizations, and other permissions required by the
Federal Communications Commission, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the Borough
as a condition of its using the right-of-way and furnishing the services and operating the
facilities proposed by the applicant;
Indemnification. Each permitee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Borough, its elected and appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times
against any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and property damage arising in
whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or omission of the permitee, its officers,
agents, employees or contractors arising out of but not limited to, the construction, installation,
operation, maintenance or removal of permitee's system or facilities in the rights-of-way. Each
permitee shall defend any actions or proceedings against the Borough in which it is claimed that
personal injury, including death, or property damage was caused by the permit holder's
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of permitee's system or facilities in
the rights-of-way. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys'
fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
Application for right-of-way use permit. Application for a ROW use permit shall be in such form
and shall include such information as the Borough determines by regulation. Within a reasonable
period not to exceed 60 days after receiving a complete application hereunder, the Borough shall
approve or deny the application. Determinations to grant or deny an application shall be made on
a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral basis. If the application is denied, the determination
shall include the reasons for denial. The application fee, which shall be paid at the time of the filing
of the application, shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of Borough Council. The
application fee shall be sufficient to reimburse the Borough for the actual costs of Borough staff
time and other resources that are required and may be adjusted by resolution of Borough Council.
Renewal of right-of-way use permit. A telecommunications provider desiring to renew a ROW use
permit prior to the expiration of the permit shall file an application with the Borough at least 60
days prior to expiration for renewal of its authorization, which shall include the information and
documents required for an initial application and other material information required by the
Borough by regulation. The Borough shall make a determination accepting or denying the renewal
application. If the renewal application is denied, the determination shall include the reasons for
nonrenewal. Determinations to grant or deny a renewal application shall be made on a
nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral basis. The Borough shall not unreasonably delay or
deny the issuance of a renewal permit.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 160/233
F.
G.
H.
I.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
B.
As-built maps. Each telecommunications provider applying for a ROW use permit shall submit to
the Borough two paper copies and one electronic copy of as-built map or maps and engineering
specifications as set forth in the policies and procedures depicting and certifying the location of all
its existing facilities within the right-of-way. Such electronic and paper maps and engineering
specifications shall be submitted in a format and include the information required by the Borough
in the policies and procedures, and shall be submitted with the application. If the maps are not
provided electronically in the required format, then the telecommunications provider shall
reimburse the Borough for the cost of converting paper maps into electronic form or the cost of
converting electronic maps in another format into the required format. Such maps are, and shall
remain, confidential documents and are exempt from public disclosure under Pennsylvania's Right
to Know Law, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 708. After submission of the as-built maps required under this
section, each permitee having facilities in the Borough rights-of-way shall update such maps as
required under this chapter.
Right to inspect. The Borough shall have the right to inspect all of the facilities of the Permitee,
including aerial facilities and underground facilities, to ensure health and safety with respect to
such facilities, other facilities, the rights-of-way and any other public or private property, and to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations.
Permitees are required to cooperate with all such inspections and to provide information
requested by the Borough as part of the inspection.
Use authorized. No ROW use permit shall confer any exclusive right or privilege to occupy or use
the right-of-way for any purpose; or explicitly or impliedly preclude or affect the Borough's right to
authorize use of the right-of-way by other telecommunications providers to own, construct,
operate, maintain, and/or provide the same or different facilities or services, or for any other
purposes as the Borough determines appropriate; or affect the Borough's right to construct,
operate or maintain any type of facilities itself or offer any type of services in the right-of-way; or
authorize, or excuse any telecommunications provider from securing such further easements,
leases, permits or other approvals as may be required by applicable law or regulation to occupy
and use the right-of-way; or convey any right, title or interest in any right-of-way greater or other
than an agreement only to use and occupy the right-of-way for the limited purposes and terms
provided in the ROW use permit; or be construed as any warranty of title.
Owner's consent. No ROW use permit expressly or impliedly authorizes a Permitee to provide any
services to, or install any facilities on, any private property without the owner's consent, or to use
publicly or privately owned poles, ducts or conduits without a separate agreement with the owners
thereof for such use.
§ 96-3.3. Cable franchise.
Franchise required.
No entity may own, construct, operate or maintain a cable system within the Borough, provide
cable service over a cable system without a cable franchise issued by the Borough.
To the extent permitted by law, facilities used to provide telecommunications service,
information service or any form of services similar to cable service, that are also used to
provide cable service, shall be subject to this chapter and shall also require a right-of-way use
permit pursuant to this chapter.
Effect of authorization.
A cable franchise shall not confer any authority to provide any form or type of
telecommunications service or information service in addition to the cable service authorized
by the franchise. To the extent permitted by law, a separate right-of-way use permit pursuant
to this chapter, in addition to the cable franchise, shall be required before any franchisee is
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 161/233
(2)
A.
B.
A.
(1)
B.
C.
D.
E.
permitted to use facilities in the right-of-way to furnish any form or type of telecommunications
service or information service.
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and a cable franchise
agreement in effect on the effective date of this chapter, the provisions of the cable franchise
agreement shall govern.
§ 96-3.4. Alteration or modification of existing facilities.
Alteration or modification of existing facilities. The Permitee must notify the Borough upon
alteration or modification of existing facilities within the rights-of-way. The Permitee must
additionally provide an updated facilities map if facilities have been removed from, or added to, the
rights-of-way.
Change in information. If there are any changes in the information provided in the original permit
application, the permit holder has an obligation to notify the Borough within 60 days of such
changes.
§ 96-3.5. Construction in rights-of-way.
Street opening permits. Except in the case of an emergency, no non-PUC regulated entity shall
perform any street excavation in the rights-of-way without first obtaining a street opening permit
and paying a permit fee pursuant to Chapter 105, Article I, of the Borough Code. No
telecommunications provider shall perform curb and sidewalk construction replacement or repair
without first obtaining a curb and sidewalk permit and paying a permit fee pursuant to Chapter
105, Article I, of the Borough Code. The procurement of a street opening permit shall only be
necessary when the proposed street excavation and/or construction affects Borough streets; it
shall not apply to any construction or excavation activities on state roads.
Construction standards.
All construction, installation, maintenance, and operation of facilities in the ROW by non-PUC
regulated entities shall conform to the requirements of the following publications, as from time
to time amended: the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication Form 408, the
Borough of Lititz Curb and Sidewalk Regulations, National Electrical Code, and the National
Electrical Safety Code (collectively, the "Borough of Lititz ROW Construction Standards"). In
the event of conflict between the ROW Construction Standards and this section, this section
shall govern as of the effective date of this chapter.
Security. Each non-PUC regulated entity performing construction in the ROW shall furnish to the
Borough, at the telecommunications provider's expense, a letter of credit or other form of financial
security, in such form and in the amount as required by the Borough consistent with the policies
and procedures and regulations of the Borough. The security shall be a continuing obligation until
the completion of the construction as confirmed in writing by the Borough.
Right to inspect facilities. The Borough may inspect the construction or installation of the facilities
of any non-PUC regulated entity, including both aerial and underground facilities, and any
construction or repair activity to ensure health and safety with respect to such facilities, other
facilities, the rights-of-way and any other public or private property, and determine compliance with
the terms of this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations. Entities are required to
cooperate with all such inspections and to provide information requested by the Borough as part of
the inspection.
Recently constructed streets. No street opening permit shall be issued to cut any Borough street
that was constructed, reconstructed or resurfaced fewer than five years prior to application for a
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 162/233
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
street opening permit, unless the applicant agrees in writing to overlay or pave the surface of the
street, from curb to curb and intersection to intersection, to the satisfaction of the Department. The
Borough may grant an exception to this section in the case of an emergency. The applicant shall
pay all street degradation fees and comply with all related requirements as prescribed in Chapter
105, Article I, of the Borough Code.
Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written notice from the Borough, or
such longer period as the Borough determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in
the case of an emergency, a Permitee shall temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change
or alter the position of any facilities within the right-of-way, excluding those underground,
whenever the Borough, consistent with applicable PUC regulations, shall have determined that
such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances: the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Borough or other public
improvement in the right-of-way; the operations of the Borough or other governmental entity in the
right-of-way; vacation of a street or the release of a utility easement; or an emergency as
determined by the Borough.
Coordination of construction activities. By March 1 of each year, or at such other time as the
Borough and Permitees may agree, each right-of-way use permitee shall provide the Borough with
a schedule (including plans and projected start and finish dates for each project) of its planned
construction activities for the following year which may affect the rights-of-way. The schedule shall
depict all planned construction activities the Permitee is committed to perform within the current
year.
Damage to facilities or property. A Permitee, including any contractor working for Permitee, shall
avoid damage to any facilities and/or public or private property. If any facilities and/or public or
private property are damaged by Permitec, including any contractor working for Permitee,
Permitee shall promptly repair and restore such property within 10 business days. Permittee shall
utilize the Pennsylvania One Call System prior to any disturbance of the rights-of-way and shall
adhere to all other requirements of the Pennsylvania Underground Utility Line Protection Act.
Facilities maps. Each non-PUC regulated entity issued a street opening permit shall submit to the
Borough, not later than 30 days after completion of the permitted construction (or any part thereof,
if required by the Borough) two paper copies and one electronic copy of as-built map or maps and
engineering specifications as set forth in the policies and procedures depicting and certifying the
location of the facilities constructed. Such engineering specifications and electronic and paper
maps shall be submitted in a format and include the information required by the Borough in the
policies and procedures. If the maps are not provided electronically in the required format, then
the telecommunications provider shall reimburse the Borough for the cost of converting paper
maps into electronic form or the cost of converting electronic maps in another format into the
required format. Such maps are exempt from public disclosure under Pennsylvania's Right to
Know Law, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 708.
Field marking. Each Permitee shall field mark the locations of its underground facilities upon
request by other Permitees, telecommunications providers or the Borough, consistent with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Underground Utility Line Protection Act and at no cost to the
Borough.
§ 96-3.6. Right-of-way maintenance fee.
Compensation for right-of-way use. Every ROW use permit is subject to the Borough's right to fix
fair and reasonable compensation, which compensation shall be directly related to the Borough's
actual right-of-way costs including, but not limited to, the cost to the Borough of administration and
performance of all inspection, permitting, enforcement, and other ROW management activities.
Article IV. Remedies
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 163/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 96-4.1. Violations and penalties.
PUC regulated utilities. In the event a telecommunications provider is found by the Borough to
have violated a PUC regulation, standard, or order, then the Borough may bring a complaint
against such telecommunications provider before the Public Utility Commission for violation of
such regulation, standard, or order. The Borough may also notify the telecommunications provider
of the existence of any suspected violation of PUC standards, regulations or order in order to
obtain compliance by the telecommunications provider.
In the event a telecommunications provider is found to have violated any other provision of this
chapter that is not within the exclusive jurisdiction of the PUC, then such telecommunications
provider shall be subject, upon conviction thereof, to a fine not exceeding $300, for each and
every offense, together with attorneys' fees and costs, and in default of the payment thereof,
imprisonment for not more than 90 days. A separate and distinct violation shall be deemed to be
committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues to occur. In addition to an action to
enforce any penalty imposed by this chapter and any other remedy at law or in equity under this
chapter, the Borough may apply to a Court of Common Pleas for an injunction or other appropriate
relief at law or in equity to enforce compliance with or restrain violation of any provision of this
chapter which is not subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the PUC.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the Borough to commence or attempt to
commence prosecution of any PUC regulated telecommunications provider for a violation of any
regulation, standard or order of the PUC.
Non-PUC regulated entities. Any entity not regulated by the PUC that is found by the Borough to
have violated any provision of this chapter shall be subject, upon conviction thereof, to a fine not
exceeding $300, for each and every offense, together with attorneys' fees and costs, and in
default of the payment thereof, imprisonment for not more than 90 days. A separate and distinct
violation shall be deemed to be committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues to
occur. In addition to an action to enforce any penalty imposed by this chapter and any other
remedy at law or in equity under this chapter, the Borough may apply to a Court of Common Pleas
for an injunction or other appropriate relief at law or in equity to enforce compliance with or restrain
violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 96-4.2. Determination of violation.
In the event a determination is made that a telecommunications provider has violated any provision of
this chapter or right-of-way use permit, such telecommunications provider shall be provided written
notice of the determination and the reasons therefor. Except in the case of an emergency, the
telecommunications provider shall have 30 days to cure the violation. If the nature of the violation is
such that it cannot be fully cured within such time period, the Borough may, in its reasonable judgment,
extend the time period to cure provided the telecommunications provider has commenced to cure and
is diligently pursuing its efforts to cure. If the violation has not been cured within the time allowed, the
Borough may take any and all actions authorized by this chapter and/or Pennsylvania law and
regulations.
Article V. Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 96-5.1. Proprietary information.
If a telecommunications provider considers information it is obligated to provide to the Borough under
this chapter to be a business or trade secret or otherwise proprietary or confidential in nature, and
desires to protect the information from disclosure, then the telecommunications provider shall mark
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 164/233
A.
B.
such information as proprietary and confidential. Subject to the requirements of the Right to Know Act
of 2009, 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq., as amended, and other applicable law, the Borough shall exercise
reasonable good faith efforts to protect such proprietary and confidential information that is so marked
from disclosure. The Borough shall provide notice to the telecommunications provider in the following
circumstances: (i) if the Borough receives a request for disclosure of such proprietary and confidential
information and the Borough Solicitor determines that the information is or may be subject to
disclosure under applicable law; or (ii) if the Borough Solicitor determines that the information should
be disclosed in relation to its enforcement of this chapter or the exercise of its police or regulatory
powers. In the event the telecommunications provider does not obtain a protective order barring
disclosure of the information from a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days following receipt of
the Borough's notice, then the Borough may disclose the information without further notice to the
telecommunications provider.
§ 96-5.2. Leased facilities.
Subject to the provisions of this chapter and with prior written approval of the Borough, a non-PUC
regulated entity shall have the right to furnish any facilities for which it has the applicable authorization
to own, construct, operate and/or maintain in the right-of-way to another telecommunications provider
for the latter's use in constructing or operating its own facilities in the right-of-way, provided that:
The entity furnishing its facilities to another shall first deliver to the Borough notice that there is a
fully signed and executed lease, rental agreement, or other agreement with such other
telecommunications provider pursuant to which the facilities are to be furnished; and
The telecommunications provider to which the facilities are furnished shall comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable policies and procedures.
§ 96-5.3. Duty to provide information.
Within 10 days of a written request from the Borough, each Permitee shall furnish the Borough with
information sufficient to demonstrate the following: that the Permitee has complied with all
requirements of this chapter; that all fees and taxes due the Borough in connection with the services
and facilities provided by the Permitee have been properly paid by the Permitee; and any other
information reasonably related to the Permitee's obligations pursuant to this chapter.
§ 96-5.4. Right to inspect records.
The Borough shall have the right, upon 30 days' written notice and during normal business hours, to
inspect all documents, records, maps and other pertinent information maintained by the Permitee that
relate directly to the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 96-5.5. No substitute for other required permissions.
No ROW use authorization or ROW use permit includes, means, or is in whole or part a substitute for
any other permit or authorization required by the laws and regulations of the Borough for the privilege
of transacting and carrying on a business within the Borough; or any permit or agreement for
occupying any other property of the Borough.
§ 96-5.6. No waiver.
The failure of the Borough to insist on timely performance or compliance by any Permitee holding a
right-of-way use authorization shall not constitute a waiver of the Borough's right to later insist on
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 165/233
[1]
timely performance or compliance by that Permitee or any other Permitee holding such a right-of-way
use authorization. The failure of the Borough to enforce any provision of this chapter on any occasion
shall not operate as a waiver or estoppel of its right to enforce any provision of this chapter on any
other occasion, nor shall the failure to enforce any prior ordinance or Borough Charter provision
affecting the right-of-way, any facilities, or any user or occupant of the right-of-way act as a waiver or
estoppel against enforcement of this chapter or any other provision of applicable law.
§ 96-5.7. Policies and procedures.
The Borough is authorized to establish such written policies and procedures consistent with this
chapter as the Borough deems necessary for the implementation of this chapter.
§ 96-5.8. Police powers.
The Borough, by granting any permit or taking any other action pursuant to this chapter, does not
waive, reduce, lessen or impair the lawful police powers vested in the Borough under applicable
federal, state and local laws and regulations.
§ 96-5.9. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter is for any reason held
illegal or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such provision shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not render the remainder of this chapter
invalid.
§ 96-5.10. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective as provided by law.
Chapter 100. Sewers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961.[1]
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Authority — See Ch. 27.
Construction codes — See Ch. 36.
Fees — See Ch. 55.
Holding tanks — See Ch. 68.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 103.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 108.
Utilities — See Ch. 113.
Water — See Ch. 118.
Editor's Note: This chapter was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
Article I. Sewer Connections
§ 100-1. Definitions.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 166/233
The following words and terms as used in this chapter shall be construed or defined as follows, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ACT or THE ACT
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
ALLOWABLE INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance, waterborne waste or form of energy ejected or escaping
from any industrial, manufacturing, trade, or business process or from the development, recovery,
or processing of natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage, which complies with all
provisions of these regulations and which is allowed to be discharged into the sewer system by
the rules and regulations of the Borough.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
AUTHORITY
The Lititz Sewer Authority,[1] as presently or hereafter constituted, to which has been referred by
said borough the specific project of sewers.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
CONNECTION
[Repealed 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345, approved 6-25-1991]
CONNECTION FEE
A single charge levied against a property owner for each physical or actual connection of service
line to the municipal sewer system, which fee is related to the actual costs of physically connecting
the service line to the sewer system and the borough's fees and costs incurred in inspection of
such connection.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345, approved 6-25-1991]
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT or EDU
The EDU shall be equal to sewage discharge at a rate of 350 gallons of sewage per day, per unit.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345, approved 6-25-1991]
INDIRECT DISCHARGE
The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under
Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act into the sewage system (including holding tank waste
discharged into the system).
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
INDIVIDUAL DWELLING UNIT
A single-family residence, apartment unit or mobile home occupied by one or more persons.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345, approved 6-25-1991]
INDUSTRIAL USER
A source of indirect discharge.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Solids, liquids or gaseous substances or forms of energy ejected or escaping in the course of any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or in the course of development, recovering
or processing of natural resources.
[Amended 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
LATERAL SEWER OR SERVICE CONNECTION
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 167/233
A.
That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to a curbline or, if there shall be no curbline,
to the edge of the right-of-way of the street abutting property affected, or, if no such lateral shall be
provided, then "lateral sewer or service connection" shall mean that portion of or place in a
sanitary sewer which is provided for the connection of any service line.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345, approved 6-25-1991]
OCCUPIED BUILDING
Any structure erected and intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by
human beings or animals and from which structure sewage is or may be discharged.
PERSON
Natural persons, partnerships, organizations and corporations.
PREMISES ACCESSIBLE TO THE SEWER SYSTEM
[Repealed 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. C-257, approved 11-25-1980]
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in
§ 100-4.1 of these regulations.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
SERVICE LINE
That part of the main building drain or sewer line extending from the exterior wall of a building to
its connection with the lateral or service connection.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345, approved 6-25-1991]
SEWAGE
Household waste, liquids, human or animal excretion and all substances commonly known as
"sewage," but shall not include roof or surface waters, exhaust steam, oils, tar, grease, gasoline,
benzine or other combustible gases and liquids and offal or insoluble solids or substances which
would impair, impede, affect, interfere with or endanger the sewer system or any part thereof in
any manner whatsoever or the functioning of the processes of sewage treatment or industrial
waste.
[Amended 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. C-257, approved 11-25-1980]
SEWAGE SYSTEM or SEWERAGE SYSTEM
All facilities operated by the Borough or the Authority which are used for collecting, plumbing,
transporting, treating or disposing of sewage and allowable industrial waste. For the purposes of
these regulations, "sewage system" and "sewerage system" shall also include any sewers that
convey wastewaters to the sewerage system from persons who are, by contract or agreement with
the Borough, users of the Borough's sewerage system.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
SEWER MANAGER
Any person who may from time to time be placed in general charge of the sewer system by the
Borough of Lititz.
SEWER SYSTEM or SEWER COLLECTION SYSTEM
Sewers which convey sewage or industrial waste to the sewage treatment plant operated by the
Borough.
[Amended 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. C-257, approved 11-25-1980]
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER
Any industrial user that contributes over 25,000 gallons per day and either:
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
Contributes over 5% of the daily load for BOD, total suspended solids, ammonia, or total
phosphorus; or
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 168/233
B.
[1]
[2]
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
Whose discharge composition is such that the Borough determines it poses risk of upset,
bypass, or interference to the sewage system.
SLUG
Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or
noncustomary batch discharge, or which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards of § 100-4.1 of these regulations.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
TAPPING FEE
A charge levied against the property owner of each property connecting to the Borough's sewer
system, computed on an equivalent-dwelling-unit basis as authorized by Act 57 of 2003.[2]
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345, approved 6-25-1991; amended 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527,
approved 8-6-2013]
USER
Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the Borough's
sewerage system.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 27. Sewer Authority.
Editor’s Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5607.
§ 100-2. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 100-2. Time limit for connections, was repealed 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. C-257,
approved 11-25-1980.
§ 100-3. Sewer system must be used.
[Amended 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. C-257, approved 11-25-1980]
All sewage must be discharged to the sewer system.
§ 100-4. (Reserved)
Editor’s Note: Former § 100-4, Prohibited discharges, as amended, was repealed 8-6-2013 by Ord. No.
C-527, approved 8-6-2013.
§ 100-4.1. Use of sanitary sewers and admission of industrial
waste.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
All sewage and allowable industrial wastes may be discharged to the sewerage system except
those which the Borough deems harmful to the system or which are specifically prohibited by this
chapter. The Borough may from time to time amend these rules and regulations to specifically
prohibit certain discharges, and these rules and regulations shall not be deemed to create any
vested rights to any particular discharge.
The discharge of stormwater runoff to the sewerage system is prohibited. No user shall discharge
or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, cooling water, drainage from tile fields or unpolluted process waters to any sanitary
sewer.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 169/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
D.
All persons connecting occupied buildings to the sewage system shall provide adequate
means for excluding stormwater runoff to any sanitary sewer.
No person who connects an occupied building to the sewage system shall connect any roof
drain or foundation drain thereto or permit any such drains to remain connected to the
sewage system, nor shall he permit, allow or cause to enter into any sanitary sewer any
springwater, or surface water from any other source.
The provisions of this chapter do not prohibit the present or future discharge of stormwater
runoff to storm sewers or to natural watercourses within the Borough.
No sump pumps or roof drains shall be connected to the sewage system without authorization
by the Borough.
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater which causes interference or pass-through. These general prohibitions apply to all
such users of the sewerage system, whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or
pretreatment requirements.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no user shall discharge or cause to be discharged to
the sewerage system any sewage, industrial waste, pollutant or other matter or substance:
Having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the sewage treatment plant
resulting in interference and/or cause the temperature at the treatment plant to exceed 40° C.
Additionally, no discharge shall exceed 60° C. at the point of public connection.
Containing any liquids, solids, or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity, are, or
may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or
explosion or be injurious in any other way to the sewerage system or to the operation of the
sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flash
point of less than 140° F. or 60° C. using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. At no
time shall two successive readings on any explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge
into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than 5% nor any single reading over
10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
Containing unground garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
Containing solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or
other interference with the operation of the sewage treatment plant, such as, but not limited
to, ashes, cinders, spent lime, stone dust, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metals, glass, rags,
grass clippings, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, bentonite, lye,
building materials, rubber, asphalt residues, hair, bones, leather, porcelain, china, ceramic
wastes, polishing wastes, glass grinding or other solid or viscous substances capable of
causing obstruction or other interference with the operation of the sewerage system.
Having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 10.5 standard units or having any corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, bacterial action or personnel
of the sewerage system.
Containing toxic or poisonous pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A
toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to Section
307(a) of the Act.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 170/233
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
Containing a BOD or total suspended solids concentration of such character and quantity that
unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials in the sewage treatment
plant.
Containing any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
Containing dye from any source that will not have an effluent the equivalent of that produced
by alum coagulation and chlorination to remove suspended or colloidal matter and bleach the
dissolved dyes.
Containing radioactive substances and/or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may
exceed limits in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
Having a chlorine demand of such quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
Prohibited by any permit issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
Containing any substance which will cause the sewage treatment plant to violate its NPDES
permit and/or state permit or the receiving water quality standards.
Containing any substance which may cause the sewage treatment plant's effluent or any
other product of the sewage treatment plant, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case
shall a substance discharged to the sewerage system cause the sewage treatment plant to be
in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed
under Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or
disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act; or state criteria applicable to
the sludge management method being used.
Containing wastes which are not amenable to biological treatment or reduction in existing
treatment facilities, specifically nonbiogradeable complex carbon compounds.
Causing a hazard to human life or public nuisance.
Containing total solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is
required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
Containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow
rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference to the sewage treatment
plant.
Containing fats, tars, greases, vegetable oil, petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
Containing pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the
sewerage system in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
Containing any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the
Borough.
Containing detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause
excessive foaming in the sewerage system or may cause interference or pass through the
sewage treatment plant.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 171/233
(23)
[1]
(24)
(25)
Waste prohibited by federal or Pennsylvania law or regulations, including the general
pretreatment standards (40 CFR, Part 403) and categorical pretreatment standards.
Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which.[1]
Editor's Note: So in original.
Containing concentrations of anions, cations, and other various objectionable substances in
excess of the following local limits, measured in a representative sample collected at the point
of discharge to the sewerage system:
Parameter Sample Type
Daily Maximum Allowable
Concentration (Local Limit)
(mg/L)
Ammonia Composite Monitor
Arsenic Composite 0.030
Biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD-5)
Composite 1,200, monitor
Cadmium Composite 0.020
Chromium, total Composite 1.0
Chromium, hexavalent Composite 0.10
Copper Composite 0.050
Cyanide Grab 0.20
Dissolved solids, total (TDS) Composite 2,000
Flourides Composite 1.50
Iron Composite 5.00
Lead Composite 0.075
Manganese Composite 0.50
Mercury Composite 0.01
Molybdenum Composite 0.11
Nickel Composite 0.25
Nitrogen, total Composite Monitor
Oil and grease (O&G) Grab 100
pH Grab 5.0 to 10.5 s.u.
Phosphorus, total Composite Monitor
Selenium Composite 0.050
Silver Composite 0.50
Suspended solids, total
(TSS)
Composite Monitor
Temperature Grab 40° C. (at headworks)
60° C. (at connection)
Zinc Composite 0.10
NOTES:
Monitor and report. Parameter subject to surcharge fees.
Discharges <6.0 or >9.0 s.u., subject to surcharge fees on a case-by-case basis.
Provided, however, that deviations from the above schedule may be authorized by the
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 172/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
Borough at its sole discretion, upon affirmative showing, by the person requesting the same,
that such deviation will not be harmful to the sewerage system or the sewage treatment
plant or cause the plant effluent to violate its current NPDES discharge limitations. For the
purpose of this chapter, an allowable deviation may be granted by the Borough, provided
that the corresponding total loading allocated for each objectionable substance does not
exceed the maximum allowable industrial loading limit. Deviations granted by the Borough
shall be incorporated in the industrial user's discharge permit. In no event shall a deviation
allow a discharge to occur that is below the federal pH standard of 5.0 s.u.
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or proposed to be discharged, to the sewerage system,
which waters or wastes contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated and
prohibited in this chapter or which, in the judgment of the Borough, may have a deleterious effect
upon the sewerage system or receiving waters, the Borough may, upon giving official notice to the
discharger:
Reject the waste.
Require pretreatment to reduce characteristics to daily maximum allowable concentrations
permitted by this chapter or any other applicable rules or law.
Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
Require immediate discontinuance of the waste discharge until such time as it meets the
requirements of this chapter.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided where, in the opinion of the approving
authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity acceptable to the Borough and shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Users having such devices shall submit annual
reports to the Borough that include receipts, manifests, bills and other proof that these devices are
in place and have been properly maintained.
The use of mechanical garbage grinders producing a finely divided mass, properly flushed with an
ample amount of water, shall be permitted upon the condition that no such mechanical garbage
grinder to serve premises used for commercial purposes shall be installed until permission for
such installation shall have been obtained from the Borough.
Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall
be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner's
expense and shall be accessible to the Borough for inspection and testing.
§ 100-4.2. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
Upon the promulgation of the categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial
subcategory, the general standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter
for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this
chapter. The Borough shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under
40 CFR 403.12. The categorical standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-
471, are incorporated herein by reference.
Modification of Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Where the Borough's sewage
treatment plant achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal categorical standards,
the Borough may apply to the regulatory authority for modification of specific limits in the federal
categorical standards.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 173/233
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
§ 100-4.3. State requirements.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
State requirements and limitations on discharge shall apply in any case where they are more stringent
than federal requirements and limitations or those in this chapter.
§ 100-4.4. Authority's right to revision.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
The Borough reserves the right to establish more-stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to
the sewerage system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in § 100-4.1 of this
chapter. Nothing in these rules and regulations shall be deemed to create any vested right in any user
to a particular level, amount, concentration, characteristic or type of discharge.
§ 100-4.5. Excessive discharge.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a
partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations
contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards or in any other pollutant-specific
limitation developed by the Borough or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 100-4.6. Accidental discharges and slugs.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
substances regulated by this Borough and from slugs. Facilities to prevent slugs or accidental
discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own
cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this
protection shall be submitted to the Borough for review and shall be approved by the Borough
before construction of the facility. No user who commences contribution to the sewerage system
after the effective date of this chapter shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the sewerage
system until slug and accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the Borough.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the
responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. In
the case of an accidental discharge or slug discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to
immediately telephone and notify the Borough of the incident. The notification shall include the
location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions.
Any user required to develop and implement an accidental spill prevention and/or slug control plan
shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following:
Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
Description of stored chemicals;
Procedures for immediately notifying the Borough of any accidental or slug discharges,
including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under § 100-4.1, with procedures for
follow-up written notification within five days;
If required by the Borough, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills,
including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials,
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 174/233
A.
B.
A.
B.
loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic chemicals
(including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
§ 100-4.7. Written notice of accidental discharge.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
Within five days following an accidental or slug discharge, the user shall submit to the Borough a
detailed written report describing the cause of the accidental or slug discharge and the measures to be
taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of
any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
sewerage system, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification
relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or
other applicable law.
§ 100-4.8. Advising employees on emergency notification
procedures.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising
employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous or unauthorized discharge. Employers shall
ensure that all employees who may suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
§ 100-4.9. Drainage of swimming pools.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
Filter backwash lines shall be discharged to the sewerage system as follows:
Sand filter backwash may be discharged to the sewerage system.
Diatomaceous earth filter backwash shall be connected to the sewerage system through settling
tanks with three months' storage capacity of spent diatomaceous earth, which tanks shall be
readily accessible for removing solid waste for disposal.
§ 100-4.10. Removal, transportation and disposal of sewage and
industrial waste.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
The industrial wastes discharged by tank trucks into the sewerage system shall not contain
industrial waste, chemicals, or other matter, with or without pretreatment, that does not conform to
the requirements of this chapter.
Any industrial waste to be discharged from tank trucks shall be disposed of at the location
designated at the sewage treatment plant at the time or times and at the rate or rates of discharge
fixed by the Borough.
§ 100-4.11. Pretreatment requirements.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 175/233
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
A.
Users shall design, construct, operate and maintain wastewater pretreatment facilities whenever
necessary to reduce or modify the user's wastewater to achieve compliance with this chapter, national
pretreatment standards, pretreatment requirements, and conditions or limitations contained in the
user's industrial waste discharge permit, or any sludge limitation imposed by federal, state or local
authorities. The review or approval of pretreatment facility plans, specifications and operating
procedures by the Borough or its consulting engineer shall not excuse or mitigate any violations by the
user of this chapter or any federal, state or local requirements.
§ 100-4.12. Industrial user agreement.
[Added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
A significant industrial user ("SIU") may be required by the Borough to enter into a user agreement.
Such user agreement will establish additional restrictions, surcharges, fees and pretreatment
requirements as deemed necessary by the Borough for the protection of the sewerage system and to
provide for equitable cost sharing between users of the sewerage system. The user agreement may
establish specific sampling and monitoring requirements for the SIU. An SIU with a user agreement is
subject to pay reasonable administrative, sampling and reporting fees incurred by the Borough in
administering the user agreement. The Borough shall submit invoices and receipts to the SIU for
reimbursement of such costs by the SIU.
§ 100-5. Industrial wastes, peak flows and powers of inspectors.
[Amended 4-16-1970 by Ord. No. C-106, approved 4-16-1970; 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. C-257,
approved 11-25-1980]
Sampling and reporting.
All those who discharge or desire to discharge industrial wastes into the sewer system shall
fill in and file with the borough quarterly an industrial wastes report in a form determined by
the borough, which shall furnish pertinent or predicted data inclusive of quantity of flow and
analysis of the character and concentration of the typical industrial wastes discharged or to be
discharged into the sewer system. Such report shall be based on analysis by an independent
testing laboratory, at the expense of the discharger. The installation, operation and
maintenance of the sewage sampling facilities shall be the responsibility of the person
discharging the industrial wastes into the sewer system and shall be subject at all times to the
approval of the Borough Council or its sewer system engineer. Access to the sewage
sampling location or locations shall be available to the Borough Council or its duly authorized
representatives at all times. Due care shall be exercised in the collection and preservation of
all samples to ensure the preservation of the sample in as nearly its natural state as possible,
including the refrigeration of all samples which will be analyzed by biochemical methods.
An authorized representative of the borough may require a user of sewer services to provide
information needed to determine compliance with this Article or other applicable local, state or
federal laws, rules or regulations. This information may include:
Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period.
Laboratory analyses of wastewaters.
Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting wastewater volume and
quality.
Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important
to sewer use control.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 176/233
(e)
(f)
(g)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility
locations.
Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the
municipal sewer.
Peak flows. No discharger of industrial waste shall discharge such waste at an instantaneous
peak rate higher than twice the average daily rate of discharge.
Powers and authority of inspectors.
Duly authorized employees of the borough, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall
be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the sewer system.
Duly authorized employees of the borough are authorized to obtain information concerning
industrial processes resulting in industrial waste. The industry may withhold information if the
industry establishes to the satisfaction of the borough that the revelation to the public of the
information in question would result in an advantage to competitors.
While performing the necessary work on private properties, duly authorized employees of the
borough shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner,
and the owner shall be held harmless for injury or death to the borough employees, and the
borough shall indemnify the owner against loss or damage to its property by borough
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the owner and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as
such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions. For the
purpose of this section, the term "owner" is defined to mean and include the lawful owner of
the premises, the operator of any lawful business on the premises, the tenant, lessee and any
other person lawfully occupying the premises by and with the consent and permission of the
owner.
Duly authorized employees of the borough, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall
be permitted to enter all private properties through which the borough holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewer system lying within said
easement.
§ 100-6. Only registered plumbers to make connections.
No connections shall be made to the sewer system except by a plumber duly registered and licensed
by the borough and in the manner and of such materials as are approved of by the sewer manager or
his duly appointed deputy or assistant and in compliance with the rules and regulations prescribed by
existing ordinances or as may otherwise be required by law.
§ 100-7. Grease interceptors required for eating establishments.
[Amended 5-31-2005 by Ord. No. C-466, approved 5-31-2005]
Where the building connected to the sewer system is used, in whole or in part, for preparation or
serving of food to the public, including, but not limited to, eating houses, restaurants, nursing homes,
hotels, drugstores, bars and saloons, there shall be installed in each connection a grease interceptor
or trap.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 177/233
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
Installation plans and specifications for proposed oil and grease interceptor systems shall be
submitted to the Borough prior to the start of installation. Installation shall not be started until
approval of the system has been obtained from the Borough.
Owners of said facilities shall, at their expense, provide a written inspection and cleaning report of
the grease trap/interceptor by a properly licensed professional. This annual report shall be
submitted to the Borough on or before the anniversary date of the Borough's approval of the
system. The owner shall also self-monitor the system on an ongoing basis to assure its proper
operation.
§ 100-8. Connections from buildings to be independent.
Each separate occupied building shall be provided with an independent connection with the sewer
system and two or more occupied buildings shall not be permitted to discharge into the building lateral
connecting any property with the sewer system except with the consent of the borough.
§ 100-9. Unlawful to construct private disposal system.
Any person who erects, constructs or maintains a privy, cesspool, sinkhole or septic tank on any
property accessible to the sewer system shall be deemed and shall be declared to be erecting,
constructing and maintaining a nuisance, which nuisance the borough may abate in the manner
provided by law.
§ 100-10. Violations and penalties; hearings.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978; 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. C-257,
approved 11-25-1980; 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. C-527, approved 8-6-2013]
Any person, firm or corporation (whether owner, occupier, plumber or other responsible person,
firm or corporation) who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 per offense, plus costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate
offense. If such violation shall not be corrected within 10 days after notice from the Borough
served on the property owner, the Borough may either:
Enter upon the property and correct the defect or make the necessary connection and charge
the cost thereof against the owner or owners of the property and collect the same by lien or
suit;
Take legal action to compel the owner or owners or occupier or occupiers to correct the defect
or make any required connection;
Enter upon the property and shut off sewer and/or water service and restore the same only
upon payment of the cost of shutting off and restoring service and of any work done by the
Borough; or
Pursue any or all of its remedies cumulatively.
Any party aggrieved by an "adjudication," as that term is defined in the Local Agency Law, 2
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., may request a hearing before the Borough Council if no other hearing
procedure exists. The request shall be in writing, shall reasonably describe the decision,
determination, ruling or other adjudication in question and the basis for disagreement with it, shall
be signed by the person or persons aggrieved and contain the addresses and telephone numbers
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 178/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
A.
B.
of the persons claiming to be aggrieved and shall be filed with the Borough Manager. The request
shall be filed within 30 days of the date the party knew or reasonably should have first known
himself or herself to be aggrieved. The Council shall schedule a hearing and give reasonable
notice thereof to all persons who have requested a hearing. The procedure shall thereafter be in
accordance with the Local Agency Law.
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged, to the sewer system
which contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in §§ 100-4.1 through
100-4.12 or which, in the judgment of the Borough, may have a deleterious effect upon the
wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Borough may:
Reject the wastes;
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the system;
Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by
existing taxes or sewer charges.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be liable to the Borough for any
expense, loss, damage, fine or penalty occasioned because of such violation.
Article II. Sewer Connection Regulations
§ 100-11. Supervision of installations and repairs.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager or some other authorized person of the Borough of Lititz to
supervise the installation and repair of sanitary sewer laterals and all sanitary house drainage
connected therewith in conformity with the provisions of ordinances of the Borough of Lititz and rules
and regulations adopted by the Borough Council. "Sanitary house drainage" shall be construed to
include any connections with any sewer, drain, soil, waste or vent pipe or any pipe connected
therewith.
§ 100-12. Persons authorized to install laterals.
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in or carry on the business of installing laterals between
the sewer trunk system of the borough and the connections with the structural plumbing except either:
A contractor who shall have obtained authorization to do such work in the Borough of Lititz, in
writing, from the Borough Council.
A registered plumber.
§ 100-13. Only registered plumbers to make connections.
No person except a registered plumber shall be permitted to make the connections between laterals
and the structural plumbing system.
§ 100-14. Authorization required prior to connection.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 179/233
A.
B.
C.
A.
No plumber shall undertake any work whatsoever on any premises intended to be fully connected to
the sanitary sewer system of the borough until the owner thereof has exhibited to him the authorization
for the connection granted to him by the Borough Manager, which authorization shall be applied for by
the owner or his agent.
§ 100-15. House drains.
When separate drains not necessary. The entire drainage system of every house or building shall
be separately and independently connected with the street sewer where such sewer exists, that
where one building exists or is erected in the rear of another or on an interior lot, of single
ownership, and no private sewer is available or can be made for the rear building through an
adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the house drain from the front building may be extended to
the rear building and the whole will be considered as one drain. Where it is necessary to construct
such a private sewer, such plans may be followed as may be approved by the Borough Council,
but in no case shall joint drains be laid in cellars, which joint drains are parallel with the street or
alley which the property faces.
Weights of cast-iron pipe required. House drains or soil pipes laid under or through the wall must
be plain cast-iron soil pipe of weights as set forth in the following table:
Pipe Size
(inches)
Weight
(pounds per lineal foot)
4 13
5 17
6 17
7 27
8 33
10 45
12 54
However, pipe laid under the floor may be standard cast-iron soil pipe.
Installation of pipe. Joints shall be leaded and caulked and shall be carried five feet outside the
foundation wall, All drains or soil pipes connected with the main drain shall be of plain cast-iron
soil pipe with leaded and caulked joints or of heavy wrought iron or steel pipe with gas tight screw
joints properly secured and carried five feet outside the cellar wall. No cast-iron soil pipe, drain,
waste or vent pipe shall be tarred or coated until after the inspection and approval by the
appropriate borough officials. All arrangements of soil waste pipes shall be laid by as direct a route
as possible. Changes of direction in pipes shall be made with curved pipes, and all connections
with Y- branches, both above and below the ground shall be protected from frost and readily
accessible for inspection and convenience in repairing. In each instance in which a pipe passes
through a new foundation wall, a relieving arch shall be built over it with a two-inch space above
and on either side of the pipe, or a sleeve shall be grouted into the wall and a sewer pipe laid
through the sleeve and caulked into place.
§ 100-16. Drains outside of buildings.
Alternate pipe permitted. Where the ground is of sufficient solidity for a proper foundation, it shall
be permissible to use transit pipe or cylindrical bell-and-spigot terra-cotta pipe, perfectly burned
and well-glazed over the entire inner and outside surfaces, provided that same shall be of the best
quality, free from flaws, splits or cracks, and provided that same shall be laid on a smooth bottom,
with a special groove cut in the bottom of the trench for each hub, where necessary, in order to
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 180/233
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
give the pipe a solid bearing on its entire length, and the soil well-rammed on each side of the
pipe. In any instance in which terra-cotta pipe is used, the spigot and hub ends shall be closely
connected and the space between the hub and pipe caulked with oakum, jute or hemp and
thoroughly filled with hot poured bituminous compound where trees are present, or the space
between the hub and pipe shall be caulked with oakum, jute or hemp and thoroughly filled with
cement mortar made of one part of the best American portland cement and two parts of bar sand,
thoroughly mixed dry, and with enough water added afterwards to give proper consistency. The
joints must be carefully wiped and pointed, and all mortar that may be left inside shall be removed,
and the pipe when completed shall be clean and smooth throughout.
Where alternate pipe not permitted. Transit or terra-cotta pipe must be laid not closer than five feet
to any exterior wall of a building nor in any portion of a drain passing under a driveway less than
3 1/2 feet below the surface of the driveway, not within 10 feet of any well, nor in "made" or "filled
in" ground.
Grade. Before any pipe is laid, the trench shall be evenly graded. The minimum grade shall be
one-fourth-inch fall per running foot. After the pipe is laid and the joints made, it shall remain
uncovered, and sufficient time shall be allowed for the joints to become set to allow for the
necessary inspection by the borough authorities. The house lateral sewer shall not be connected
to the borough sewer system until after inspection by the Borough Manager or his proper agent.
Backfilling. Backfilling shall be made with loose earth and carefully tamped about and over the
pipe in six-inch layers for a depth of one foot above the pipe, on top of which the coarser materials
may be backfilled and the trench brought to its original condition. The contractor or plumber is
authorized to supervise backfill up to and including one foot above the top of the pipe.
Cradle for wet areas. When the pipe is laid in wet areas, either cast-iron pipe with lead joints or
transit or terra-cotta pipe with a concrete bed and jacket shall be used. The concrete bed and
jacket shall extend below the bell of the pipe at least four inches, shall have a horizontal bearing
extending at the least three inches on each side of the bell of the pipe and shall be at least three
inches thick over the top or side of any part of the pipe. Concrete for this purpose shall be a oneto-
two-to-three mix with mineral aggregate having a maximum size of one inch.
Cradle for rock excavation. When pipe is laid in rock excavation, the trench shall be excavated
three inches deeper than the outside bell of the pipe, and this depth under the pipe and up to the
midsection of the pipe shall be of well-compacted concrete of a one-to-three-to-five mix or shall be
of fine gravel or coarse sand.
§ 100-17. Drilling and tapping not permitted.
Drilling and tapping of drain and waste pipes will not be permitted. When iron drains and waste pipes
are to be removed for a connection, the connection must be made by the insertion of a Y- branch;
provided, however, that when the connection is made in a basement on a horizontal run and is to
remain exposed, such connection may be made by the use of a Y-saddle. In either case, such
connections must be inspected and approved by the Borough Manager.
§ 100-18. Specifications for horizontal drains.
All horizontal drains within and to a distance of five feet beyond the walls of buildings shall be of cast
iron with caulked leaded joints or wrought iron with screw joints and shall be so located as to be readily
accessible for inspection. The house drain within the building shall not be less than four inches, and
the fall shall not be less than 1/4 of an inch per foot; it shall be laid in a trench cut out at a uniform
grade, or it may be constructed along the foundation walls above the cellar floor, resting on nine-inch
brick or stone piers laid in cement mortar [said piers to be not more than seven feet apart], or it may be
suspended from the floor beam by heavy iron hangers at intervals of not more than seven feet. The
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 181/233
use of pipe hooks, gas pipe or iron pipe driven into the walls is prohibited. Where a pipe passes under
the walls of a building, there shall be a relieving arch to prevent the pipe from being broken by settling
of the foundation. Said drain shall be provided with a fitting for cleaning purposes, the same to be
closed with a screw plug.
§ 100-19. Location of main trap.
[Amended 7-30-1963 by Ord. No. C-21, approved 7-30-1963]
Each drain must be provided with a double-extra-heavy cast-iron trap located just inside the curbline.
The trap will be equipped with a cleanout on the curb side of the trap for convenience in cleaning from
the trap to the main, the cover of which must be properly fitted and made gas- and airtight with a heavy
brass screw-cap ferrule, caulked in. The house drain must be equipped with a hand hole properly fitted
as described above, for the convenience of cleaning from the house to the main trap.
§ 100-20. Fresh-air inlet.
[Amended 7-30-1963 by Ord. No. C-21, approved 7-30-1963]
A fresh-air inlet must be connected with the drain at the main trap. In any instance in which it is
underground, it must be of extra-heavy cast iron. Said inlet must lead to the outer air and be finished
with an automatic device. The fresh-air inlet must be of the same size as the drain up to four inches in
diameter. For five- and six-inch drains, it must not be less than four inches in diameter; for seven- and
eight-inch drains, not less than six inches in diameter or its equivalent; and for larger drains, not less
than eight inches in diameter or its equivalent.
§ 100-21. Alternate location of main trap.
[Amended 7-30-1963 by Ord. No. C-21, approved 7-30-1963]
Where the trap and fresh-air inlet are desired to be included inside the house, the arrangement must
be approved in writing by the Borough Manager.
§ 100-22. Changes in pipe direction; offsets.
All sewer, soil and waste pipes must be in as direct a course as possible. Changes in direction must be
made with Y- or half-Y- branches, or one-eighth bends. Offsets in soil or waste pipe will not be
permitted except where necessary, nor, in any case, unless suitable provision is made to prevent
accumulation of rust or other obstructions. Offsets shall be made with forty-five-degree bends or similar
fittings. The use of T-Y's (sanitary T's) will be permitted on upright joints only.
§ 100-23. Exceptions.
Any person or persons desiring exception to any provisions in §§ 100-17, 100-19 or 100-20 of this
chapter will present in writing a petition to the Borough Manager for exceptions to the rulings. These
petitions will be prepared by the owner on forms provided by the borough and shall be accompanied by
a sketch showing the proposed connections. This petition must be approved by a registered plumber of
Lititz Borough. After the petition is submitted to the Borough Manager, he shall study the proposed
changes and shall then present the petition with recommendations to the Sewer Committee of Lititz
Borough Council. The Sewer Committee may accept or reject the proposed changes and inform the
applicant accordingly.
§ 100-24. Violations and penalties.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 182/233
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
Any person violating any provision of this Article, upon conviction before any District Justice of the
Borough of Lititz, shall be subject to pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is
without the financial means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such
defendant shall be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as
the District Justice deems to be just.
Article III. Sewer Service Charges
§ 100-25. Connection charges and annual rental.
[Amended 11-26-1963 by Ord. No. C-27, approved 11-26-1963; 1-26-1965 by Ord. No. C-44, approved
1-28-1965; 1-28-1969 by Ord. No. C-91, approved 1-31-1969; 4-27-1971 by Ord. No. C-118, approved
5-12-1971; 6-29-1971 by Ord. No. C-123, approved 6-29-1971; 6-24-1975 by Ord. No. C-167,
approved 6-24-1975; 5-25-1976 by Ord. No. C-186, approved 5-25-1976; 5-30-1978 by Ord. No. C-
212, approved 5-30-1978; 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978; 5-29-1984 by Ord.
No. C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984; 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 345, approved 6-25-1991]
There is hereby imposed upon the owners of improved properties served by the sewers, sewer system
and sewage treatment works (hereinafter in this Article all collectively called "sewer system") in the
Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, who have the use of said sewer system, and who
shall pay connection charges and an annual rental or charge, payable as hereinafter provided, for the
use, the following schedule of rates in accordance with the following classifications.
Application, connections to the borough's sewer system shall not be made to any premises until
application shall have been made to the Borough Manager by the owner of such premises or by
his authorized agent. Such application shall be made upon a form to be prescribed by the
borough, and, upon such application, the applicant shall state fully all purposes for which he shall
desire such sewer and shall answer fairly and without concealment all necessary questions.
Connection fee.
There is hereby imposed and fixed upon the owner of each property making a connection to
the sewer system a connection fee in an amount equal to the actual costs incurred by the
borough in respect of each connection to the sewer system. Such costs shall include the
borough's actual costs involved in opening and closing the street, making the tap, laying the
service connection and costs of all equipment and materials used in making the service
connection.
The borough's costs shall include actual labor costs at the borough's then-current rates, the
costs of all materials used to construct the lateral sewer or service connection and the
reasonable rental value of all equipment used by the borough or its agents in making such
connections. The borough shall publish, on at least an annual basis, a schedule of its thencurrent
rates for labor and equipment. The schedule of rates will be available for inspection by
the public during the borough's regular business hours.
Customer facility fee. There is hereby imposed and fixed upon the owner of each property making
a connection to the borough's sewer system a customer facility fee in an amount equal to the
borough's actual costs incurred by the borough in supplying and installing any customer facilities
required to provide sewer service to the customer's property. Such fee shall also include
installation costs thereof, when such equipment is necessary to serve the customer's property, and
inspection fees, where applicable, to confirm compliance with the borough's rules and regulations.
Tapping fee. There is hereby fixed and imposed upon the owner of each property making a
connection to the borough's sewer system a tapping fee per EDU as set forth below:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 183/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
E.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
F.
[Amended 7-26-2005 by Ord. No. C-468, approved 7-26-2005]
The capacity-related tapping fee for the sewer system shall be $2,061.9 per EDU based on
an EDU of 237 gallons per day for the sewer system.
The connection-related tapping fee for the sewer system shall be $497.70 per EDU based on
an EDU basis of 237 gallons per day.
The total sewer tapping fee shall be $2,559.60 per EDU based on EDU value of 237 gallons
per day.
Notwithstanding any other definition of an EDU as set forth in Ord. No. C-345, or the Code of
Ordinances of Lititz Borough, for the purposes of calculating sewer tapping fees, an EDU
shall be calculated on the basis of 237 gallons per day per EDU.
Date of payment.
Tapping fees imposed hereunder shall be paid to the borough at the time a property owner
makes an application for a permit to connect to the borough's sewer system.
At the time a property owner makes an application for a permit to connect to the sewer
system, the borough shall estimate the connection fee and customer facilities fee (if any) to
be payable with respect to such connection. The estimated connection fee and customer
facility fee shall be payable at the time application is made for a connection permit. The
estimated amount held by the borough shall be applied to the borough's actual costs for
making such connection and providing and installing any customer facilities which may be
necessary for such connection. After the connection is completed, if the combined amount of
the estimated connection fee and customer facility fee was in excess of the actual cost of
such connection, the borough shall refund the excess to the property owner within 30 days
following the completion of the connection. If the combined estimated connection fee and
customer facility fee is less than the borough's actual cost for making such connection, the
borough shall bill the property owner for the additional costs, which bill shall be payable within
30 days of the date of said bill.
Annual sewer rentals and regulations.
Annual sewer rental.
Sanitary sewage. The sewer rental hereby imposed shall be an annual charge, payable
as hereinafter provided, based upon the water consumption of the property served as
shown by the meter readings. The schedule of rates to be used in determining the charge
for sewer rentals by the Borough of Lititz to users of the Borough of Lititz sewer system,
based on three months' usage, shall be as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees. Dwellings or
establishments which have sources of water supply other than the Borough of Lititz water
system will be required to provide a meter at the source of supply. This meter and its
installation must be furnished by the property owner and must be acceptable to the
borough and shall be available to borough employees for meter reading at any time. The
amount of water consumed, as shown by their meter readings, will be the basis for the
sewer rental charge.
Minimum charge. The minimum charge for each meter shall be as provided for in
Chapter 55, Fees, and shall be billed as follows: on March 10, on June 10, on September
10 and on December 10 of each year. Minimum charges for additional dwelling unit(s)
served by the same meter and billed to one account shall be appropriate multiples of this
schedule. For services outside of the borough limits, the minimum charges contained
herein shall be as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees.
(Reserved)
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 184/233
(d)
[1]
(2)
(3)
G.
(Reserved)
Water not discharged into sewer system. Whenever a property upon which a sewer supply is
hereby imposed uses water from the borough water supply system[1] and/or from an
independent supply for industrial purposes such that the water so used is not discharged into
the sewer system, the quantity of water so used and not discharged into the sewer system
shall be excluded in determining the sewer rental of said property, provided that the quantity
of water so used and not discharged into the sewer system is measured by a device or
devices approved by the borough and installed without cost to the borough. The quantity used
to determine the sewer rental shall be computed by deducting the water not discharged into
the sewer system from the borough water meter readings; provided, however, that when, in
the opinion of the Borough Engineer, it is not practical to install measuring devices to
continuously determine the quantity of water not discharged into the sewer system, the
borough shall determine, in such manner and by such method as it may prescribe, the
percentage of metered water discharged into the sewer system, and the quantity of water
used to determine the sewer rental shall be the quantity measured by the water meter or
meters. Any dispute as to the estimated amount shall be determined by the borough after
notice of the estimate, whose decision on the matter shall be final for the current year.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 118, Water.
Measuring devices. All meters or other measuring devices installed or required to be used
under the provision of Subsection B(2) of this section shall be under the control of the
borough. The owner of the property upon which any such measuring device is installed shall
be responsible for its maintenance and safekeeping, and all repairs thereto shall be made at
the property owner's expense, whether such repairs thereto shall be made necessary by wear
and tear or other causes.
Industrial waste. The borough reserves the right to refuse connection to the sewer system or
otherwise to compel discontinuance of use or to compel pretreatment by any industry to prevent
discharge into the sewer system of any industrial wastes deemed to be harmful to the sewer
system or to have a deleterious effect on the sewage treatment process.
§ 100-26. Time and method of payment
[Amended 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984]
All connection charges shall be due and payable at the time of making connection. The annual sewer
rentals shall commence when the sewer system becomes available for use by the particular improved
property and thereafter shall be due and payable at the same time and by the same method that water
rentals are now due and payable. They shall be included in the same bills and shall be collected at the
same times and in the same manner as the charges for water.
§ 100-27. Penalty for late payment.
[Amended 12-30-1975 by Ord. No. C-179, approved 12-30-1975; 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2,
approved 5-29-1984]
Every customer who does not pay in full the sewer rental bill rendered within 30 days after the billing
date shall be subject to a penalty of 5% of the amount of such bill.
§ 100-28. Delinquent rentals to be lien on property.
[Amended 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984]
If any sewer bill is not paid within 60 days after the billing date, the Business Manager may place a
municipal lien on the property charged with the payment thereof in the office of the Prothonotary of
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 185/233
A.
B.
C.
Lancaster County, and it shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the filing and collection of
municipal claims.
Article IV. Inspections
[Adopted 1-30-2001, approved 1-30-2001]
§ 100-29. Right to enter premises.
The Borough of Lititz and the Lititz Sewer Authority, through their agents and employees, shall have
the right, at all reasonable times and with reasonable notice, to enter any premises connected with or
about to be connected with the sewer system in order to enforce compliance with any ordinance,
resolutions or rules and regulations adopted by the either the Borough of Lititz or the Lititz Sewer
Authority.
Chapter 101. Skateboards and Scooters
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 7-30-1991 by Ord. No. C-347, approved 7-
30-1991. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 115.
§ 101-1. Intent.
The Borough Council recognizes that the use of skateboards, roller skates, street skates, scooters,
pedalcycles and any other humanpowered device or devices has become prevalent in the borough.
The use of these devices on public areas and streets my constitute a danger to the public and the
person using these devices. In order to lessen the hazards to the public health, safety and welfare, the
Borough Council has determined to regulate the use of skateboards, roller skates, street skates,
scooters, pedalcycles or any other type of device or devices that are propelled solely by human power
in the borough.
§ 101-2. Word usage and definitions.
Word usage. In the interpretation of this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
Application. It is not the intent of this chapter to apply to baby strollers, wheelchairs or other
nonrecreational humanpowered devices.
Definitions.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
COUNCIL
The Council of the Borough of Lititz.
PEDALCYCLE
A device propelled solely by humanpowered pedals.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 186/233
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
ROLLER SKATE OR STREET SKATE
A device having multiple sets of wheels affixed to shoes and used to glide over hard surfaces
by an individual.
SCOOTER
A child's vehicle consisting of a narrow board mounted on two wheels in tandem and guided
by a handle attached to the front wheel. The child stands with one foot on the board and
pushes the device with the other foot.
SIDEWALK
That portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the
adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians.
SKATEBOARD
A device consisting of a a flat surface constructed of wood, metal, plastic, fiberglass or other
similar material with two or more wheels affixed to the underside and which is used by a
person for coasting and guided by the distribution of the weight of the user.
STREET OR TRAFFICWAY
The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public for vehicular travel.
§ 101-3. Prohibited acts.
No person shall ride upon, or utilize in any manner upon the streets, alleys and trafficways in the
Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania, or on any property owned, leased, managed or under the control
of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania, except as may be provided by the Lititz Community Center,
any skateboards, roller skates, street skates, scooters or any other human-powered devices, other
than pedalcycles, except to cross the street at appropriate designated areas or crosswalks in
compliance with signalization or right-of-way.
No person shall erect, construct or place any type of ramp designed for use with skateboards,
roller skates, street skates, scooters, pedalcycles or any other human-powered devices onto the
streets, alleys and trafficways in the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania, or on any property owned,
leased, managed or under the control of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania, except as may be
provided by the Lititz Community Center.
No person other than Lititz Borough Police Bicycle Patrol shall ride or use skateboards, roller
skates, street skates, scooters, pedalcycles or other human-powered devices on any sidewalks in
the following areas, as determined by the Lititz Borough Council:
[Amended 3-31-1992 by Ord. No. C-351, approved 3-31-1992]
The entire length of East Main Street.
The entire length of West Main Street.
The entire length of Broad Street.
No person shall ride a skateboard or use roller skates, street skates, scooters or pedalcycles on
any sidewalk located within the boundary lines of the Borough of Lititz, Pennsylvania, in a reckless
manner. No person shall ride a skateboard, roller skates, street skates, scooters or pedalcycles on
any sidewalk without exercising due care for the safety of other persons using the sidewalk, and
said person shall always give way to pedestrian traffic. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave
a skateboard, roller skates, street skates, scooter or pedalcycle upon a sidewalk in such a manner
as to obstruct pedestrian traffic.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 187/233
E.
A.
B.
C.
No person shall operate a skateboard, roller skates, street skates, scooter or pedalcycle or other
human-powered device on any private property or private parking lot without the express consent
of the owner or a responsible agent for such owner of the private property.
§ 101-4. Parental responsibility.
The parent and/or guardian of any child shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child to
violate any provision of this chapter.
§ 101-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the following
penalties:
First offense: The violator and/or his parent or guardian shall receive a written warning. Such
written warning will be kept on file by the Borough Police Department for a period of one year.
Second offense: the impoundment of the violator's skateboard, roller skates, street skates,
scooter, pedalcycle or other device for a period not to exceed 15 days and/or a sentence of a fine
of between $5 and a maximum fine of $25, plus costs of prosecution, with payment paid in full
prior to return of the mentioned device.
Third and subsequent offenses: the impoundment of the violator's skateboard, roller skates, street
skates, scooter, pedalcycle or other device for a period not to exceed 30 days and/or a sentence
of a fine of between $25 and a maximum fine of $50, plus costs of prosecution, with payment paid
in full prior to return of the mentioned device.
§ 101-6. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Lititz Borough Police Department to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 102. Speed-Timing Devices
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 8-30-1983 by Ord. No. C-276, approved 8-
30-1983. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 115.
§ 102-1. Enforcement of speed restrictions.
Any police officer, to the extent allowed by law, may enforce the speed restrictions authorized under
Subchapter F of Chapter 33 of the Vehicle Code, Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 101 et seq. (hereinafter and heretofore referred to as the "Vehicle Code"), as the same may be
hereafter amended.
§ 102-2. Electrical and/or mechanical devices authorized.
The rate of speed of any vehicle may be timed on any street or highway within the physical boundaries
of Lititz Borough, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, by a police officer using an electrical and/or
mechanical speed-timing device.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 188/233
[1]
A.
§ 102-3. Approval and testing.
All electrical and/or mechanical speed-timing devices shall be of a type approved by the Department of
Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and shall be calibrated and tested in accordance
with regulations prescribed by said Department of Transportation.
§ 102-4. Enforcement and penalty.
Every person convicted of a summary offense for a violation of any speed restriction authorized under
the Vehicle Code shall be sentenced to pay those fines and costs established by the applicable
provisions of the Vehicle Code or any subsequent Act of Assembly which amends said Vehicle Code.
Disposition of said fine or fines shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the Vehicle Code.
Chapter 103. Stormwater Management
[The current Stormwater Management Ordinance is on file in the Borough offices.]
Chapter 105. Streets and Sidewalks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961;[1]
amended in its entirety 4-30-2019 by Ord. No. C-575, approved 4-30-2019. Subsequent amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes and property maintenance — See Ch. 36.
Fees — See Ch. 55.
Parades and meetings — See Ch. 82.
Skateboards and scooters — See Ch. 101.
Speed-timing devices — See Ch. 102.
Streets in subdivisions — See Ch. 108.
Utilities — See Ch. 113.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 115.
Utilities in public ways — See Ch. A125.
Editor's Note: This chapter was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 by part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
Article I. Excavations in Streets
§ 105-1. Definitions.
The following words, used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates otherwise:
OWNER
Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have a legal title to any lot, with
or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or control of
any lot as an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner.
PERSON
Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association or corporation.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 189/233
B.
A.
B.
A.
SIDEWALK
An improved walkway along the side of the street intended for use by pedestrians.
SNOW
Precipitation depositing any accumulation on the streets and sidewalks, such as snow, sleet,
hail, ice, and freezing rain.
STREET
Any public street, avenue, road, square, lane, alley, highway or other public place located in
the Borough of Lititz and established for the use of vehicles.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine
and neuter.
§ 105-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of any kind in any of the streets
in the Borough of Lititz without first securing a permit therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 105-3. Application for permit.
Any person who shall desire to make any opening or excavation in any of the streets in the Borough of
Lititz shall make application to the Code Enforcement Officer in writing for that purpose. Such
application shall be made upon blanks to be furnished by the Borough and shall set forth the name of
the applicant, the exact location of the proposed opening or excavation and the approximate size or
depth thereof and shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that the work shall be done in
full compliance with the ordinances of the Borough and the laws of the commonwealth in relation
thereto and that the applicant shall well and truly save, defend and keep harmless the Borough from
and indemnify it against any and all actions, suits, demands, payments, costs and charges for or by
reason of the proposed opening or excavation, and all damages to persons or property resulting in any
manner therefrom or occurring in the prosecution of the work connected therewith or from any other
matter, cause or thing relating thereto.
§ 105-4. Permit fee and charge.
Before any permit shall be issued to open or excavate any public street, lane or alley within the
Borough, the applicant shall pay to the Borough Secretary a permit fee in the amount as provided
in Chapter 55, Fees, plus a charge based upon one of the schedules, as applicable, in Chapter
55, Fees.
No permit shall be issued for more than one opening or an opening larger in area than that
required for the work which is to be performed under the permit.
§ 105-5. Guards, barriers and lights required; liability for
damages; backfilling.
It shall be the duty of every person to whom a permit is issued or by whom any opening or
excavation is made as aforesaid to provide and maintain proper and adequate guards, barriers
and lights to prevent accidents, and such person shall assume all risks and be liable for all
damages by reason of such opening or excavation and by reason of any failure to properly fill the
hole or trench in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 190/233
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
After first notifying the Public Works Forman or their designee, all trenches and openings dug in
pursuance of a permit granted under this chapter shall be backfilled immediately upon completion
of the work for which such opening was made by the person securing the permit. The dirt shall be
thoroughly compacted in the excavation at six-inch intervals and filled and compacted to the level
of the rest of the street. All surplus dirt and other material shall be immediately removed.
§ 105-6. Maintenance of temporary resurfacing; liability.
The permanent resurfacing and repaving of street surface openings, made by and under a permit as
provided for in this chapter and after said opening has been properly filled in accordance with the
terms of this chapter by the person securing the permit, shall be undertaken by the permitee; provided,
further, that the temporary resurfacing and refilling of the opening shall be maintained by the permittee
until the permittee shall have permanently resurfaced said opening, which period shall extend up to
one year after the temporary filling of the opening. The Borough may require additional maintenance
by permittee. The permittee shall remain liable and assume all liability during this period in accordance
with § 105-5.
§ 105-7. Location and size of opening; interference with conduits;
tunneling.
No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curbline into the highway a distance
greater than one foot beyond the centerline of the street before refilling, and the surface of the
highway shall be restored to a condition safe and convenient for travel.
No more than 25 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at any one time.
The work of excavation shall be so conducted as not to interfere with the water mains, sewers or
their connections with the houses, or any other subsurface lines or constructions, until permission
of the proper authorities in connection with such subsurface lines or construction shall have been
obtained.
No tunneling shall be allowed without the express approval of the Borough Engineer and
permission therefor endorsed upon the permit. The backfilling of a tunnel excavation shall be
made only in the presence of the Borough Engineer or an inspector designated by him and shall
be done only in a method approved by him.
§ 105-8. Emergency work.
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe, line, construction or
apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning or responsible for such pipe, line, construction or
apparatus to commence an excavation to remedy such condition before securing a permit, provided
that application for a permit shall be made immediately and not later than the next business day
thereafter and that all other provisions of this chapter are fully complied with. If any such emergency
condition shall not be immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for such pipe, line,
construction or apparatus, the Public Works Forman or their designee, after such notice as he or she
shall deem necessary under the circumstances of the particular case, shall proceed to do the work
necessary and required by such emergency and charge same on the basis of cost plus 20% to such
owner or person.
§ 105-9. Notice of resurfacing; opening of new pavement.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 191/233
A.
The Borough shall give timely notice to all persons owning property abutting on any street within the
Borough about to be paved or improved and to all public utility companies operating in the Borough,
and all such persons and utility companies shall make all water, gas or sewer connections, as well as
any repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation of the said street, within 30 days from the
giving of such notice, unless such time is extended, in writing, for cause shown, by the Borough
Manager. New paving shall not be opened for a period of five years after the completion thereof,
except in the case of an emergency which endangers life or property and requires the opening of such
paving. If it is sought to excavate upon or open a street within five years after the completion of the
paving thereof for any other reason than an emergency as above stated, the applicant shall make
written application to the Borough Council, and a permit for such opening shall only be issued after
express approval of Council.
§ 105-10. Approval required prior to work.
No new water, sewer or gas main shall hereafter be laid or constructed, and no existing water, sewer
or gas main shall be extended, in any of the streets of the Borough until the exact location thereof and
the plan therefor shall have been first approved by the Borough Council or the Borough Secretary.
§ 105-11. Payment of charges for work done by Borough.
Payment for all work done by the Borough under the provisions in § 105-8 hereof shall be made by the
person made liable therefor under the provisions hereof within 30 days after a bill therefor is sent to
such person by the Borough. Upon failure to pay such charges within such time, same shall be
collectible by the Borough in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims.
§ 105-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, whether as principal, agent or employee, violating or assisting in the violation of any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before the Mayor or before any District Justice of
the Borough, pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment of such costs and prosecution, be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days;
provided, however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is without the financial
means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall be
permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as the District Justice
deems to be just.
§ 105-13. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to laying sidewalks or curbs or to the planting of poles.
Article II. Sidewalk and Curb Construction
§ 105-13.1. Responsibility for construction, repair and
maintenance.
It shall be the responsibility of every property owner within the Borough of Lititz to construct,
maintain and repair all sidewalks and curbs on or adjacent to his property. Failure to do so shall
subject such property owner, upon conviction thereof, to the penalties established by this article,
whether or not any notice was issued pursuant to this article.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 192/233
B.
A.
B.
The purpose of §§ 105-14 through 105-22 of this article is to provide a procedure whereby the
Borough may order the construction and/or the repair of sidewalks and curbs and to ensure that
certain standards are met by the property owner in performing such construction and/or repair.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as affecting the responsibility for the construction,
maintenance or repair of sidewalks and curbs, which is hereby declared to rest solely with the
property owner, nor shall this article be deemed in any way to make the Borough liable for any
injury or damages caused by the failure of the property owner to properly construct, maintain or
repair any sidewalk or curb, whether or not any notice was issued to the property owner by the
Borough concerning such failure, or whether or not the work was undertaken and approved
pursuant to this article.
§ 105-14. Notice to construct.
Every owner of property in the Borough of Lititz shall, on 30 days' notice from the Borough Council,
construct or reconstruct a sidewalk and/or a curb, which shall conform to all applicable requirements of
this chapter, in front of or at the side of such property.
§ 105-15. Notice to repair.
Every owner of property in the Borough of Lititz shall, on five days' notice from the Borough Council,
repair the sidewalk and/or curb in the manner stipulated in such notice, in front of or at the side of such
property.
§ 105-16. Form of notices.
The notices referred to in §§ 105-14 and 105-15 of this chapter may be written or printed or partly
written and partly printed.
§ 105-17. Specifications and materials.
All sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed, reconstructed and repaired of concrete only, according to
specifications determined by the Borough Council, provided that, in the case of sidewalks only, a
temporary bituminous surface meeting specifications determined by the Borough Council may be
applied as protective coating only until the concrete is replaced; but where a block of concrete has to
be replaced, such replacement shall be with concrete only; provided, further, that where the existing
sidewalk is of brick and at least 2/3 of such sidewalk is in good repair, such sidewalk may be repaired
with brick.
§ 105-17.1. Installation of ramps.
It shall be the duty of all owners of property abutting a dedicated or opened or public street or
highway within the Borough to construct concrete ramps, where feasible, and crosswalks when
new installations of sidewalks and/or curbs are made or when a replacement of an existing
sidewalk and/or curb is made so as to make the transition from street to sidewalk easily negotiable
for handicapped persons in wheelchairs and for other persons who may have difficulty in making
the required step up and down from curb level to street level.
All such ramps shall be constructed or installed in accordance with the designs and specifications
thereof prepared by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. The cost of such installation
shall be borne by the abutting property owners. The abutting property owners shall also keep the
same in good repair.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 193/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 105-17.2. Brick sidewalks.
New brick sidewalks may be constructed with the permission of the Borough Council and only in
accordance with the following specifications:
Excavation shall be made to the required depth and the subgrade compacted to a firm, even
surface.
A six-inch layer of 2B stone shall be placed and compacted to accept a two-inch layer of
compacted stone dust.
Brick pavers shall be set on the compacted stone dust and sand brushed into the joints.
Line and grade dimensions, general requirements and backfilling shall be in accordance with the
specifications for curb and sidewalks, updated and revised June 25, 1991.
§ 105-18. Minimum width.
On all streets, the sidewalks shall be at least five feet wide, with the exception of sidewalks passing
tree wells which shall be allowed at four feet.
§ 105-19. Construction over excavations.
In all cases where sidewalks are constructed, reconstructed or repaired over coal cellars or other
excavations under such sidewalks, such sidewalks shall be supported by iron or steel beams or girders
or stone or concrete arches. In no case shall any support of wood or other perishable materials be
used.
§ 105-20. Line and grade.
All sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed, reconstructed and repaired and the grading thereon shall
be done upon the line and grade obtained by the property owner from the Borough Inspector, and not
otherwise. Upon notice as provided in §§ 105-14 and 105-15, as the case may be, the work of
construction, reconstruction or repair shall be done by the owner or owners of such property.
§ 105-21. Notice of completion; inspection.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Public Works to determine, in the case of any individual
property, whether or not the sidewalk and/or curb shall be reconstructed or repaired and, if so, the
specific part or parts thereof to be reconstructed or repaired. Public Works may, at any time during the
course of repairing any sidewalk and/or curb, visit the site of such work to ascertain whether such work
is being done according to requirements; and he or one of his assistants or other designated Borough
official shall visit any such site for such purpose whenever requested by the property owner. Within two
days after the completion of the work of construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk or curb, it
shall be the duty of the owner of the property where such work was done to notify the Borough
Inspector of the fact, so that he may inspect such sidewalk or curb to determine whether the grade
thereof has been observed and followed.
§ 105-22. Proceeding without notice; application required.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 194/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Any property owner, upon his own initiative and without notice from any Borough authority, may
construct, reconstruct or repair a sidewalk or curb in front of or along his property, provided that such
owner shall first make application to the Borough Inspector and shall conform to the requirements of
this chapter as to line and grade and as to material used and that he shall also notify the Borough
Inspector as required by § 105-21 within two days after completion of the work.
§ 105-22.1. Violations and penalties.
Any person, whether as principal, agent or employee, violating or assisting in the violation of any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before the Mayor or before any District Justice of
the Borough, pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment of such costs and prosecution, be subject to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
30 days; provided, however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is without the
financial means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall
be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as the District
Justice deems to be just.
Article III. Snow and Ice Removal
§ 105-23. Responsibility of owners, occupants, and tenants.
It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the owner, occupant and tenant of every property
fronting upon and alongside of any of the streets in the Borough of Lititz to remove or cause to be
removed all snow from the sidewalks fronting and alongside such property within 24 hours after
the snow shall have ceased to fall.
Each owner, tenant or person in charge of any property fronting on or adjoining any street in the
Borough of Lititz shall clear a pathway of at least five feet in width on the sidewalk(s) in front of or
adjoining such property.
In the event that snow on the sidewalk has become so hard that it cannot be removed without
likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the person charged with its removal shall, within the time
mentioned in Subsection A hereof, cause enough abrasive to be put on the sidewalk to make
travel safe; and shall, as soon thereafter as weather permits, cause to be cleared a path on said
sidewalk at least five feet in width.
The owner, tenant or person shall prevent the falling of snow and/or ice from all buildings on their
property adjacent to public sidewalks.
It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the owner, occupant and tenant of every property
which has a hydrant located on or adjacent to the property boundary to remove snow, ice and
other formed precipitation from the hydrant and area within a two-foot radius of the hydrant within
24 hours after the snow shall have ceased to fall.
It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the owner, occupant and tenant of every corner
property where there exists a handicap ramp from the public sidewalk to the street to remove
snow from the ramp at least three feet in width within 24 hours after the snow shall have ceased to
fall. The responsible party shall maintain the surface of the ramp and remove any further snow
that may be plowed, pushed or otherwise deposited onto the travel width of the ramp.
§ 105-24. Depositing of snow and ice restricted.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 195/233
A.
B.
[1]
No person shall shovel, dump, throw, plow, pile or push any snow or ice removed from any driveway,
sidewalk or parking lot across or into any street or immediately next to a fire hydrant or storm sewer.
§ 105-24.1. Violations and penalties.
Every person failing to comply with § 105-23 of this article within a period of 24 hours from the
time the snow shall have ceased to fall shall be notified by the Borough to remove such snow
within a period of 24 hours from the time of said notice. Any owner, occupant or tenant who shall
fail to remove all snow from such sidewalk as noted in § 105-23 within said twenty-four-hour
period shall be sentenced to pay an initial fine not to exceed $50, with second and third fines a
minimum of $100 and $300 respectively, and in default of payment of such fines, imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that if the District Magistrate Judge determines
that the defendant is without the financial means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a
single remittance, such defendant shall be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and
over such periods of time as the District Magistrate Judge deems to be just.
Every owner, person, occupant or tenant who causes to shovel, dump, throw, plow or push any
snow or ice removed from any driveway, sidewalk or parking lot across or into any street or
immediately next to a fire hydrant or storm sewer as noted in § 105-24 shall be sentenced to pay
an initial fine not to exceed $50, with second and third fines a minimum of $100 and $300
respectively, and in default of payment of such fines, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30
days; provided, however, that if the District Magistrate Judge determines that the defendant is
without the financial means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such
defendant shall be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time
as the District Magistrate Judge deems to be just.
Chapter 108. Subdivision and Land Development
[The provisions of the Borough of Lititz Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 1993,
adopted 3-30-1993 by Ord. No. C-363, approved 3-30-1993, are on file in the office of the Borough
Manager. This ordinance supersedes former Chapter 108, Subdivision of Land, adopted 8-17-1961 as
part of Ord. No. C-1, approved 8-17-1961, as amended.]
Chapter 110. Taxation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.[1]]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Commission of Tax Collector — See Ch. 5, Art. X.
Editor's Note: Sections 1.13.1 and 1.13.2 of the former codification of the Borough of Lititz relating to
the annual real estate tax rate were deleted from the Code during codification. A copy of this ordinance,
as amended, is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary, where it is available for public inspection.
Article I. Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 12-26-1972 by Ord. No. C-135, approved 12-26-1972]
§ 110-1. Tax levied.
A per capita tax of $10 for general Borough purposes is hereby levied and assessed under authority of
the Enabling Act[1] and its amendments upon each resident or inhabitant of the Borough of Lititz over
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 196/233
[1]
[1]
(1)
A.
the age of 18 years, which tax shall be in addition to all other taxes levied and assessed by said
Borough pursuant to any other laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Such tax shall continue in
force on a calendar-year basis without annual reenactment, unless this article shall be repealed or the
rate of the tax changed.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 110-2. Collection.
Such tax shall be collected by the duly elected or appointed Tax Collector of the Borough of Lititz in the
same manner and at the same time as other Borough taxes are collected, as provided by the Enabling
Act.
§ 110-3. Bond.
The Tax Collector shall give bond secured and conditioned for the collection and payment of such
taxes as provided by law for other Borough taxes.
§ 110-4. Authority for collection.
The entry to the per capita tax duplicate and the issuance of such duplicate to the Tax Collector shall
constitute his warrant for the collection of the per capita tax hereby levied and assessed.
§ 110-5. Compensation of Tax Collector.
The expense of collection and compensation of the Tax Collector shall be allowed in the discretion of
the Borough Council, as provided in the Enabling Act, which compensation shall be fixed from time to
time by the Borough Council in the same manner as the collection of other borough taxes.
Editor's Note: As to the commission of the Tax Collector, see Ch. 5, Administration of Government, Art.
X.
§ 110-6. Tax notice.
The Tax Collector shall give notice to the taxpayers of the amount of per capita tax due under this
Article, in the same manner and at the same time as notice of other borough taxes is given.
§ 110-7. Additions to tax duplicate.
In the event that the Tax Collector shall at any time find within the borough any resident or inhabitant
above the age of 18 years whose name does not appear upon the tax duplicate, he shall report the
name of such person forthwith to the Assessor, who shall thereupon certify same unto the Borough
Council, which shall promptly certify same to the Tax Collector reporting such name, whereupon the
Tax Collector shall add such name and the assessment of the per capita tax against such person to the
duplicate of the Borough of Lititz and shall proceed to collect same.
§ 110-8. Duties and powers of Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector shall:
Give notice to taxpayers.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 197/233
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
[1]
[1]
Have the power to collect said taxes by distress.
Have the power and authority to demand and receive said tax from the employer of any
person owing any per capita tax or whose wife owes any per capita tax.
Remit such taxes to the Borough Treasurer by separate statement at the same time as other
taxes are remitted to the borough.
Allow discounts and add penalties.
Generally be subject to all the duties and shall have the rights and authority conferred upon
him by the Enabling Act.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council in enacting this Article to confer upon
the Tax Collector, in the collection of this per capita tax, all the powers, together with all the duties
and obligations, to the same extent and as fully provided in the Enabling Act.
Article II. Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. C-502,[1] approved 11-24-2009]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. II, Occupational Privilege Tax, adopted 12-
30-1975 by Ord. No. C-173, approved 12-30-1975, and Ord. No. C-501, Local Services Tax, adopted
11-24-2009 by Ord. No. C-501, approved 11-24-2009.
§ 110-9. Short title and authority.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Lititz Local Services Tax Ordinance."
This article is enacted under the authority of The Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.,[1] and
continues and redesignates the occupational privilege tax pursuant to Act No. 7 of 2007.
Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 110-10. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section, except where the context or language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BOROUGH OF LITITZ or BOROUGH
The area within the corporate limits of the Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
COLLECTOR
The person or agency appointed from time to time by the Council of the Borough of Lititz to assess
and collect the tax imposed under, and to administer the provisions of, this article.
COUNCIL OF THE BOROUGH OF LITITZ
The governing body of the Borough of Lititz.
EMPLOYER
An individual, partnership, association, corporation, governmental body, agency or other entity
employing one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis,
including a self- employed person.
FISCAL YEAR
The twelve-month period beginning January 1, 2010, and ending December 31, 2010, and
thereafter each 12 months.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 198/233
[1]
HE, HIS OR HIM
Indicates the singular and plural number as well as male, female and neuter gender.
INCOME FROM ALL SOURCES
Earned income and net profits or as otherwise defined by the Act.
INDIVIDUAL
Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation, trade or profession within the corporate
limits of the Borough of Lititz.
MANAGER
The Manager of the Borough of Lititz under whose direction this tax shall be administered and
enforced.
OCCUPATION
Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type, kind or character, including services,
domestic or other, carried on or performed within the corporate limits of the Borough for which
compensation is charged or received whether by means of salary, wages, commissions or fees for
services rendered.
SCHOOL DISTRICT
The Warwick School District.
TAX
The local services tax in the amount of $52 per annum levied by this article which was previously
referred to in this article as an occupational privilege tax.
§ 110-11. Imposition of tax.
Beginning January 1, 2010, the Borough of Lititz hereby levies and imposes on each occupation
engaged in by individuals within its corporate limits during the fiscal year of 2010 and each fiscal year
thereafter a local services tax in the amount of $52 per annum, said tax to be paid by the individuals so
engaged; provided, however, that all persons deriving less than $12,000 per year from such
occupation, and all other persons whom the Local Tax Enabling Act[1] exempts or shall in the future
exempt from paying a local services tax shall be exempt from paying the Borough of Lititz local
services tax. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the
Borough, and this tax shall continue in force on a calendar-year basis, without annual reenactment,
unless the rate of the tax is subsequently changed or this article is repealed. An individual may obtain
a prospective exemption by filing an exemption certificate on a form provided by the collector with the
collector and the individual's employer.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 110-12. Collection by employer; return and payment.
Each employer who engages in business within the Borough is hereby charged with the duty of
collecting from each of his employees engaged by him and performing for him within the Borough the
said tax of $52 per annum and making a return and payment thereof to the collector. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, no employer shall have an obligation to collect the local services tax from an employee
who presents such employer with an exemption certificate meeting all requirements of the Local Tax
Enabling Act[1] unless such person who has presented the exemption certificate earns in excess of
$12,000 in a calendar year. If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year from the
local services tax becomes subject to the local services tax for such calendar year, the employer shall
withhold the tax in accordance with the requirements of the Local Tax Enabling Act. If a person who is
subject to the local services tax ceases employment, such person shall make payment to the Borough
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 199/233
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
A.
[1]
B.
[1]
A.
of the portion of the local services tax which the employer did not withhold within 30 days after such
person ceases to be employed by such employer.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 110-13. Withholding by employer.
Each employer is hereby authorized to deduct the local services tax from each employee in his
employ, whether said employee is paid by salary, wages or commission. Each employer shall
deduct the tax in accordance with the requirements of the Local Tax Enabling Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
Local services taxes deducted from wages by an employer shall at all times be and remain the
property of this Borough and shall constitute a trust fund in the employer's hands until remitted to
the collector. Deduction of taxes from wages shall, as between the employee and the Borough,
constitute payment of the tax by the employee, regardless of any insolvency or failure to remit on
the employer's part.
§ 110-14. Employer's returns and payment.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the tax on forms to be
supplied by the collector. If the employer fails to file such return and pay such tax, whether or not
he makes collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him to such employee,
the employer shall be responsible for payment of the tax in full as though the tax had originally
been levied against him.
Each employer shall remit the local services tax withheld from employees within 30 days after the
end of each quarter of a calendar year. If the Local Tax Enabling Act is amended to require a
different schedule of remitting taxes withheld from employees, compliance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act[1] shall be considered compliance with this section.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 110-15. Individuals having more than one occupation.
Each individual who shall have more than one occupation shall be subject to the payment of the local
services tax in accordance with the provisions of the Local Tax Enabling Act[1] governing payment of
taxes by a person who has more than one employer.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 110-16. Self-employed individuals.
All self-employed individuals who perform services of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or
profession within the Borough shall be required to comply with this article on April 30 of the fiscal year
or as soon thereafter as he engages in an occupation and earns $12,000.
§ 110-17. Collection and administration of tax by Borough.
It shall be the duty of the collector to accept and receive payments of this tax and to keep a record
thereof showing the amount received by him from each employer or self-employed person
together with the date the tax was received.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 200/233
[1]
B.
C.
A.
B.
[1]
The Manager is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of this article and is
hereby charged empowered to prescribe, adopt, and promulgate rules and regulations relating to
any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions for
the processing of refund claims for the tax paid by any person who is eligible for an exemption, the
examination of the payroll records of any employer subject to this article, and the examination and
correction of any return made pursuant to this article and any payment alleged or found to be
incorrect, or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person aggrieved
by any decision of the Manager shall have the right to appeal to the Council of the Borough of
Lititz pursuant to the Local Agency Law.[1]
Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551.
The Manager or his duly authorized representative or agent is hereby authorized to examine the
books and payroll records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made by
an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each employer is hereby directed
and required to give the Manager or his duly authorized representative or agent the means,
facilities, and opportunity for such examination.
§ 110-18. Suits for collection.
In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30 days after the date above set
forth, the Borough may sue for the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article
together with the interest and penalty by any method permitted by the Act or by any other
appropriate remedy.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per annum on the amount
of said tax shall be calculated beginning with the due date of said tax, and an additional penalty of
0.5% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during which the tax
remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of this tax, the
individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of collection,
including attorneys' fees.
§ 110-18.1. Use of revenue.
The Borough shall use all revenue generated by the local services tax for purposes authorized in the
Local Tax Enabling Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 110-18.2. Prohibited acts; violations and penalties.
Any person who makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by this article, or who
refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts in his custody and control setting forth the number
of employees subject to this tax who are in his employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file any
return required by this article or whoever fails to pay local services taxes payable to such person
commits a violation of this article. If the Council of the Borough of Lititz or the collector determines that
a person has committed or permitted the commission of a violation of this article, the Borough may
institute summary criminal proceedings and/or may seek equitable relief. In the event summary
criminal proceedings are instituted, the fine for the first offense shall be not less than $100 and not
more than $600. The fine for a second offense shall not be less than $300 and not more than $600.
The fine for a third or greater offense shall not be less than $500 and not more than $600. Each day or
portion thereof in which a violation exists shall be considered a separate violation of this article. Each
section of this article which is violated shall also be considered a separate violation. The amount of any
fine imposed by a magisterial district judge or a court shall be in addition to any other fine which may
be imposed under any other provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the Borough or under any statute.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 201/233
A.
B.
[1]
C.
[1]
In default of payment of any fine, such person shall be liable to imprisonment for not more than 30
days. The action to enforce the article may be instituted against any person in charge of the business
of any employer who shall have failed or refused to file a return required by this article.
§ 110-18.3. Applicability; validity.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the Borough to levy and collect the
tax hereby imposed on any occupation not within the taxing power of the Borough under the
Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be held to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as to any
individual, such decision shall not affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax, or the
validity of the tax so imposed, on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed on an occupation by the
Borough and the Warwick School District (if said School District shall impose any such tax) shall
not exceed the limitations prescribed in Sections 2 and 8 of The Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S.
§§ 6902 and 6908,[1] and therefore the School District shall be entitled to its share of the tax (if
any) in accordance with the provisions of said Sections 2 and 8, Act 222 of 2004, and Act 7 of
2007.
Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
Article III. Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 11-27-2007 by Ord. No. C-486,[1] approved 11-27-2007]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. III, Real Estate Transfer Tax, adopted 12-30-
1986 by Ord. No. C-306, approved 12-30-1986.
§ 110-19. Imposition of tax.
The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, hereby adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of
the Tax Reform Code of 1971 and imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized under that Article subject
to the rate limitations therein. The tax imposed under this Section shall be at a rate of 1/2 of 1%.
§ 110-20. Administration.
The tax imposed under § 110-19 and all applicable interest and penalties shall be administered,
collected and enforced under the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), as amended, known
as the "Local Tax Enabling Act"; provided, that if the correct amount of the tax is not paid by the last
date described for timely payment, the Borough of Lititz, pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform
Code of 1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax, interest and penalties.
§ 110-21. Interest.
Any tax imposed under § 110-19 that is not paid by the date the tax is due shall bear interest as
prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No.
153) (53 P.S. § 7101, et seq.), as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent commonwealth taxes as
provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended,
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 202/233
[1]
known as the "Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and
Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
§ 110-22. Effective date.
The provisions of this ordinance shall become effective on and be applicable to any document made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording on or after November 27, 2007.
§ 110-23. through § 110-24. (Reserved)
Article IV. Discounts and Penalties
[Adopted 12-28-1976 by Ord. No. C-195, approved 12-28-1976]
§ 110-25. Discount for prompt payment.
[Amended 2-22-1977 by Ord. No. C-200, approved 2-22-1977]
All taxpayers subject to the payment of any real estate taxes levied and assessed by the Borough of
Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, and any per capita taxes levied and assessed under authority
of the Act of January 1, 1966, (1965) P.L. 1257, No. 511, as amended, commonly known as the "Local
Tax Enabling Act,"[1] shall be entitled to a discount of 2% from the amount of such tax upon making a
payment of the whole amount thereof within two months after the date of the tax notice.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 110-26. Penalty for late payment.
All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of any such taxes charged against them for four months
after the date of the tax notice shall be charged a penalty of 10%, which penalty shall be added to the
taxes by the Tax Collector and be collected by said Tax Collector.
Article V. Occupation Tax
[Adopted 12-26-1979 by Ord. No. C-246, approved 12-26-1979]
§ 110-27. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
OCCUPATION
Any trade, business, employment or undertaking of any type, kind or character, including services,
domestic or other, carried on or performed by residents or inhabitants of the Borough of Lititz for
which compensation is charged or received by means of wages, salary, commissions or fees for
services rendered.
RESIDENT or INHABITANT
A person 18 years of age or over who is a resident in or an inhabitant of the Borough of Lititz.
§ 110-28. Tax levied.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 203/233
[1]
[1]
A.
A tax for general borough purposes is hereby levied at the flat rate of $10 on the occupations of all
persons who are residents or inhabitants of the Borough of Lititz.[1]
Editor's Note: Legislation adopted 1-20-1980, approved, provided as follows: "Any person liable for
payment of said occupation tax with an earned income of less than $2,000 per year will be exonerated
from payment of the occupation tax for the fiscal year upon proper application to the Council of the
Borough of Lititz."
§ 110-29. Collection of tax; statutory authority.
Such tax shall be collected by the duly elected or appointed Tax Collector of the Borough of Lititz in the
same manner and at the same time as other borough taxes are collected, as provided by the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 110-30. Bond.
The Tax Collector shall give bond secured and conditioned for the collection and payment of such
taxes as provided by law for other borough taxes.
§ 110-31. Authority for collection.
The entry to the occupation tax duplicate and the issuance of such duplicate to the Tax Collector shall
constitute his warrant for the collection of the occupation tax hereby levied and assessed.
§ 110-32. Compensation of Tax Collector.
The expense of collection and compensation of the Tax Collector shall be allowed in the discretion of
the Borough Council, as provided in the Local Tax Enabling Act,[1] which compensation shall be fixed
from time to time by the Borough Council in the same manner as the collection of other borough taxes.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 110-33. Notice.
The Tax Collector shall give notice to the taxpayers of the amount of occupation tax due under this
Article in the same manner and at the same time as notice of other borough taxes is given.
§ 110-34. Additions to tax duplicate.
In the event that the Tax Collector shall at any time find within the borough any resident or inhabitant
above the age of 18 years who would be subject to the provisions of this article whose name does not
appear upon the tax duplicate, he shall report the name of such person forthwith to the Assessor, who
shall thereupon certify the same unto the Borough Council, which shall promptly certify the same to the
Tax Collector reporting such name, whereupon the Tax Collector shall add such name and the
assessment of the occupation tax against such person to the duplicate of the Borough of Lititz and
shall proceed to collect the same.
§ 110-35. Duties and powers of Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector shall:
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 204/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
[1]
Give notice to taxpayers.
Have the power to collect said taxes by distress.
Have the power and authority to demand and receive said tax from the employer of any
person owing any occupation tax or whose wife owes any occupation tax.
Remit such taxes to the Borough Treasurer by separate statement at the same time as other
taxes are remitted to the borough.
Allow discounts and add penalties.
Generally be subject to all the duties and shall have the rights and authority conferred upon
him by the Local Tax Enabling Act.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council in enacting this Article to confer upon
the Tax Collector, in the collection of this occupation tax, all the powers, together with all the duties
and obligations, to the same extent and as fully provided in the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 110-36. Effective date.
This article shall be effective on January 1, 1980, and shall continue in force from year to year without
reenactment until repealed or the rate of tax is changed.
Article VI. Real Estate Tax Rate
[An ordinance fixing the real estate tax rate for the Borough of Lititz is on file in the Borough
Secretary's office and open to public inspection during regular business hours.]
Article VII. Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 10-25-2011 by Ord. No. C-514, approved 10-25-2011[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. VII, Earned Income Tax,
adopted 12-30-1986 by Ord. No. C-304, approved 12-30-1986, as amended.
§ 110-37. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Lititz Borough Earned Income Tax Ordinance."
§ 110-38. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act shall have the meanings set forth therein. The following
terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR
The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the
tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE
January 1, 2012.
ENACTMENT
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 205/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
This article.
GOVERNING BODY
The Council of the Borough of Lititz.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT
The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. while such numbering and
provisions remain in effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as amended in the
future.
TAX
The tax imposed by this enactment.
TAXING AUTHORITY
Lititz Borough.
TAX RETURN
A form prescribed by the collector for reporting the amount of tax or other amount owed or
required to be withheld, remitted, or reported under this enactment or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR
The period from January 1 to December 31.
TCC
The Tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee the collection of earned income
tax within the TCD under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TCD
Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part of the taxing authority is
assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 110-39. Imposition of tax.
General purpose resident tax. The taxing authority hereby imposes a tax for general revenue
purposes at the rate of 0.5% on earned income and net profits of individual residents of the taxing
authority.
General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The taxing authority also imposes a tax for general
revenue purposes at the rate of 1.0% on earned income and net profits derived by an individual
who is not a resident of the taxing authority from any work, business, profession, or activity of any
kind engaged in within the boundaries of the taxing authority.
Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the current tax year and each tax
year thereafter, without annual reenactment, until this enactment is repealed or the rate is
changed.
Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority of the Local Tax Enabling
Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated
into this enactment. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required to be
applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will automatically become part of this enactment
upon the effective date of such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this
enactment, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The tax shall be collected and administered
in accordance with: all applicable laws and regulations; and regulations, policies and procedures
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 206/233
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
adopted by the TCC or by the collector. This includes any regulations, policies and procedures
adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
§ 110-40. Exemption for individuals under age 16.
This governing body finds that:
Minors of various age groups have traditionally, and with judicial sanction, been considered as
comprising separate classes for many legislative purposes; and
Minors under the age of 16 are generally unemancipated and subject to compulsory school
attendance and child labor laws, and therefore have limited earned income and net profits
and control of money such that enforcement of reporting and collection of tax hereunder
against them would yield inconsequential amounts and be unduly difficult, expensive, and not
in the public interest.
For these reasons, individuals under the age of 16 years are exempt from liability for the tax.
§ 110-41. Exemption for residents of other states if similar
exemption in other state.
Individuals who are residents of a state other than Pennsylvania are exempt from liability for the
tax, but only if all local governments of the locality where the individual resides either:
Impose no tax on the income of a Pennsylvania resident derived from activities within the
locality; or
Exempt that income from tax.
In addition to this exemption from municipal nonresident tax, certain credits and deductions
against tax are permitted under certain circumstances as provided in applicable law and
regulations.
§ 110-42. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax year shall file tax returns and
pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 110-43. Employer withholding, remittance, and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold and remit tax, and file tax returns in accordance with the Local
Tax Enabling Act.
§ 110-44. Tax collector.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the collector. The Borough designates the
Lancaster County Tax Collection Bureau as its collector.
§ 110-45. Interest, penalties, costs, and fines.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 207/233
[1]
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines in accordance with the
Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by the collector in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
Article VIII. Volunteer Service Credit Program
[Adopted 1-29-2019 by Ord. No. C-569, approved 1-29-2019]
§ 110-46. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings given to them in
this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATION
The form completed by a volunteer and submitted to the Fire Chief or the President of the
Ambulance Agency for signature certifying eligibility according to the Volunteer Service Credit
Program criteria.
CERTIFIED VOLUNTEER
A volunteer with the volunteer fire company or volunteer ambulance agency listed under § 110-
47C who has complied with and is certified under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EARNED INCOME TAX
A tax on earned income and net profits levied under Chapter 3 of the act of December 31, 1965
(P.L.1257, No. 511), known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act."[1]
ELIGIBILITY LIST
The document provided by the Fire Chief or Ambulance President that contains the names of
those volunteers who he/she certifies as eligible according to the Volunteer Service Credit
Program Criteria.
ELIGIBILITY PERIOD
The timeframe when volunteers may earn credit under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE CALL
Any emergency call to which a volunteer responds, including travel directly from and to a
volunteer's home, place of business or other place where he/she shall have been when the call
was received.
MUNICIPAL REAL ESTATE PROPERTY TAX
An annual local governmental tax on real property or personal property based on a tax rate (so
many dollars or cents per $100 value of property.)
REQUEST FOR CREDIT
The form completed by a certified volunteer and submitted to the Municipal Treasurer, requesting
earned income tax and/or real property tax credit.
VOLUNTEER
A member of a volunteer fire company or ambulance agency.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 110-47. Volunteer Service Credit Program.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 208/233
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
Establishment. Lititz Borough hereby establishes a Volunteer Service Credit Program. The goal of
the program is to encourage membership and service in the community's volunteer fire companies
and/or ambulance agencies.
Program criteria. The Council shall establish, by resolution, the annual criteria that must be met to
qualify for credits under the program based on the following:
The number of emergency response calls to which a volunteer responds to or duty crews
he/she has been committed to.
The total amount of time served by a volunteer on administrative and other support services,
including but not limited to:
Fundraising.
Providing facility or equipment maintenance.
Financial bookkeeping or fundraising.
Fire prevention and public education.
Other events or projects that aid the financial viability, emergency response or
operational readiness of a volunteer fire company.
Eligible entities. The Volunteer Service Credit Program is available to residents of Lititz Borough
who are Volunteers of the following volunteer fire companies and ambulance agencies that
provide service to Lititz Borough:
Lititz Fire Company No. 1.
Brunnerville Fire Company.
Rothsville Volunteer Fire Company.
Brickerville Fire Company.
Warwick Community Ambulance Association.
Rothsville Volunteer Fire Company Ambulance.
Eligibility period. A volunteer must meet the minimum criteria, set by resolution under this section,
during the eligibility period to qualify for the tax credits established under § 110-48. For 2018, and
each subsequent year thereafter, the eligibility period shall run from January 1 through December
31.
Injured volunteers.
A volunteer who is injured during an emergency response call may be eligible for future tax
credits. The injury must have occurred while responding to, participating in, or returning from
an emergency response call with one of the entities listed under § 110-47C.
An injured volunteer shall provide documentation from a licensed physician with the
application required under § 110-47G stating that their injury prevents them from performing
duties to qualify as a certified volunteer. In such a case, the injured volunteer shall be deemed
a certified volunteer for that tax year.
An injured volunteer shall annually submit the application required under § 110-47G, along
with updated documentation from a licensed physician stating that the injury still exists and
prevents them from qualifying as a certified volunteer. The injured volunteer shall again be
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 209/233
F.
G.
H.
(a)
(b)
(1)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
deemed a certified volunteer for that tax year. An injured volunteer shall only be deemed a
certified volunteer for a maximum of five consecutive tax years.
Recordkeeping/eligibility list. The Fire Chief of each volunteer fire company and President of each
ambulance agency listed under § 110-47C shall keep specific records of each volunteer's activities
in a service log to establish credits under the Volunteer Service Credit Program. Service logs shall
be subject to review by the Borough Council, the State Fire Commissioner and the State Auditor
General. The Fire Chief and President shall annually transmit to the Borough an eligibility list of all
volunteers that have met the minimum criteria for the Volunteer Service Credit Program. The
eligibility list shall be transmitted to the Borough no later than January 30 of each year. The Fire
Chief and ambulance association President of each participating volunteer agency shall post the
eligibility list in an accessible area of the volunteer agency's facilities.
Application. Volunteers that have met the minimum criteria of the Volunteer Service Credit
Program shall sign and submit an application for certification to their Fire Chief or President. The
Fire Chief shall sign the application if the volunteer has met the minimum criteria of the Volunteer
Service Credit Program. Certified volunteers wishing to receive an earned income tax credit for the
previous year shall complete and submit a request for tax credit, including all required
documentation, to the Borough Treasurer between January 1 and April 30. Requests shall not be
accepted by the Borough after April 30 of each year.
Municipal review. The Borough Treasurer shall review the requests for credit under the Volunteer
Service Credit Program and shall cross reference them with the eligibility list. The Borough
Council shall acknowledge receipt of the eligibility list as submitted by the fire company or
ambulance agency.
§ 110-48. Earned income tax credit.
Each certified volunteer shall be eligible to receive a tax credit of his/her paid earned income tax levied
by the Borough. The tax credit, payable to the volunteer, has been established to be $100. The tax
credit applies only the portion of the earned income tax ultimately payable to Lititz Borough.
Claim.
A certified volunteer may submit a request for credit of his/her Borough earned income tax
liability. The tax credit shall be administered as a refund by the Borough Treasurer, to be
distributed by June 14. A certified volunteer shall file the following with the Borough
Treasurer:
Completed and signed request for credit; and
Copies of all W-2 forms (or quarterly vouchers with cancelled checks if self-employed).
Rejection of tax credit claim.
The Borough Treasurer shall reject a claim for a tax credit if the taxpayer is not on the
eligibility list or fails to provide the documents required under § 110-48A(1).
If the Borough Treasurer rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be notified in writing of the
decision. The notice shall include the reasons for the rejection and provide the method of
appealing the decision pursuant to § 110-50.
Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the Borough Treasurer to the Borough
Manager.
§ 110-49. Municipal real estate property tax credit.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 210/233
(a)
(b)
(1)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
Each certified volunteer shall be eligible to receive a tax credit of his/her paid municipal real estate
property tax levied by the Borough. The tax credit, payable to the volunteer, has been established to be
20%. The tax credit applies only to the portion of the municipal real estate property tax ultimately
payable to Lititz Borough.
Claim.
A certified volunteer may submit a request for credit of his/her municipal real estate property
tax liability. The tax credit shall be administered as a refund by the Borough Treasurer, to be
distributed by June 14. A certified volunteer shall file the following with the Borough
Treasurer:
Completed and signed request for credit; and
Copies of proof of municipal real estate property tax paid.
Rejection of tax credit claim.
The Borough Treasurer shall reject a claim for a tax credit if the taxpayer is not on the
eligibility list or fails to provide the documents required under § 110-49A(1).
If the Borough Treasurer rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be notified in writing of the
decision. The notice shall include the reasons for the rejection and provide the method of
appealing the decision pursuant to § 110-50.
Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the Borough Treasurer to the Borough
Council President.
§ 110-50. Appeals.
Earned Income Tax and Municipal Real Estate Property Tax Credit Appeals:
Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under § 110-48 or 110-49 shall have a right to appeal said
decision to the Borough Council President.
A taxpayer shall have 30 days from the date set forth on the notice of decision to appeal a
decision or rejection of claim.
All appeals of decisions under § 110-48 or 110-49 shall follow the provisions of the Act of May 5,
1998, P.L.301, No. 50, known as the "Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights."[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 110-51. Violations and penalties.
In accordance with Section 79A31 of the authorizing Act for this volunteer service program, any person
who knowingly makes/provides or conspires to make/provide a false service record report under the
Act commits a misdemeanor of the first degree punishable by a fine of $2,500.
§ 110-52. Severability.
In the event that any provision, section, sentence, clause, or part of this article is held to be invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or part of
the article, it being the intent of the Lititz Borough Council that such remainder shall be and shall
remain in full force and effect and for this purpose the provisions of this article are hereby declared to
be severable.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 211/233
[1]
§ 110-53. When effective.
This article shall be effective five days after adoption.
Chapter 113. Utilities
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz: Art. I, 10-31-1989 by Ord. No. 327,
approved 10-31-1989. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 36.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 50.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 108.
Zoning — See Ch. 122.
Utility franchises — See Ch. A125.
Article I. Underground Utility Districts
[Adopted 10-31-1989 by Ord. No. 327, approved 10-31-1989]
§ 113-1. Definitions.
Whenever in this Article the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall
have the following definitions:
POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES AND ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES
Poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces,
transformers, insulators, cut-outs, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and
appurtenances located above ground in a district and used or useful in supplying electric,
communication or similar or associated services.
RECONSTRUCTION
Removal and replacement of the cartway, curbs or sidewalks in or along the public right-of-way
involving a distance of at least 300 linear feet.
SUBDIVISION
A plan presented and approved pursuant to the borough's Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.[1]
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT or DISTRICT
That area in the borough within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
are prohibited pursuant to the provisions of this Article.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 108, Subdivision of Land.
§ 113-2. Legislative findings.
The Borough of Lititz is empowered by the terms of the Borough Code codified at 53 P.S. § 47301 to
establish reasonable districts within which the underground placement of poles, overhead wires and
associated overhead structures is required. In an effort to promote the health, welfare and safety of the
residents of the Borough of Lititz, the Borough Council has determined to create certain underground
utility districts. In order to allow affected utility companies and others the time necessary to plan the
relocation of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures to conduits in the districts, the
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 212/233
A.
B.
Borough Council has also determined to require relocation only in conjunction with reconstruction and
subdivisions.
§ 113-3. Establishment of districts.
The borough's Historic District, as previously defined, and all subdivisions approved after the effective
date of this Article are hereby established as underground utility districts. Any future amendments or
alterations to the Historic District shall also be amendments or alterations to the underground utility
district. In the case of a new subdivision, the area depicted in the subdivision plot plan shall become an
underground utility district upon the filing with the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds of the
approved subdivision plot plan.
§ 113-4. Notice to utility companies.
The borough shall give owners of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures as much
notice as possible of anticipated reconstruction projects. In all cases, the borough shall attempt to give
such notice at least 100 days prior to the initiation of reconstruction projects. The borough shall give
notice by delivering a description of the project to the owners at their principal places of business.
§ 113-5. Unlawful acts.
In the case of the underground utility district that is coterminous with the borough's Historic
District, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, maintain, continue, employ
or operate poles, overhead wires and associated structures along any street in the district after
completion of a reconstruction of that street.
In the case of underground utility districts coterminous with new subdivisions, it shall be unlawful
for any person or utility to erect, construct, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead
wires and associated structures in the district.
§ 113-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Article shall be fined not less than $100
nor more than three $300 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 113-7. When effective.
This Article shall take effect 30 days after it is approved.
Chapter 115. Vehicles and Traffic
[All vehicle and traffic legislation of the Borough of Lititz is on file in the Borough offices and may be
examined there during regular business hours.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 34.
Skateboards and scooters — See Ch. 101.
Speed-timing devices — See Ch. 102.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 213/233
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
Chapter 117. Warrantless Arrests
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz: Art. I, 6-25-1996 by Res. No. 545,
approved 6-25-1996. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Intermunicipal police assistance — See Ch. 12.
Curfew — See Ch. 41.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 84.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
§ 117-1. Guidelines to be followed prior to arrest.
Prior to making an arrest under 42 PA. C.S.A. § 8902 any police officer shall ensure that:
He/she has probable cause to believe that at least one of the following summary offenses is being
committed:
18 P.S. § 5502 (disorderly conduct).
18 P.S. § 5505 (public drunkenness).
18 P.S. § 5507 (obstructing highways and other public passages).
18 P.S. § 6308 (purchase, consumption, possession transportation of liquor or malt or brewed
beverages).
The suspect's conduct is ongoing;
The conduct constituting the offense is in the officer's view; and
The conduct imperils the personal security of any person or endangers public or private property.
§ 117-2. Procedure following arrest.
Following an arrest pursuant to 42 Pa. C.S.A. § 8902, the officer shall forthwith satisfy the procedures
set forth in Pennsylvania Rule of Criminal Procedure, Rule 71 (procedure following arrest without
warrant).
Chapter 118. Water
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961.[1] Sections
118-6, 118-20C(2), 118-22A, 118-26, 118-30B, 118-32, 118-34B, 118-35, 118-36, 118-37, 118-38 and
118-39 amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Other amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 55.
Plumbing — See Ch. 89.
Sewers — See Ch. 100.
Editor's Note: This chapter was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
Article I. General Provisions and Regulations
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 214/233
A.
§ 118-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them by this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CONNECTION FEE
A single charge levied against a property owner for each physical or actual connection of a
service pipe to the borough's water system, which fee is related to the actual costs of
physically connecting the service pipe to the water system and the borough's fees and costs
incurred in inspection of such connection.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 346, approved 6-25-1991]
CUSTOMER
Any person, as hereinafter defined, owning any premises receiving water from the Lititz
waterworks.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT or EDU
The EDU shall be equal to a consumption rate of 400 gallons of water per day, per unit.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 346, approved 6-25-1991]
INDIVIDUAL DWELLING UNIT
A single-family residence, apartment unit or mobile home occupied by one or more persons.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 346, approved 6-25-1991]
PERSON
Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or corporation.
SERVICE CONNECTION
Connecting facilities between the borough's water main and the customer's service pipe, in
general consisting of valve or corporation stop at the water main and all piping therefrom
terminating with the curb stop and curb box located at the curb if such exists or, in a case
where no curb exists, to the edge of the paved or traveled portion of the street, road or
highway or, in the case of rights-of-way over private property, to the edge of the right-of-way
line.
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 346, approved 6-25-1991]
SERVICE PIPE
That pipe leading from the curb stop or meter setting to the premises of a customer.
STREET
Any street, alley or lane.
SUPERINTENDENT
The Superintendent of the Water-works.
TAPPING FEE
A charge levied against the property owner of each property connecting to the borough's
water system, computed on an equivalent dwelling unit basis as authorized by Act 203 of
1990[1]
[Added 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 346, approved 6-25-1991]
WATERWORKS
Includes the plant, fixtures, mains, reservoirs, rights-of-way and all other properties and
facilities now or hereafter operated and maintained by the Borough of Lititz in order to collect,
treat and distribute water for municipal purposes and for the use of the inhabitants thereof,
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 215/233
[1]
B.
A.
B.
and shall also include those officers and employees of the borough collectively engaged in
the management, operation and maintenance thereof.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 306.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the feminine
and the neuter.
§ 118-2. Operation and maintenance of waterworks.
The waterworks of the Borough of Lititz, as it is now constituted or shall hereafter, as the Borough
Council may from time to time direct, be extended through other portions of the borough, shall be
operated and maintained under the provisions of this chapter, subject to the authority of the borough at
any time to amend, alter, change or repeal same.
§ 118-3. Charge and management of waterworks.
The Borough Council shall have charge and management of the waterworks, subject to such
delegation of authority to the Superintendent as is provided herein.
§ 118-4. Protective regulations.
For the protection of the waterworks, the following regulations shall be in force:
No person shall damage, injure, molest, disturb or interfere with any pipe, hydrant, stop cock,
reservoir, machinery, tool or any other property belonging to or appertaining to the waterworks.
Where any such damage, injury, molestation, disturbance or interference takes place, the Water
Superintendent shall be notified immediately by anyone observing such.
No person shall, except with authority from the Superintendent or any person subordinate to him
in the waterworks, open, close, interfere with or attach to or connect with any fire hydrant, stop
valve or stop cock belonging to the borough; provided, however, that in case of fire, the opening
and use of the fire hydrants needed in the fighting thereof shall be under the direction of the Fire
Chief of the borough.
§ 118-5. Extension of distributing pipe.
Extension of the distributing pipe shall be made only after petition of the owners of real estate or their
authorized agents along the proposed line and upon their entering into an agreement which shall
satisfy the Council that an annual revenue will accrue to the borough as a result of such extension
equal to 7% of the cost of laying the pipe, dating from the time when water is turned into same for
public use, provided that the above rule shall not apply in cases where it may become necessary to
supply short gaps in the distributing pipe in order to perfect the circulation or to increase the size of
pipe already laid, which shall be done as the Borough Council shall direct, provided further that, in any
instance, the Borough Council may, in its discretion, extend any distributing main without petition or
refuse any petition.
Article II. Connection to System
§ 118-6. Application for service.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 216/233
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
[1]
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
[Amended 6-29-1971 by Ord. No. C-122, approved 6-29-1971; 5-25-1976 by Ord. No. C-187,
approved 5-25-1976; 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978; 6-25-1991 by Ord. No.
346, approved 6-25-1991]
Application. Connections to the borough's water system shall not be made to any premises until
application shall have been made to the Borough Manager by the owner of such premises or by
his authorized agent. Such application shall be made upon a form to be prescribed by the
borough, and, upon such application, the applicant shall state fully all purposes for which he shall
desire such water and shall answer fairly and without concealment all necessary questions.
Connection fee.
There is hereby imposed and fixed upon the owner of each property making a connection to
the water system a connection fee in an amount equal to the actual costs incurred by the
borough in respect of each connection to the water system. Such costs shall include the
borough's actual costs involved in opening and closing the street, making the tap, laying the
service connection, setting the curb stop, setting the meter and costs of all equipment and
materials used in making the service connection.
The borough's costs shall include actual labor costs at the borough's then-current rates, the
costs of all materials used to construct the service connection and the reasonable rental value
of all equipment used by the borough or its agents in making such connections. The borough
shall publish, on at least an annual basis, a schedule of its then current rates for labor and
equipment. The schedule of rates will be available for inspection by the public during the
borough's regular business hours.
Customer facility fee. There is hereby imposed and fixed upon the owner of each property making
a connection to the borough's water system a customer facility fee in an amount equal to the
borough's actual costs incurred by the borough in supplying and installing a water meter to
measure the customer's water usage. Such fee shall also include the costs of backflow
preventors, pressure-reducing valves and related equipment and installation costs thereof, when
such equipment is necessary to serve the customer's property.
Tapping fee.[1]
There is hereby fixed and imposed upon the owner of each property making a connection to
the borough's water system a tapping fee per EDU as set forth below:
Component Fee
Capacity $540.00
Distribution $840.00
$1,380.00 (total)
In addition to the capacity and distribution components of tapping fees, there is hereby
imposed on each property making a connection to the water system in the Kissel Hill area a
special facilities tapping fee of $240. The Kissel Hill area shall be that area determined by the
borough's consulting engineers and indicated on the borough's water system map.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Fees, § 55-1.9A, for amendments to tapping fees.
Date of payment.
Tapping fees imposed hereunder shall be paid to the borough at the time a property owner
makes an application for a permit to connect to the borough's water system.
At the time a property owner makes an application for a permit to connect to the water
system, the borough shall estimate the connection fee and customer facilities fee to be
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 217/233
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
payable with respect to such connection. The estimated connection fee and customer facility
fee shall be payable at the time application is made for a connection permit. The estimated
amount held by the borough shall be applied to the borough's actual cost for making such
connection and providing and installing a water meter for such connection. After the
connection is completed, if the combined amount of the estimated connection fee and
customer facility fee was in excess of the actual cost of such connection and water meter
installation, the borough shall refund the excess to the property owner within 30 days
following the completion of the connection. If the combined estimated connection fee and
customer facility fee is less than the borough's actual cost for making such connection, the
borough shall bill the property owner for the additional costs, which bill shall be payable within
30 days of the date of said bill.
§ 118-7. Service connections.
[Amended 3-21-1981 by No. C-262, approved 3-21-1981]
No person except an authorized employee of Lititz Borough shall tap any main or distributing pipe.
Service connections shall be installed by the borough from street main to the service line run out
from the premises to the curbline.
All single-dwelling units, each semidetached dwelling unit and each townhouse dwelling unit shall
have a separate individual service lateral from street main to dwelling unit.
Multi-unit apartment dwellings and commercial/industrial premises may be served by laterals of
the proper size as approved by the borough and metered through a common meter or multi-unit
meters as desired by the owner and approved by the borough. (All meters are to be individual
master meters.)
New services. The owner of the premises shall be liable for all connection fees, tapping fees and
customer facility fees payable in connection with providing service to said property. The borough
shall own and be responsible for the service connection from the main to and including the curb
stop or meter setting.
[Amended 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 346, approved 6-25-1991]
Replacement service connections. In the event that an existing service lateral not in compliance
with this section must be replaced between main and curb stop or meter setting, service laterals
must be installed to individual units. The owner(s) shall be liable for all costs on a pro rata basis
for opening and closing the street, making the additional tap, laying the additional service line,
setting the additional curb stop and meter, and costs of all materials used for additional service
lines. There will be no charge for a street opening permit, application or tapping fees. The
owner(s) shall run out additional services from the premises to the curb stop or meter setting. The
borough will advise the owners, if possible, in advance of repair work which may require additional
service lines to be laid. In no event shall owners be liable for more than 50% of the costs for
opening and closing the street in the event a common trench can be utilized for replaced and new
service lines. The borough shall own and be responsible for service lines from the main to and
including the curb stop or meter setting.
Subdivision. In the event that premises having an existing service lateral not in compliance with
this section is to be subdivided, the owners shall bring each proposed individual unit(s) into
compliance. The owner will be liable for all costs for new services in accordance with Subsection
D.
§ 118-8. Curb stops to be provided.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 218/233
Every street connection, at the time of making thereof, shall be provided with a separate stop cock and
box, at the curb of the sidewalk when practicable, for each property to be supplied. The stop and box
at the curb shall be the property of the borough, placed there for its sole use.
§ 118-9. Drain valves required in premises.
Every service pipe shall have a drain valve inside the premises of the customer, so placed and kept as
always to be ready for use. Such drain valve shall control the entire supply of water for the premises
and shall drain all the pipes and fixtures thereon. It shall be secure from frost and shall be provided
with a handle approved by the Superintendent. Such handle shall be kept in a convenient place ready
for immediate use.
§ 118-10. Drain valves in multiple dwellings to be independent.
Premises intended to be occupied by more than one establishment, firm or family shall be provided
with an independent drain valve conveniently located within each separate establishment or apartment
into which water is to be introduced, so that any portion of such premises which may be separately
occupied can be drained without interfering with the supply of water from other occupants.
§ 118-11. Property owner responsible from curb to premises.
The service pipe from the curb stop or meter setting to the premises shall be the property of the owner
of the premises to which it is connected, and all repairs to same shall be made at the expense of such
property owner, who shall keep his pipes and fixtures in good repair, in such condition as to avoid
unnecessary waste and protected against frost, at his own expense. The property owner shall be held
responsible for any waste or damage that may result from any defective service pipe or other pipe
located within the premises or any fixture.
§ 118-12. Borough employees not to do work on private
premises; exception.
The borough shall furnish no material or labor for use upon private premises, except when a person
shall contract with the borough to lay mains up to a building.
§ 118-13. Laying depth of service pipes.
All service pipes shall be laid at least three feet below the surface of the ground.
§ 118-14. Permission required for private extensions.
No person shall extend or cause to be extended any service pipe from one property to another without
special permission having been granted therefor by the Borough Council and without a stop being
placed in such a position that the supply of water for either property can be shut off without closing off
the supply of water for the other property.
§ 118-15. Plumbers to notify of violation; inspection.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 219/233
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
Whenever borough water is introduced into any premises or changes are made in any water pipes or
fixtures that might affect the supply or the security against frost, the plumber doing such work shall
notify the Superintendent of the location and nature of such work, and the Superintendent shall
thereupon cause such work to be promptly and carefully inspected. No water shall be turned on
permanently in any location until the Superintendent shall be satisfied that every applicable provision of
this chapter has been complied with. Prior to such approval of the Superintendent, water shall be
turned on by the plumber only as may be necessary in order to test his work.
§ 118-16. Drainage in pipes.
All pipes shall be free from jogs and snags that might obstruct the drainage, shall be securely fastened
to their places and shall be so pitched that when the stop is turned off, all water shall flow toward the
waste.
§ 118-17. Pipes to be protected against frost.
All pipes and fixtures shall be placed in such a manner as will secure them against frost. Whenever it
may become necessary to carry any pipe along any outer wall, beneath any floor, through any open
space or through any place where such pipe might be affected by drafts of air, such pipe shall be
thoroughly boxed and packed or otherwise protected against cold.
§ 118-18. Location of meters.
All plumbing for business buildings, manufacturing establishments and other premises where large
quantities of water may be used shall be done in such a manner as to enable the water consumed to
be measured by a single meter installation located as near to the main as is feasible.
§ 118-19. Extensions from existing installations.
In extending pipe from existing installations, the same rules shall apply as are applicable under this
chapter to new installations.
§ 118-20. Fire protection lines.
The following regulations shall apply to the installation and testing of pipes for fire protection purposes:
Pipes for fire protection purposes shall be fitted with only such fixtures as are needed for fire
protection, and such fixtures shall be sealed by the Superintendent.
Whenever practicable, the hose shall be kept attached to the fixtures suspended conveniently for
use in case of fire. No person shall use any fire protection fixture for other than fire protection
purposes.
Any person having connections used for fire protection may test such apparatus at any time under
the following conditions:
Written notice shall be given to the Superintendent that such test is desired, and the
Superintendent shall then assign to the applicant a day and hour when such test can begin.
All tests shall be in the presence of the Superintendent or an employee of the waterworks
assigned by the Superintendent for that purpose, and the sole duty of the Superintendent or
such employee shall be to remove and replace the seal of the Superintendent used on such
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 220/233
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
fire protection apparatus and to note the time required for his presence. The person at whose
request such test is made shall pay to the borough for that test the applicable fee provided for
in Ch. 55, Fees.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
No seal shall be removed from any fire protection apparatus except in case of fire, and in such
case the owner or occupant of the premises where such apparatus is located shall make a written
report of that fact within 24 hours of its occurrence.
Each pipe used for fire protection purposes shall have installed on it a one-inch corporation cock
with Mueller threads, which shall be accessible through an approved manhole.
Each person having a private fire service shall, upon the demand of the Superintendent, furnish
the Superintendent with a complete and accurate diagram of all piping and fixtures connected with
the fire service line.
§ 118-21. Plumber regulations.
All plumbers working in the borough shall observe the following regulations and requirements:
No plumber shall do any work within the borough that would result in a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
Every plumber shall, within 24 hours after the discovery thereof, report to the Superintendent any
plumbing installation or use of water that is contrary to any of the provisions of this chapter which
might come to his notice.
During the winter months, every plumber shall make a weekly report to the Superintendent of all
frozen water pipes and fixtures that may have required his attention or may have been brought to
his attention during the preceding week, with the cause thereof, as nearly as he can ascertain.
All reports of plumbers shall be made upon official forms obtainable at the office of the
Superintendent.
§ 118-22. Conservation of water.
The following regulations shall be in effect in order to prevent waste or excessive use of water or
irregularity of pressure:
The Superintendent may inquire into and investigate into the cause of any unusual flow or
apparently unnecessary waste of water upon any premises in the borough. If said flow or waste
results from want of repair of any pipe or other fixture, he shall require the owner of such premises
to make such necessary repairs within 10 days, and upon failure of such owner to make such
repairs within the time limit, he shall have authority to shut off the supply of water leading to such
premises. Such water shall not again be turned on until the customer shall have made the
required repairs and paid the fee as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees, which is hereby established
for such service.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
No person shall use the borough water or permit it to be used for any purpose other than that
declared at the time the permit mentioned in § 118-6 was obtained.
No person shall allow water fixtures to run excessively.
No person shall allow water to flow continuously in order to guard against freezing or for any other
purpose, except by special permission from the Superintendent, provided that the Superintendent
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 221/233
E.
F.
may at any time rescind such special permission when he shall deem its continuance to be
detrimental to the operation of the waterworks and the service available to other customers.
Except in case of fire, no large current of water shall be permitted to flow at intervals causing
irregularity of pressure. The use of fixtures that may create water hammers is prohibited.
The Mayor may, in time of emergency, restrict the uses to which water may be put.
Article III. Meters
§ 118-23. Installation; interference.
[Amended 6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 346, approved 6-25-1991]
The borough shall furnish and install all meters, which shall be of sufficient size in the judgment of the
Superintendent to provide adequate service to the premises. Upon notice by the Superintendent that a
meter is to be installed in a premises, the owner thereof shall, at his own expense, prepare the pipe,
ready for the installation of the meter, as well as any stop, waste or valve required to drain it. When
convenient to place a meter at the curb, a suitable meter box or masonry pit shall be built, at the
expense of the owner of the property, such box to have a suitable cover with lock and key. When not
convenient, the meter shall be placed within the property line of the customer in a convenient,
accessible and unobstructed position within a building. No person other than an authorized officer or
employee of the waterworks shall install, remove, inspect or change, alter or interfere with any meter or
any of the dials thereof. A broken seal shall be considered sufficient evidence of interference with a
meter. The water meters furnished by and installed by the borough shall be subject to the customer
facilities fees and connection fees set forth in § 118-6.
§ 118-24. Customer to bear cost of repairing injured meters.
The customer shall, at all times, properly protect the meter upon his property from injury by frost or
other cause and shall be responsible for the cost of all repairs to any such meter damaged through his
negligence or that of any of the members of his family, his agents, workmen, servants or employees,
such charge to be payable in full at the time when his next water bill shall be due and payable.
§ 118-25. Bills to be estimated if meter fails to register.
If a meter fails to register or otherwise becomes out of order, such meter shall be replaced or repaired
by the waterworks, and the current bill shall be estimated and determined by the average amount of
water used in a previous corresponding period. No deduction from any water bill shall be allowed on
account of leakage.
§ 118-26. Tests.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
If any customer shall doubt the correctness of the meter measuring the water delivered to his
premises, he may, upon application to the Superintendent and upon making a deposit as set forth in
the schedule referred to below, to defray the cost thereof, have such meter tested by the
Superintendent or any person designated by him to do so. Should such tests show the meter to be
registering more than 1% over the accurate amount, such deposit shall be refunded to the customer,
and his account shall be adjusted accordingly, and the entire cost of such test shall be borne by the
waterworks; otherwise the customer shall forfeit the deposit made. The deposit to be required shall be
as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 222/233
A.
B.
A.
§ 118-27. Additional meters.
In all cases where the service connection serves a building occupied by two or more establishments,
firms or families, only one meter shall be furnished by the waterworks to such building, and the water
service charge as registered by such meter shall be chargeable to and payable by the owner of such
building, provided that, in any such case, the owner of the building may, after having given notice
thereof to the Superintendent, furnish and install separate meters, at his own expense, for each portion
of such building separately occupied. Such meters shall be of a type approved by the Superintendent,
and the owner shall be responsible for all expenses incurred in the testing, maintenance and repair of
such meters. After the installation of such separate meters, separate bills shall be furnished to the
owner of such property for each separately metered portion of such building.
§ 118-28. All services to be metered.
No customer shall take or receive, or permit to be taken or received, any water from the waterworks
except such water as shall have passed through and been registered by a meter, unless Council shall
have given written authorization, such authorization to be renewed each year.
Article IV. Billing
§ 118-29. Change of ownership.
[Amended 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984]
The owner of a metered property shall notify the Business Manager immediately of any change of
ownership of such property so that the Business Manager may cause the meter to be read so that the
final consumption shall be billed to the seller and all future billings shall be made to the buyer.
§ 118-30. Rates; owner liable for payment.
Rates. Rates shall be established by resolution from time to time by the Borough Council. All bills
for water service shall be rendered to the owner of the premises to which water is furnished by the
waterworks, and such owner shall in all cases be liable for payment of such bills.
Owner's responsibility. All bills for water service shall be rendered to the owner of the premises to
which water is furnished by the Borough of Lititz water system, and such owner shall in all cases
be liable for payment of such bills. Original bills shall be sent to the property owner with a
duplicate to the tenant(s). If requested by the property owner, second notices and all future
correspondence will be with the property owner only.
[Amended 7-30-1963 by Ord. No. C-21, approved 7-30-1963; 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224,
approved 10-31-1978; 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2]
§ 118-31. Payment of bills.
[Amended 7-30-1963 by Ord. No. C-21, approved 7-30-1963; 12-30-1975 by Ord. No. C-178,
approved 12-30-1975; 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2]
Bills for water service shall be payable at the Lititz Borough Office as follows:
Water bills for established accounts will be rendered quarterly on the 10th day of March, June,
September and December each year.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 223/233
B.
C.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
Water bills for water used on construction projects for final bills or for occasional use shall be
payable on demand.
Every customer who does not pay the water bill rendered in full within 30 days after the billing date
shall be subject to a penalty of 5% of the amount of such bill.
§ 118-32. Delinquent bills.
[Amended 7-30-1963 by Ord. No. C-21, approved 7-30-1963; 12-30-1975 by Ord. No. C-178,
approved 12-30-1975; 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978; 5-29-1984 by Ord. No.
C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984; 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. C-391, approved 12-30-1996]
If any water bill is not paid within 45 days after the billing date, it shall be the duty of the Business
Manager to give the customer 10 days' notice, in writing, of the fact that such water bill is delinquent
and that at the end of such ten-day period all water service to the premises upon which such water bill
is delinquent shall be shut off and shall not be resumed until such delinquent water bill has been paid
in full, including a penalty, plus a charge as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees, for restoring the service.
Any time a customer's property is posted by the borough with a ten-day notice, the customer shall be
responsible to pay the borough an administrative fee to cover the cost of such posting as set forth in
Chapter 55, Fees.
§ 118-33. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 118-33, Effective date, added 12-30-1975 by Ord. No. C-178, approved 12-30-
1975, was repealed 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984.
§ 118-34. Abatement of charges.
[Amended 7-30-1963 by Ord. No. C-21, approved 7-30-1963]
The following regulations shall govern abatement of charges for water:
No abatement of charges shall be allowed for vacancy of premises, except from the date that
written notice shall have been given by the owner of such premises, at the office of the Business
Manager, that such premises shall have been vacated.
[Amended 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984]
No abatement of charges shall be allowed for absence of the customer unless the water shall
have been shut off from the premises at the request of the customer, for which a charge shall be
made as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees. An additional charge as provided for in Chapter 55,
Fees, shall be made upon restoration of such service.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
Whenever water shall be used on any metered premises for fire protection or for fire fighting, in an
actual case of fire or conflagration, no charge shall be made for the water so used, and the
amount of water so used shall be ascertained by comparison with the average used of water
during a corresponding billing period, as shown by the meter.
Article V. Administration and Enforcement; Penalties
§ 118-35. Shutting off water.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978; 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2,
approved 5-29-1984]
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 224/233
The Director of Public Services is hereby authorized to limit or discontinue the supply of water in cases
of emergency and to shut off the supply of waste for repairs or extensions, he being the sole judge of
the time and necessity.
§ 118-36. Right of entry.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978; 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2,
approved 5-29-1984]
The Director of Public Services or any employee of the Borough of Lititz so assigned by the Director of
Public Services shall have the right at any and all reasonable hours to enter upon or into any premises
to which water is supplied by the Borough of Lititz water system for the purpose of inspecting any pipe
or fixture, setting, reading, repairing or replacing any meter, turning water off or on and enforcing the
provisions of this chapter generally. No person shall deny entrance to any such premises to the
Director of Public Services or any assigned borough employee hereby granted such right of entry.
§ 118-37. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-224, approved 10-31-1978]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300, plus costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment of such costs and prosecution, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days;
provided, however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is without the financial
means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such defendant shall be
permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over such periods of time as the District Justice
deems to be just.
Article VI. Rates
§ 118-38. Rate schedule.
[Amended 11-26-1963 by Ord. No. C-26, approved 11-26-1963; 1-28-1969 by Ord. No. C-90, approved
1-31-1969; 4-27-1971 by Ord. No. C-117, approved 5-12-1971; 6-24-1975 by Ord. No. C-166,
approved 6-24-1975; 5-30-1978 by Ord. No. C-211, approved 5-30-1978; 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-
224, approved 10-31-1978]
The schedule of rates to be used in determining charges by the Borough of Lititz to consumers of
water of the Borough of Lititz water system, based on three months' usage, shall be as provided for in
Chapter 55, Fees.
§ 118-39. Minimum charge.
[Amended 11-26-1963 by Ord. No. C-26, approved 11-26-1963; 1-28-1969 by Ord. No. C-90, approved
1-31-1969; 4-27-1971 by Ord. No. C-117, approved 5-12-1971; 6-24-1975 by Ord. No. C-166,
approved 6-24-1975; 5-30-1978 by Ord. No. C-211, approved 5-30-1978; 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-
224, approved 10-31-1978; 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984]
The minimum charge for each meter shall be as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees, and shall be billed
as follows: on March 10, on June 10, on September 10 and on December 10 of each year. Minimum
charges for additional dwelling unit(s) served by the same meter and billed to one account shall be
appropriate multiples of this schedule. For service outside of the borough limits, the minimum charges
contained herein shall be as provided for in Chapter 55, Fees.
§ 118-40. through § 118-41. (Reserved)
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 225/233
[1] Editor's Note: Former § 118-40. Billing for additional water usage, as amended, and § 118-41, Effective
date, as amended, were repealed 5-29-1984 by Ord. No. C-279-2, approved 5-29-1984.
Chapter 120. Weeds
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz 10-31-1978 by Ord. No. C-223, approved
10-31-1978; Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and sanitation — See Ch. 66.
§ 120-1. Obnoxious growths prohibited; cutting schedule;
violations declared nuisances.
[Amended 11-30-2004 by Ord. No. C-457, approved 11-30-2004]
No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any property within the Borough of Lititz shall
permit any weeds or any vegetation whatsoever not grown for human consumption or planted for some
useful or ornamental purpose to grow or remain upon such premises so as to exceed a height of six
inches or to throw off any unpleasant or noxious odor or to conceal any filthy deposit or to create or
produce pollen. Any weeds or other vegetation growing upon any premises in the borough in violation
of any of the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the
health, safety, cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the borough.
§ 120-2. Removal, trimming or cutting required.
The owner of any premises, as to vacant premises or premises occupied by the owner, or the occupant
thereof, in case of premises occupied by other than the owner thereof, shall remove, trim or cut all
weeds, grass or other vegetation growing or remaining upon such premises in violation of the
provisions of § 120-1 of this chapter.
§ 120-3. Enforcement; removal by borough; collection of costs.
The Borough Council, or any officer or employee of the borough designated thereby for the purpose, is
hereby authorized to give notice by personal service or by United States mail to the owner or occupant,
as the case may be, of any premises whereon weeds, grass or other vegetation is growing or
remaining in violation of the provisions of § 120-1 of this chapter, directing and requiring such occupant
to remove, trim or cut such weeds, grass or vegetation so as to conform to the requirements of this
chapter within five days after issuance of such notice. In case any person, firm or corporation shall
neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such notice within the period of time stated therein, the borough
authorities may remove, trim or cut such weeds, grass or vegetation; and the cost thereof, together
with any additional penalty authorized by law, may be collected by the borough from such person, firm
or corporation in the manner provided by law.
Chapter 122. Zoning
[The provisions of the Borough of Lititz Zoning Ordinance of 1994, adopted 11-29-1994 by Ord. No. C-
379, approved 11-29-1994, are on file in the office of the Borough Manager. This ordinance
supersedes former Chapter 122, Zoning, adopted 8-25-1959 by Ord. No. 288, approved 8-25-1959, as
amended.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 18.
Building construction — See Ch. 36.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 226/233
[1]
Flood hazard control — See Ch. 62.
Sewers — See Ch. 100.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 103.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 105.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 108.
Water — See Ch. 118
Appendix
Chapter A125. Franchises
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Council of the Borough of Lititz as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavation and occupation of streets — See Ch. 105.
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Exhibit A Cable Franchise Agreement
Article I. Gas Company
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ A125-1. Permission granted to lay pipes under public ways.
Permission is granted and vested in the Lititz, Manheim and Ephrata Gas Company, its successors
and assigns, duly incorporated under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to lay pipes or
conduits under any or all of the public streets, squares, highways or alleys for the purpose of supplying
gas to such persons, partnerships and corporations residing therein as may desire same, at a
compensation not to exceed $1.50 per thousand cubic feet.
§ A125-2. Company to indemnify Borough; bond.
During the process of excavation, said Lititz, Manheim and Ephrata Gas Company, its successors,
lessees and assigns shall use all proper precautions at night and during the day to prevent accidents.
Said company shall at all times indemnify and save harmless the Borough of and from all and every
claim for damages to person and property which may arise from the excavation and laying of its pipes
and the subsequent maintenance and operation of same, and before any work is done on the
excavation of any streets of the Borough, said Lititz, Manheim and Ephrata Gas Company shall make
and execute to the Borough a bond in the penal sum of $5,000 conditioned as above, which bond shall
be approved by the Borough Council; that said bond be further conditioned that said gas company
keep in good repair the streets, alleys and squares occupied for a period of one year from the time
same may have been disturbed by said company, its successors, lessees, assigns or employees.
§ A125-3. Method of excavating and backfilling.
Said Lititz, Manheim and Ephrata Gas Company shall lay its pipes at such depth as may be
designated by the Borough, under the direction and supervision of its Street Committee, consistent
with the necessities of the company, and in the excavation of the streets shall replace all excavated
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 227/233
[1]
materials in the order in which they were removed from the trench; that is to say, in such manner as to
leave the hand materials or macadam on top and, in the case of a paved street, to replace same in a
manner satisfactory to the Borough, and they shall also ram the ground hard and tight so that the
surface of the street shall present a level and unbroken contour, the same as it presented before any
excavations were made.
§ A125-4. Company to furnish streetlighting.
Said Lititz, Manheim and Ephrata Gas Company its successors, lessees and assigns shall at any and
all times hereafter furnish and erect as many suitable posts and five-foot-burners with Welsbach
mantels as may be required by said Borough Council, to be placed as designated by the borough
authorities for the purpose of lighting the borough streets at a cost not to exceed $32 per annum per
lamp and maintain same, said lights to be kept burning from sunset to sunrise.
Article II. Electric Company
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This Article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ A125-5. Permission granted to occupy public highways.
Permission is granted to the Edison Electric Company, its successors and assigns to occupy, with
poles and wires, such of the public highways of the Borough of Lititz, as may be necessary for
conducting the business of supplying electric energy to the Borough of Lititz and the inhabitants
thereof.
§ A125-6. Erection of poles.
The erection of such poles shall be at the direction of the Highway Committee of the Borough Council,
subject to existing ordinances and regulations relating to electric light, telephone and telegraph poles
within the limits of the Borough of Lititz.
§ A125-7. Company to indemnify borough.
Said Edison Electric Company, its successors or assigns shall indemnify and keep harmless the
Borough of Lititz from any damage that may be done to persons or property by reason of the erection
or operation and maintenance of said poles and wires.
§ A125-8. Right of borough to use poles.
The Borough of Lititz shall have the right to use said poles to support and convey such wires as said
borough may now or hereafter desire to operate for fire alarm, police or other similar purposes, said
wires to be erected as not to interfere with or impair the usefulness of the wires of the said company.
Article III. Local Telephone Company
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 228/233
[1] Editor's Note: This Article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ A125-9. Permission granted to construct apparatus in public
ways.
Permission is granted to the Denver and Ephrata Telephone and Telegraph Company, its successors
and assigns to construct, maintain and operate its posts, poles, cables, wires and all other necessary
overhead apparatus on, over and along, and its conduits, ducts, mains, pipes, cables, wires,
manholes, terminal and distributing poles and all other necessary underground appliances on, in,
under and through, the streets, alleys and highways within the limits of the Borough of Lititz, County of
Lancaster, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to use the property of others and to permit others to use
its property, upon such arrangements as may be agreed to.
§ A125-10. Erection of poles and construction of conduits.
All poles erected by said company shall extend not less than 20 feet above the surface of the ground
and shall be so located as in no way to interfere with the safety or convenience of persons traveling on
or over said streets, alleys and highways; and in the installation and maintenance of its underground
system, said company shall not open or encumber more of any street, alley or highway than will be
necessary to enable it to perform the work with proper economy and efficiency; and in all permanently
improved streets, said company shall lay such conduits as it may desire at the time of making such
permanently improved streets. The erection of poles and construction of conduits under the provisions
of this Article shall be subject to the supervision of the Chairman of the Street Committee, and said
company shall replace and properly relay that portion of any sidewalk or street pavement which may
have been displaced or damaged by it in the construction and maintenance of its system.
§ A125-11. Right of borough to use poles and conduits.
Space on the poles erected and in the conduits constructed under the provisions of this Article may be
used, free of charge, for the purpose of carrying wires of any fire alarm or police telegraph system
owned and maintained by said borough or fire company of the Borough of Lititz, provided that said
wires are placed and maintained in such a manner as may be prescribed by said company and which
will not result in interfering with or impairing the operation or use of said company's property or service
or will endanger its property or employees.
§ A125-12. Maintenance of apparatus in safe condition; company
to indemnify borough.
The company shall maintain all posts, poles, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, mains, pipes, manholes
and all other apparatus erected or constructed under the provisions of this Article in good and safe
order and condition and shall at all times fully indemnify, protect and save harmless said borough from
and against actions, claims, suits, damages and charges and against all loss and necessary
expenditures arising from the erection, construction and maintenance of its system or from its neglect
or failure to maintain said apparatus in good and safe order and condition.
§ A125-13. Monopoly not granted.
Nothing in this Article shall be construed to grant unto said company any exclusive right or to prevent a
grant of similar privileges to other companies.
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 229/233
[1]
§ A125-14. Other applicable ordinances and laws.
The company shall be governed by all legal ordinances of a general nature affecting its operations in
the Borough of Lititz that are now in force and enacted under and by the virtue of the police powers of
said borough or the laws of the commonwealth, as well as such ordinances hereafter so enacted,
provided that the terms, conditions and regulations prescribed therein do not impair or abridge the
permission contained in this Article.
Article IV. Long Distance Telephone Company
[Adopted 8-17-1961, approved 8-17-1961[1]]
Editor's Note: This Article was adopted and approved 8-17-1961 as part of Ord. No. C-1, which
ordinance adopted the prior codification of the Borough of Lititz.
§ A125-15. Permission granted to construct underground
conduits in public ways.
Permission is granted to the Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania, its successors and assigns to
construct, maintain and operate such underground facilities, consisting of conduits, ducts, mains,
pipes, cables, wires, manholes and other necessary appliances, on, in, under, across, through and
along the streets, alleys and highways within the present or future limits of the Borough of Lititz,
County of Lancaster, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as it may require in connection with its aerial
system, and to use the underground facilities of other companies and to permit other companies that
possess authority to operate within the borough to use its underground facilities upon such
arrangements as the two companies may agree to.
§ A125-16. Construction of conduits.
The construction of conduits and manholes under the provisions of this article shall be subject to the
supervision of the Chairman of the Street Committee, and said company shall replace and properly
relay that portion of any sidewalk or street pavement which may have been displaced by it in the
construction and maintenance of its underground facilities; and in the installation and maintenance of
its underground system, said company shall not open or encumber more of any street, alley or
highway than will be necessary to enable it to perform the work with proper economy and efficiency.
§ A125-17. Right of Borough to use poles and conduits.
Space on the poles or in the conduits constructed under the provisions of this article may be used, free
of charge, for the purpose of carrying wires of any fire alarm or police telegraph system owned and
maintained by said Borough, provided that said wires are placed and maintained in such a manner as
may be prescribed by said company and that no use shall be made of such space by said Borough
which will result in interfering with or impairing the operating or use of said company's property or
service or will endanger its property or employees.
§ A125-18. Maintenance of apparatus in safe condition; company
to indemnify Borough.
The company shall maintain all conduits, ducts, mains, pipes, cables, wires, manholes and all other
apparatus constructed under the provisions of this article in good and safe order and condition and
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 230/233
[1]
[1]
shall at all times fully indemnify, protect and save harmless said Borough from and against all actions,
claims, suits, damages and charges and against all loss and necessary expenditures arising from the
construction and maintenance of its system or from its neglect or failure to maintain said apparatus in
good and safe order and condition.
§ A125-19. Monopoly not granted.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to grant unto said company any exclusive rights or to prevent
a grant of similar privileges to other companies.
§ A125-20. Erection and painting of poles.
All poles shall be erected under the supervision of the Street Committee, and such as are erected shall
be painted white.
§ A125-21. Other applicable ordinances and laws.
The company shall be governed by all legal ordinances of a general nature effecting its operations in
the Borough of Lititz that are now in force and enacted under and by virtue of the police powers of said
Borough or the laws of the commonwealth, as well as all such ordinances hereafter enacted, provided
that the terms, conditions and regulations prescribed therein do not impair or abridge the permission
contained in this article.
Article V. Cable Television
[Adopted 9-25-2018 by Res. No. 885,[1] approved 9-25-2018]
Editor's Note: This resolution also superseded former Art. V, Cable Television, adopted 2-26-2013 by
Res. No. 795, approved 2-26-2013.
§ A125-22. Grant of franchise.
The Borough Council does hereby approve the Cable Franchise Agreement negotiated with Comcast,
including all of the terms and conditions contained therein, and does hereby authorize the execution of
such Agreement. A copy of the Agreement is attached hereto as Exhibit A.[1]
Editor's Note: Said exhibit is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ A125-23. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this resolution is for any reason held
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not render this resolution invalid.
Disposition List
Chapter DL. Disposition List
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Borough of Lititz adopted since 1-1-2005,
indicating its inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling legislation which is not
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 231/233
general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code material (NCM).] Consult municipal
records for information regarding prior legislation.
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. C-462 2-22-2005 Warwick Regional Recreation
Commission
Ch. 10, Art. II
Ord. No. C-465 4-26-2005 Zoning amendment See Ch. 122
Ord. No. C-466 5-31-2005 Sewers amendment Ch. 100
Ord. No. C-468 7-26-2005 Fees amendment; sewers
amendment
Ch. 55; Ch. 100
Ord. No. C-469 7-26-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Res. No. 678 11-29-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-478 10-31-2006 Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 16, Art. III
Ord. No. C-480 12-27-2006 Property maintenance Ch. 36, Art. II
Ord. No. C-481 12-27-2006 Uniform construction codes Ch. 36, Art. I; Ch. 50;
Ch. 59; Ch. 77; Ch. 89;
Ch. 92
Ord. No. C-484 1-30-2007 Cable television franchise Expired
Res. No. 704 4-24-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-485 7-31-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-486 11-27-2007 Realty transfer tax Ch. 110, Art. III
Ord. No. C-488 Sewer revenue note NCM
Res. No. 717 1-29-2008 Dumping, collecting and storing
of garbage and rubbish
amendment
Ch. 66, Art. I
Ord. No. C-489 7-29-2008 Hydronic heaters Ch. 70
Ord. No. C-493 11-25-2008 Uniform construction code
amendment
Ch. 36, Art. I
Ord. No. C-495 12-30-2008 Police Pension Plan See Ch. 16, Art. III
Ord. No. C-496 12-30-2008 Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 16, Art. II
Ord. No. C-497 1-27-2009 Official Map amendment Ch. 80
Res. No. 735 1-27-2009 Records retention schedule NCM
Res. No. 736 1-27-2009 Disposition of records NCM
Res. No. 737 1-27-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-498 3-31-2009 Street acceptances NCM
Ord. No. C-499 5-26-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment See Ch. 115
Ord. No. C-500 11-24-2009 Intermunicipal agreements:
Intergovernmental Insurance
Cooperative
Ch. 10, Art. III
Res. No. 750 11-24-2009 Earned income tax amendment Expired
Res. No. 751 11-24-2009 Per capita tax amendment See Ch. 110, Art. I
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 232/233
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Res. No. 752 11-24-2009 Occupation tax amendment See Ch. 110, Art. V
Res. No. 753 11-24-2009 Realty transfer tax amendment See Ch. 110, Art. III
Res. No. 755 11-24-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-501 11-24-2009 Local services tax Superseded by Ord.
No. 502
Ord. No. C-502 11-24-2009 Local services tax Ch. 110, Art. II
Ord. No. C-503 12-29-2009 Real estate tax rate amendment See Ch. 110, Art. VI
Ord. No. C-504 1-26-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment See Ch. 115
Ord. No. C-505 1-26-2010 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 16, Art. III
Res. 1-26-2010 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 16, Art. III
Ord. No. C-506 1-26-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment See Ch. 115
Ord. No. C-509 9-28-2010 Bond NCM
Res. No. 762 9-28-2010 Pension plan reduced
amortization option
NCM
Ord. No. C-510 10-26-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-511 12-28-2010 2011 real estate tax rate See Ch. 110, Art. VI
Ord. No. C-512 9-27-2011 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 105
Res. No. 771 9-27-2011 Pension plan actuarial value
determination
NCM
Ord. No. C-513 10-25-2011 Police Pension Fund
amendment
See Ch. 16, Art. III
Ord. No. C-514 10-25-2011 Earned income tax amendment Ch. 110, Art. VII
Res. No. 777 11-29-2011 Encouraging youth education
and youth participation in local
government
NCM
Ord. No. C-515 12-20-2011 2012 real estate tax rate See Ch. 110, Art. VI
Ord. No. C-516 1-31-2012 Intermunicipal agreements:
Susquehanna Municipal Trust
Ch. 10, Art. IV
Ord. No. C-518 2-28-2012 Right-of-way acceptance NCM
Res. No. 782 3-27-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-519 6-19-2012 Land acquisition NCM
Ord. No. C-520 8-28-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment See Ch. 115
Ord. No. C-521 11-27-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment See Ch. 115
Ord. No. C-522 12-18-2012 2013 real estate tax rate See Ch. 110, Art. VI
Res. No. 792 12-18-2012 Civil Service Commission rules
and regulations
Ch. 7
Res. No. 795 2-26-2013 Cable television franchise Ch. A125, Art. V
Ord. No. C-523 6-25-2013 Rental units: residential rental
unit regulation
Ch. 94, Art. I
Ord. No. C-524 6-25-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment See Ch. 115
Ord. No. C-527 8-6-2013 Sewers amendment Ch. 100
8/14/2020 Borough of Lititz, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LI0684?guid=LI0684&children=true 233/233
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Res. No. 805 8-6-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-528 8-27-2013 Intermunicipal agreements:
regional emergency services
Ch. 10, Art. V
Ord. No. C-529 10-29-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment See Ch. 115
Res. No. 819 5-27-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 55
Ord. No. C-535 10-28-2014 Fireworks Ch. 60
Ord. No. C-536 11-25-2014 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 16, Art. III
Ord. No. C-538 1-27-2015 Intermunicipal agreements:
capital funding for the Lititz Rec
Center
Ch. 10, Art. VI
Res. No. 833 3-31-2015 Procurement NCM
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
C-540 9-29-2015 Curfew Amendment Ch. 41 29
C-543 1-26-2016 See Ch. 122 29
C-544 3-29-2016 Floodplain
Management
Ch. 62 29
C-547 7-26-2016 See Ch. 122 29
C-550 See Ch. 108 29
C-554 12-27-2016 See Ch. 122 29
C-556 4-25-2017 Parking Prohibited See Ch. 115 29
C-557 5-30-2017 Snow Emergency
Procedures
See Ch. 115 29
C-560 10-24-2017 Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 105 29
C-561 11-28-2017 Non-Uniformed
Employee's Pension
Plan
See Ch. 16 29
C-569 1-29-2019 Taxation: Volunteer
Service Credit Program
Ch. 110, Art. VIII 29
C-570 1-29-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 55 29
C-572 2-26-2019 Administration of
Government: Health
and Sanitation Advisory
Committee Amendment
Ch. 5, Art. V 29
C-574 4-30-2019 Right-of-Way
Management
Ch. 96 29
C-575 4-30-2019 Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 105 29
885 9-25-2018 Franchises: Cable
Television Amendment
Ch. A125, Art. V 29
892 1-29-2019 Hazard Mitigation Plan NCM 29

Zoning
ordinance
Founded 1756 - Incorporated 1888
Adopted: April 27, 2010
Last Amended: June 20, 2020
Borough of Lititz
7 south broad street Lititz, pa 17543 PHONE (717) 626-2044 FAX (717) 626-1329
LANCASTER COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
Revision History
Final Revisions: February 11, 2010
Adopted: April 27, 2010
Amended: June 19, 2013
Amended: July 29, 2014
Amended: November 29, 2016
Amended: December 27, 2016
Amended: August 29, 2017
Amended: November 27, 2018
Last Amended: June 30, 2020
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents
BOROUGH OF LITITZ ZONING ORDINANCE TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 100.
Short Title
§100 pg.1
SECTION 101.
Purpose
§101 pg.1
SECTION 102.
Community Development Objectives
§102 pg.1
SECTION 103.
Borough Ordinances
§103 pg.2
SECTION 104.
Rules of Interpretation
§104 pg.2
SECTION 105.
Terms Defined
§105 pg.3
ARTICLE II
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION 200. Establishment of Districts §200 pg.45
SECTION 201. Zoning Map §201 pg.45
SECTION 202. Interpretation of District Boundaries §202 pg.46
SECTION 203. Use Adjustment on District Boundaries §203 pg.46
SECTION 204. Application of District Regulations §204 pg.46
SECTION 205. Uses Not Provided For §205 pg.47
SECTION 206. R-S Residential District §206 pg.48
SECTION 207. R-1 Residential District §207 pg.49
SECTION 208. R-2 Residential Districts §208 pg.51
SECTION 208.1 R-2A Residential Districts §208.1 pg.52
SECTION 209. R-A Residential Districts §209 pg.55
SECTION 210. Office and Professional Districts §210 pg.57
SECTION 211. Commercial District §211 pg.58
SECTION 211.1 Neighborhood Storefront District (NSD) §211.1 pg.60 SECTION 211.2 Neighborhood Storefront District-1 (NSD-1) §211.2 pg.64 SECTION 212. General Business District §212 pg.67
SECTION 213. Industrial Districts §213 pg.69 SECTION 214. Historical Areas and Historic Overlay District §214 pg.71 SECTION 215. Floodplain Districts §215 pg.71 SECTION 216. Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay
District (TNDO) §216 pg.87
SECTION 217. Form-Based Code Regulations for Districts §217 pg.99
SECTION 218. Downtown Overlay District §218 pg.99
SECTION 219. Lititz Run Revitalization District §219 pg.101
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents
ARTICLE III
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
SECTION 300.
Supplementary Regulations
§300 pg.104
SECTION 301.
Accessory Buildings
§301 pg.104
SECTION 302.
Temporary Structures for Dwelling Purposes
§302 pg.105
SECTION 303.
Water Supply and Sewage Facilities Required
§303 pg.106
SECTION 304.
Exceptions
§304 pg.106
SECTION 305.
Required Street Access
§305 pg.107
SECTION 306.
Yard and Lot Requirements
§306 pg.107
SECTION 307.
Off-Street and On-Street Parking Requirements
§307 pg.108
SECTION 308.
Off-Street Loading Requirements
§308 pg.114
SECTION 309.
Outdoor Storage
§309 pg.115
SECTION 310.
Fences and Walls
§310 pg.116
SECTION 311.
Sign Regulations
§311 pg.117
SECTION 312.
Private Outdoor Swimming Pools
§312 pg.129
SECTION 313.
Landscaping, Screening and Buffering
§313 pg.130
SECTION 314.
Environmental Performance Standards
§314 pg.132
SECTION 315.
Tennis Courts
§315 pg.132
SECTION 316.
Satellite Antennas
§316 pg.132
SECTION 317.
Solar Energy Systems
§317 pg.132
SECTION 318.
Lighting Standards
§318 pg.133
SECTION 319.
Radio Broadcasting/Receiving Antennae
§319 pg.136
SECTION 320.
Ownership & Maintenance of Common Open Space
§320 pg.136
SECTION 321.
Supplementary Form-Based Code Regulations
§321 pg.139
SECTION 322.
Demolition
§322 pg.139
ARTICLE IV
CRITERIA FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND OTHER SELECTED USES
SECTION 400.
General Procedures for Special Exceptions
§400 pg.144
SECTION 401.
Home Occupations and Home Businesses
§401 pg.146
SECTION 402.
Child or Adult Day Care Facilities
§402 pg.148
SECTION 403.
Adult-Oriented Businesses
§403 pg.151
SECTION 404.
Bed and Breakfast Inns
§404 pg.152
SECTION 405.
Places of Worship
§405 pg.153
SECTION 406.
Conversion Apartments
§406 pg.153
SECTION 407.
Educational Institutions
§407 pg.153
SECTION 408.
Essential Services
§408 pg.154
SECTION 409.
Commercial Kennels, Animal Hospitals and Vet Clinics
§409 pg.154
SECTION 410.
Park, Playground or Recreation Areas
§410 pg.155
SECTION 411.
Social and Fraternal Clubs and Organizations
§411 pg.155
SECTION 412.
Public/Municipal Buildings and Uses
§412 pg.156
SECTION 413.
Funeral Homes
§413 pg.156
SECTION 414.
Cemeteries
§414 pg.156
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents
SECTION 415.
Animals and Animal Shelters
§415 pg.157
SECTION 416.
Accessory Apartments
§416 pg.157
SECTION 417.
Hospitals, Nursing/Convalescent Homes
§417 pg.158
SECTION 418.
Business Conversions
§418 pg.158
SECTION 419.
Greenhouses/Nurseries
§419 pg.159
SECTION 420.
Hotels and Motels
§420 pg.159
SECTION 421.
Recycling Centers/Plants
§421 pg.159
SECTION 422.
Front Porch Additions
§422 pg.160
SECTION 423.
Wireless Communication Facilities
§423 pg.161
SECTION 424.
Transitional Housing
§424 pg.178
SECTION 425.
Wind Energy Systems
§425 pg.179
SECTION 426.
Historical Overlay District
§426 pg.184
SECTION 427.
Continuing Care Retirement Community
§427 pg. 190
SECTION 428.
Theatres
§428 pg. 191
SECTION 429.
Stream Restoration
§429 pg. 191
ARTICLE V
NON-CONFORMING USES, NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES AND NON-CONFORMING LOTS
SECTION 500.
Non-Conforming Uses
§500 pg.193
SECTION 501.
Construction Approved Prior to Ordinance
§501 pg.194
SECTION 502.
Non-Conforming Buildings and Structures
§502 pg.194
SECTION 503.
Non-Conforming Lots of Record
§503 pg.195
ARTICLE VI
ZONING HEARING BOARD AND OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS
SECTION 600.
Zoning Hearing Board Creation and Appointment
§600 pg.196
SECTION 601.
Organization of the Zoning Hearing Board
§601 pg.197
SECTION 602.
Expenditures for Services
§602 pg.197
SECTION 603.
Hearings of the Zoning Hearing Board
§603 pg.197
SECTION 604.
Jurisdiction
§604 pg.200
SECTION 605.
Functions
§605 pg.202
SECTION 606.
Parties Appellant before Zoning Hearing Board
§606 pg.203
SECTION 607.
Time Limitations
§607 pg.203
SECTION 608.
Stay of Proceedings
§608 pg.203
SECTION 609.
Validity of Ordinance: Substantive Questions
§609 pg.204
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents
ARTICLE VII
ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 700. Enforcement §700 pg.205
SECTION 701. Certificates and Permits §701 pg.205
SECTION 702. Records §702 pg.207
SECTION 703. Violations and Penalties §703 pg.208
SECTION 704. Appeals to Court §704 pg.210
SECTION 705. Power of Amendment §705 pg.210 SECTION 706. Enactment of Zoning Ordinance Amendments §706 pg.210 SECTION 707. Curative Amendments §707 pg.212 SECTION 708. Publication, Advertisement & Availability of Ordinances §708 pg.215 SECTION 709. (Reserved) §709 pg.215
SECTION 710. Repealer §710 pg.215
SECTION 711. Validity §711 pg.215
SECTION 712. Effective Date §712 pg.216
ARTICLE VIII
FORM BASED CODE REGULATIONS
SECTION 800.
Purpose
§800 pg.217
SECTION 801.
Manual of Written & Graphic Design Standards
§801 pg.217
Overall Goals
§802 pg.218
Building Location and Size
§803 pg.221
Parking Location Streetscape & Street Walls
§804 pg.223
§805 pg.224
Streets, Alleys, and Blocks
§806 pg.225
Streets, Alleys & Blocks: Close
§806 pg.226
Pedestrian Circulation & Connectivity
§807 pg.227
Public/Private Place Typologies Transect
§808 pg.229
Place Design/Enhancement Best Practices
§808 pg.230
Greens
§809 pg.231
Plazas & Squares
§809 pg.233
Pocket Parks
§809 pg.234
Pedestrian Pockets
§810 pg.235
Street Sections Typologies
§811 pg.236
Deck Parking Structure
§812 pg.238
Block Diagrams
§813 pg.239
Single-Family Detached
§814 pg.240
Single-Family Semi-Attached
§815 pg.241
Single-Family Attached
§816 pg.242
Live/Work Units
§817 pg.244
Multi-Family
§818 pg.244
Multi-Family (with Interior Parking Court)
§819 pg.245
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Table of Contents
Commercial Store §820 pg.247
Parking Structure §821 pg.248
Main Street Environment §822 pg.249
Anchor Store §823 pg.250
Mixed-Use & Adaptive Re-Use §824 pg.250
Historic Resource Protection §825 pg.253
INDEX
APPENDIX
A. Lot Diagrams
B. Sign Types
C. Parking Configurations
D. Building Heights & Roof Types
§ 100. § 102.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 1
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 100. Short Title. This Ordinance shall be known as the “LITITZ BOROUGH
ZONING ORDINANCE."
SECTION 101. Purpose. This Zoning Ordinance has been prepared in consideration with the
Borough Comprehensive Plan as amended, and with consideration for the character of the
municipality, its various parts, and the suitability of the various parts for particular uses and
structures, and in consideration with the Downtown Lititz Master Plan, and is enacted for the
following purposes:
1. To promote, protect, and facilitate any or all of the following: the public health,
safety, morals, and the general welfare; coordinated and practical community
development and proper density of population; emergency management
preparedness and operations, airports, and national defense facilities, the
provision of adequate light and air, access to incident solar energy, police
protection, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, recreational facilities, public grounds, the provision of a safe, reliable
and adequate water supply for domestic, commercial, agricultural or industrial
use, and other public requirements; as well as preservation of the natural, scenic
and historic values in the environment and preservation of forests, wetlands,
aquifers and floodplains.
2. To prevent one or more of the following: Overcrowding of land, blight,
danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life or
property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
3. To provide for the use of land within the Borough for residential housing of
various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of housing, including singlefamily
and two- family dwellings, and a reasonable range of multi-family
dwellings in various arrangements.
4. To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including
population and employment growth, and opportunities for development of
a variety of residential dwelling types and nonresidential uses.
SECTION 102. Community Development Objectives. This Zoning Ordinance is to render a
legal basis and framework to the future land use plan and development goals established in the
Comprehensive Plan and other planning studies undertaken by the Lititz Borough Planning
Commission. The objectives of guiding future growth and improvement of existing development
within the Borough of Lititz are to enable the most economical and efficient provision of
municipal services; eliminate hazardous and detrimental land uses while encouraging beneficial
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 2
§ 102. § 104.
and compatible land uses; maintain a desirable residential environment with adequate recreational, commercial and industrial supporting areas; promote the context-sensitive form of the Borough; be compliant with the Form-Based Code Regulations, protect historic resources; and, in general, avoid the problems which arise when growth occurs at random without any municipal-wide goals or coordination.
SECTION 103. Borough Ordinances. No uses shall be permitted in any district which directly violate any Borough ordinance.
SECTION 104. Rules of Interpretation.
A. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of health, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the Borough and its citizens. It is not intended by this Ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any rules or regulations previously adopted or permits previously issued by the Borough which are not in conflict with any provisions of this Ordinance, nor is it intended by this Ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, building restrictions, or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of the buildings or premises or upon the height of the building, or requires a larger open space than is imposed or required by such ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, or by easements, covenants, building restrictions or agreements, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. Where, due to inherent ambiguity, vagueness or lack of clarity in the language of this Ordinance, a reasonable doubt exists as to the meaning of any restriction upon the use of land, said doubt shall be resolved in favor of the property owner and against any implied extension of a restriction.
B. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the terms and words listed in this Section shall have the meaning herein defined. Words not herein defined shall have the meanings given in Webster's Unabridged Dictionary and shall be interpreted so as to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following rules of interpretation shall apply:
• Words in the present tense include the future tense.
• Words in the singular include the plural and words in the plural include the singular.
• The words "used" and "occupied" shall be construed to include the words "or intended, arranged or designed to be used or to be occupied, or offered for occupancy".
• The term "such as" shall be considered as introducing a typical or illustrative
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 3
§ 104. § 105.
designation of items, and shall not be interpreted as constituting a complete list.
• The words "person" and "owner" shall be deemed to include a corporation,
unincorporated association and a partnership, or other legal entity, as well as an
individual.
• The words "building" and "structure" shall be construed as if followed by the
phrase "or part thereof".
• The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel".
• The word "watercourse" includes channel, creek, ditch, dry run, spring, stream
and river.
• The word "erect" shall mean to build, construct, alter, repair, display, relocate,
attach, hang, place, suspend, affix or maintain any structure or building and shall
also include the painting of exterior wall signs.
• References to the male gender shall include the female gender and vice versa.
SECTION 105. Terms Defined. Other terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or
defined as follows:
Access Drive. An area on a non-residential lot of not less than the width required herein which
provides vehicular access from a street or private road to the main building on a lot.
Accessory Apartment. An independent living unit with provisions within the unit for cooking,
eating, sanitation and sleeping. Such a dwelling is an Accessory Use to the principal building.
Accessory apartments may be within, attached to, or freestanding of the principal use.
Accessory Use. A use on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and
subordinate to, the principal use.
Active Play Area. An area designed and constructed for outdoor recreational use including
playground equipment such as slides, swings and climbing apparatus.
Adaptive Re-Use of Buildings. The use of an existing building for a purpose other than the use
for which it was originally constructed, that conserves a substantial portion of the
original/existing exterior walls of the building and any portion of the roof integral thereto, and
that conserves a substantial portion of the footprint of the building, consistent with the uses and
the dimensional requirements permitted in the District.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 4
§ 105. § 105.
Addition. Any construction which increases the size of a building or adds to a building.
Adult Day Care. See "Child or Adult Day Care".
Adult-Oriented Business. A business or club which engages in one (1) or more of the following areas of sales, services or entertainment:
A. Adult Bookstore. Any establishment or place:
1. Which has a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade consisting of the following items:
• Books, magazines or other periodicals, films or other forms of audio or visual representation which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depiction, description or display of sexual activities or conduct or uncovered male or female genital areas; and/or
• Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which is designed primarily for use in connection with sexual activities or conduct.
2. To which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically or mechanically controlled still- or motion-picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images, with or without sound, where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depiction, description or display of sexual activities or conduct or uncovered male or female genital areas.
B. Adult Theater. Any theater, auditorium, concert hall or other place of assembly presenting any form of audio and/or visual material, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time measured over any consecutive twelve-month period is or will be devoted to the showing of material which is distinguished or characterized by emphasis on depiction, description or display of sexual activities or by exposure of uncovered male or female genital areas for observation by patrons.
C. Massage Establishments. Any establishment or business which provides the services of massage and body manipulation, including exercises, heat and light treatments of the body and all forms and methods of physiotherapy, unless operated by a medical practitioner, chiropractor or professional physical therapist licensed by the Commonwealth. This definition does not include an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, reduction salon, spa or similar establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory service.
D. Other Adult-Oriented Retail, Commercial Service or Entertainment Establishment.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 5
§ 105. § 105.
Any other business or club which primarily offers its patrons or members retail goods, commercial services or entertainment which is characterized by an emphasis on matter or activities relating to, depicting, describing or displaying sexual activity or conduct or uncovered male or female genital areas.
Affordable Housing. A household that has an income of less than 80 percent of the Lancaster County median income for households as determined by the most recent data issued by the United States Census Bureau. The Census median income data shall be increased by a standard
U.S. government measurement of inflation to update the median income to the present.
Agriculture. The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, fish culture, animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or storing the produce, provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the principal agricultural activities.
Alley (or Lane). A minor right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, primarily for service access to the back or side of properties.
Alter or Alteration. Construction which may change the structural parts, mechanical equipment or location of openings of a building but which does not increase the size of the building; or a change in the appearance of a building, structure, site, or object.
Amendment. A change in use in a district which includes revisions to the zoning text and/or the official zoning map, whereby the authority for any amendment lies solely with the Borough Council.
Amusement Arcade. A building or part of a building in which three or more pinball machines, video games, or other similar player-operated amusement devices are maintained.
Animal Hospital. A building for the treatment and related temporary housing or boarding of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits, and birds or fowl by a veterinarian.
Animal Shelter. A structure which is constructed for the confinement and/or use of animals, including but not limited to dog houses, stables, fenced enclosures, exercise pens, chains and tethers, and similar structures.
Antenna - any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels, dishes, whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission or reception of wireless signals. An antenna may include an omnidirectional antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic antenna (disc) or any other wireless antenna.
Antenna Height. The vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the incorporated structure, which shall include all appurtenances connected thereto (support brackets, antennas, etc.). If the support structure is on a sloped grade,
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 6
§ 105. § 105.
then the average height between the highest and lowest grade, at the ground connection points, shall be used in calculating the antenna height.
Antique Business. A business for purchase and sale of antiques at retail. Specifically excluded are flea markets, multiple antique dealer ventures, and garage sales of a permanent or quasi permanent nature, except as are authorized by the Borough for charitable institutions or civic organizations for nonprofit fund raising purposes as otherwise may be provided by laws of this Ordinance.
Apartment, Conversion. A multi-family dwelling constructed by converting an existing building into apartments for more than one family, without substantially altering the exterior of the building.
Apartment House (or Apartment Building). A building designed and constructed to contain three (3) or more dwelling units.
Applicant. A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors and assigns.
Application for Development. Every application, whether preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of construction or development including but not limited to, an application (1) for a building permit, (2) for the approval of a subdivision, plat or plan or (3) for the approval of a development plan.
Appointing Authority. Borough Council.
Archaeology. The scientific study of material remains of past human and animal life and activities.
Archaeologist. An individual with a degree from a recognized university in the science of archaeology. (A Masters degree is usually required for professional purposes in this field.)
Architectural Screening. A manmade structure designed for the sole purpose of providing a barrier to the view of an architectural or landscape element to or from a neighboring development.
Architecture. The art/science of building design and construction; a method or style of building; the product of construction; the recognizable features for any kind of structure; the materials and methods used to produce a structure.
Architect. An individual with a degree from a recognized university and registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the profession of design and construction of buildings and structures.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 7
§ 105. § 105.
Assembling. The fitting together of parts and supplies to produce a completed product.
Attached Dwelling Unit Over Shops and Offices. A dwelling unit, whether as a condominium or apartment, that is located above the first floor of a building with its first floor devoted to a business or office use. Also, see Live-Work Unit.
Authority. A body politic and corporate created pursuant to Act 2 of 2001 (53 P.S. §5601 et seq.).
Automobile. See Motor Vehicle.
Axis of a Lot. A line joining the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines. A corner lot shall have two axes, each of which shall be defined as a line joining the midpoints of a front lot line and the opposite side lot line. In the event that a front or rear lot line is not a straight line, the midpoint of such lot line shall be determined as the midpoint of a straight line drawn between each terminus of the front or rear lot line. (See Appendix).
Babysitting. Any of the following types of child or adult day care activities (See "Child or Adult Day Care"):
A. The temporary or occasional care of any number of children or adults not related to the person giving care which takes place at the home of the person giving care.
B. The temporary or occasional care of any number of children or adults at a dwelling unit customarily and regularly occupied by the children or adults as their residence, where such care is provided by a non-resident of the dwelling unit.
C. The regular care of one, two, or three children or adults per day not residing on the premises which takes place at the home of the person giving care.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides.
Bed and Breakfast Inn. An owner-occupied dwelling in which a room or rooms are rented on a nightly basis for periods of not more than thirty (30) consecutive days to a guest. Meals may or may not be provided.
Bed and Breakfast Unit. A room or group of rooms in a Bed and Breakfast Inn forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not cooking or eating purposes.
Berm. An earthen mound designed to create a visual and sound barrier between a use and adjoining properties, streets, and uses.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 8
§ 105. § 105.
Block. An area of land surrounded by streets, or surrounded by streets and alleys.
Borough. The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, the Borough Council and its designated representatives.
Buffer Area. A landscaped area, or an area of preserved vegetation, intended to be used as a means of limiting the potentially adverse effects created by a use, on adjoining properties, streets and uses. (See Appendix).
Build-To Line. The line which defines the placement of the building from the curb edge or sidewalk edge close to the street on which the building fronts. The build-to line of the building forms the street wall line. On a corner lot, the build-to line is located on each side of a lot abutting a street.
Building. A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes to be used for human habitation.
Building, Accessory. See " Structure, Accessory".
Building Area. The aggregate of the maximum horizontal cross-section areas of all buildings on a lot, excluding cornices, eaves, and gutters projecting not more than eighteen (18) inches.
Building Code. The Building Code as adopted and amended by Lititz Borough Council.
Building Official or Building Code Official. The official, appointed by Lititz Borough Council, in charge of enforcement and administration of the Building Code.
Building Coverage. That portion of a lot covered or occupied by buildings. For the purpose of computation, building coverage excludes fences, free-standing walls, retaining walls, decks extending no more than eight feet from the building wall, playground equipment, wading pools no more than 30 inches above grade, cornices, eaves, gutters, unenclosed porches, stoops, terraces, balconies, fire escapes, and unenclosed steps.
Building Height. The vertical dimensions measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building to the highest point of ceiling at the top story in the case of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof and to the average height between the plate and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. (See Appendix). The grade shall not be altered for the purpose of increasing the elevation of an object.
Building Line. A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal plane and a vertical plane that coincides with the exterior surface of a building or structure on any side. In the case of a cantilevered or projected section of a building, except overhanging eaves, gutters and cornices, the vertical plane will coincide with the most projected surface. (See Appendix).
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 9
§ 105. § 105.
Building Location. The required building position specified as a Build-To Line in certain districts.
Building Mass. The three dimensional bulk of a building: height, width and depth.
Building, Principal. A building or buildings in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. (See Appendix).
Building Set-back Line. The line within a property usually parallel to the right-of-way or property line), defining the required minimum distance between any enclosed structure and the adjacent street right-of-way or property line. (See Appendix).
Front set-back line: The line across and nearest the front of a lot establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the front façade of buildings and the front line of structures, and the front lot line.
Side set-back line: The line across and nearest the side of a lot establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the side line of buildings and structures and the side lot line.
Rear set-back line: The line across and nearest the rear of a lot establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the rear line of buildings and structures and the rear lot line.
Business. Any enterprise, occupation, trade or profession engaged in, either continuously or temporarily, for profit. The term "business" shall include the occupancy or use of a building or premises or any portion thereof for the transaction of business or the rendering or receiving of professional or personal service (See "Home Business" and "Home Occupation").
Business Conversion. Conversion of an entire existing residential structure to a non-residential use, or a conversion of only a portion of the premises, with the retention of one or more dwelling units. (A first-floor retail or office use with an apartment(s) on the second and higher floors is one such example.)
Business (Professional) Office. A building or portion of a building wherein services are performed involving predominantly business, professional, administrative or clerical functions.
Business Services. Includes such uses as banks, credit unions, loan and insurance agencies, utility offices, government, business and professional offices, medical or dental office facilities.
Car Wash. See Motor Vehicle Wash.
Cartway. The motor vehicle travel lane of a street or alley.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 10
§ 105. § 105.
CCRC (Continuing Care Retirement Community).
Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks which confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water.
Channel Flow. That water which is flowing within the limits of a channel.
Cell Site. A tract or parcel of land that contains a wireless or cellular phone antenna, its support structure, accessory buildings, and parking and may include other uses associated with and ancillary to wireless and cellular phone transmission.
Cemetery. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including chapels, mausoleums, crematories and caretaker residences when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.
Center Line of Street or Road. A line located midway between, and parallel to, the right-of- way lines of any street or road.
Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate issued by the Zoning Officer upon completion of the construction of a new building or upon a change or conversion of the structure or use of a building, which certifies that all requirements and regulations as provided herein, and within all other applicable requirements, have been complied with. No structure or building may be occupied or used without a Certificate of Occupancy.
Child or Adult Day Care. The temporary or occasional care of any number of children or adults not related to the person giving care which takes place at the home of the person giving care, or in a non-residential facility.
Child or Adult Day Care Facility. Any dwelling, building, or portion thereof which child or adult day care services other than "babysitting" are provided, including any on-site outdoor play area. Child and adult day care facilities shall be further differentiated by the following two classifications:
Day Care Home. Any premises or dwelling unit, other than the home of the child or adult, where a family residence is being used as a day care area, operated for profit or not for profit, in which day care is provided at any one time for a maximum of six (6) non- dependent children or adults per day. (For differentiation, see definition of "Babysitting".)
Day Care Center. A facility which provides care for a combined total of seven (7) or more children or adults per day, where the child or adult care areas are not being used as a residence.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 11
§ 105. § 105.
Civic Space. Features such as greens, parks, pocket parks, pedestrian gathering areas, tot lots, playgrounds, plazas, squares, pedestrian pockets, and the like that are used as common open space.
Clear Sight Triangle. An area of unobstructed vision at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, access drives or alleys. It is defined depending on street types by lines of sight between points at a specific distance from the intersection of the centerlines of both streets. No obstructions lower than seven (7) feet nor higher than four (4) feet as measured from the nearest street shall be permitted.
Clinic/Medical Center. The use of land and/or a building for examination, diagnosis, and treatment of ill or afflicted human outpatients, including office, laboratory and dispensaries for the use of physicians, dentists, technicians and pharmacists.
Close. An accessway for counterclockwise vehicular travel, within which a green is centered, and around which buildings are located on three sides, and on-street parking is located either parallel to the curb line or in an angled parking arrangement.
Club. An organization established for social or fraternal purposes whose buildings and services are for the use of members and their guests only (including service organizations).
Club, Non-Profit. Buildings or facilities owned and/or operated by a corporation, association, or persons for a social, educational, or recreational purpose; but not primarily for profit or to render a service that is customarily carried on as a business. A non-profit club shall not include churches, synagogues, or other places of worship.
Co-location. The mounting of one or more Wireless Communications Facilities, including antennas, on an existing Telecommunications Tower, or on any structure that already supports at least one Telecommunications Antenna.
Commercial Kennel. See "Kennel, Commercial".
Commercial Recreation. A business such as a theater, bowling alley, pool hall, golf driving range, miniature golf courses, swimming pool or skating rink which offers recreational activities to the general public and which is operated for a profit.
Commercial Use. A use of land or improvements thereto for the purpose of engaging in retail, wholesale, or service activities for profit.
Common Open Space. A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public facilities, and including civic space, greens, recreational facilities, and the like.
Completely Dry Space. A space which will remain totally dry during flooding; due to its design
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 12
§ 105. § 105.
and construct to prevent the passage of water and water vapor.
Comprehensive Plan. The Comprehensive Plan adopted by Borough Council pursuant to
Article III of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code which indicates the general locations recommended for the various functional classes of public works, places and structures and for the general physical development of the Borough, and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or part thereof.
Condominium. Real estate consisting of privately-owned portions and other areas designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners.
Conservation Plan. A plan including a map(s) and narrative that, at the very least, outlines an erosion and sedimentation control plan for an identified parcel of land.
Continuing Care Retirement Community (CCRC). A planned development that provides for a continuum of licensed accommodations and care, from independent living, to assisted living, to skilled nursing for both long-term and short-term care of age qualified or physically handicapped individuals. CCRCs may also provide for on-site medical care, accessory commercial, and social uses, so long as those uses are primarily scaled to serve the inhabitants of the campus. CCRCs may be a component of a Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND).
Convenience Store. Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, and other goods commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area of less than 5,000 square feet.
Corner Lot. A lot fronting on two streets at their intersection. (See Appendix).
County. The County of Lancaster, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
County Planning Commission. The Lancaster County Planning Commission and its professional staff.
Court. An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building, which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls of such building.
Curb Cut. A depression of the curb that allows for vehicular or pedestrian circulation onto a sidewalk, driveway, street, or alley.
Curb Cut, Mid-Block. A curb cut that is not located at the intersection of streets and alleys, unless located opposite a T-intersection or an adjoining public pathway, sidewalk, or walkway.
Customary Incidental Home Occupations. See "Home Occupation".
Day Care. See "Child or Adult Day Care".
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 13
§ 105. § 105.
Day Care Center. See "Child and Adult Day Care Facility".
Day Care Facility. See "Child and Adult Day Care Facility".
Day Care Home. See "Child and Adult Day Care Facility".
Dedication. The deliberate offering, and formal acceptance thereof by the Borough, of land by its owner for any general and public, or limited public, use, reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted.
Demolition. To tear down, raze, destroy, do away with, to remove, or relocate from the site in part or its entirety.
Demolition by Neglect. The absence of routine maintenance and repair which leads to structural weakness, decay and deterioration in a building to structure.
Density. A measure of the number of dwelling units which occupy, or may occupy, an area of land, typically expressed as dwelling units per acre.
Density, Gross Residential. The number of dwelling units in relation to an area of land actually in use or proposed to be used for residential purposes, excluding public rights-of-way, whether exterior or interior, but including interior parking areas and access lanes, sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, and common open spaces.
Density, Net Residential. The number of dwelling units in relation to the land area actually in use or proposed to be used for residential purposes, exclusive of public rights-of-way, streets, sidewalks, parks, playgrounds and common open spaces.
Dental Clinic. See "Clinic/Medical Center".
DEP. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
Developer. Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or a land development.
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
Development Plan. The provisions for development including a planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 14
§ 105. § 105.
facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the development
plan" when used in this Ordinance shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
Development Strategy Plan. The Downtown Lititz Master Plan, which is intended to guide redevelopment and infill development in Downtown Lititz.
Domestic Pets. Animals, such as dogs and cats, that have been bred and/or raised to live in or about the habitation of humans and is dependent on people for food and shelter.
Downtown. The area designed as the central business district in the Downtown Lititz Master Plan.
Downtown Lititz Master Plan. The plan prepared by Derck & Edson, dated September 2008, appears as an Appendix to the Subdivision & Land Development Ordinance.
Downtown Overlay District. The Downtown area of Lititz Borough, as shown in the Downtown Lititz Master Plan.
DPW. The Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.
Drive-in Facility. Any portion of a building or structure from which business is transacted, or capable of being transacted, directly with customers located in a motor vehicle during such business transactions.
Drive-In Service Place. An establishment that, by design of physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures, encourages or permits customers to receive a service or obtain a product that may be used or consumed in a motor vehicle on the premises or to be entertained while remaining in a motor vehicle. Accessory services provided for customers which do not require the direct assistance of personnel of the establishment outside of the confines of the building (e.g. self-service gasoline pumps, vending machines, automatic teller machines and similar services) shall not be encompassed in this definition.
Driveway. A private drive on a residential lot providing access between a public or private street or service lane and a permitted use, building or structure.
Dwelling. A house, apartment building or other building designed or used primarily for human habitation. (See Appendix). The word "dwelling" shall not include boarding or rooming houses, hotels, motels, tents, trailers or any structure designed or used for transient residence.
Dormitory: A space in a building where group sleeping accommodations are provided in one room, or in a series of closely associated rooms, for persons not members of the same family group.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 15
§ 105. § 105.
Dwelling, Apartment. A dwelling unit with provisions within the unit for cooking, eating, sanitation, and sleeping. Such units can be within Multiple Family Dwellings, as an Accessory Apartment to a permitted Primary Use, or co-located with other allowable uses in the same structure.
Dwelling, Attached (Townhouse or Row). A building used by one family and having two party walls in common with other dwellings, except in the case of an end-of-row unit which only has one side wall which is a party or lot-line wall.
Dwelling, Multiple Family. A building (apartment house or condominium with flats) designed for or used exclusively for residence purposes by more than two (2) families.
Dwelling, Single Family, Detached. A detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family.
Dwelling, Single Family, Semi-Detached (Twin). A dwelling containing two (2) dwelling units which are attached side by side by the use of a common wall.
Dwelling, Two Family, Detached (Duplex). A dwelling containing two (2) dwelling units, one of which is located above the other.
Dwelling, Two Family, Semi-Detached. A building used by two families, with one dwelling unit arranged over the other, having one side yard, and one party wall in common with another building.
Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms providing living and sanitary facilities for one family, including equipment for cooking or provisions for same.
Easement. The authorization by a property owner of a right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of private land for a public or quasi-public purpose, within which the owner of the property shall not erect any permanent structures, but shall have the right to make any other use of the land which is not inconsistent with the rights of the grantee of the easement.
Eaveline. The point at which the roof converges with the side of the building.
Emergency. A condition that (1) constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or safety of the public, or (2) has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be unusable and result in loss of the services provided.
Engineer, Borough. The Borough Engineer or any consultant designated by Borough Council to review a subdivision plan and perform the duties of engineer in behalf of the Borough.
Engineer, Professional. A person duly licensed as a professional engineer by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 16
§ 105. § 105.
EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Essential Services. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies of gas, electrical, telephone, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, and sewage disposal systems, including buildings,
enclosures, wells, pumping stations, storage facilities, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic light signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories and services in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, including fire houses or fire companies and emergency services under agreement with the municipality or for the public health or safety or general welfare. Wireless and cellular communications are not considered to be Essential Services.
Essential Services Building. An essential services facility intended for human occupancy.
Essential Services Structure. An essential services facility not intended for human occupancy.
Essentially Dry Space. A space which will remain dry during flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage; the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
Event Space. A building or portion thereof that is designed for public or private assembly for special events or regularly scheduled programs. Such events may include, but are not limited to, lectures, performances, weddings, receptions, banquets, and fundraisers. Live music performances shall not present a nuisance to neighboring properties.
Excessive Glare. The spillover of nighttime illumination in excess of 1.0 footcandle beyond a property line onto an adjoining property.
Exterior Features. The architectural style, design and general arrangement of the various parts of a building, structure or object. This may include the color, nature and texture of building materials, and the type of style of all windows and doors, ornamental application, and the like.
Family. One (1) or more persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit.
FCC. Federal Communications Commission
Fence. Any artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
Fill. Material placed or deposited so as to form an embankment or to raise the surface elevation of the land, including but not limited to levees, bulkheads, dikes, jetties, embankments, and causeways.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 17
§ 105. § 105.
Flood. A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
Flood-Fringe Area. That portion of the 100-year floodplain outside of the floodway area.
Flood of Record. The flood which has reached the highest flood elevation above mean sea level at a particular location.
Floodplain area. A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete
inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any source.
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Floodway. The designated area of a floodplain required to carry and discharge flood waters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the one hundred (100) year magnitude.
Floor Area, Habitable. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all rooms used for habitation, such as living room, dining room, kitchen or bedroom, but not including hallways, stair-ways, cellars, attics, service rooms or utility rooms, bathrooms, closets or unheated areas such as enclosed porches or rooms without at least one window or skylight opening onto an outside yard or court. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet, and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five (5) feet shall not be considered as part of the habitable floor area.
Floor Area, Total. The area of all floors measured from the exterior face of the structure of a building, including finished attics and finished basements.
Funeral Home. A building devoted to the care, embalming, and holding of services for the dead, including the sale of funeral equipment as an accessory activity.
Garage, Private. A building for the private use of the owner or occupant of a principal building situated on the same lot of the principal building for the storage of motor vehicles with no facilities for mechanical service or repair of a commercial or public nature.
Garage, Public. A building designed and used for the storage of automotive vehicles operated as a business enterprise with a service charge or fee being paid to the owner or operator for the parking or storage of privately owned vehicles.
Garage Sale. The sale or offering for sale to the general public of items of personal property, not involving items purchased for resale, used in conjunction with a residential dwelling by the owner or tenant of an improved lot at a residential use in a residential district, whether within or outside any building.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 18
§ 105. § 105.
Gardening. The cultivation of herbs, fruits, flowers, or vegetables, excluding the keeping of livestock.
Governing Body. Borough Council of the Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
Grade, Finished. The completed surfaces of lawns, walks, and roads brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.
Green. A plaza, square, courtyard, pedestrian pocket, pedestrian gathering area, promenade, lawn area, or other outdoor space in which features such as pavers, benches, gazebos, pergolas, trellises, planters, plantings, lighting, sculpture, and the like, are installed and maintained, and in which public seating takes place.
Green Area. The portion of a lot which may not be occupied or covered by buildings or paved areas.
Green Infrastructure. All landscaping, greens, and other like type features that protect or conserve natural resources; other resources that are referenced in the Lancaster County “Greenscapes” Plan of 2009; and other civic space.
Gross Floor Area. The sum of the horizontal areas of all enclosed floors of a building, including cellars, basements, corridors, and lobbies, from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a common wall separating two buildings, but excluding any space with a floor to ceiling height of less than 7 feet.
Hazardous Material. Materials which have the potential to damage health, endanger human life or impair safety, including, but not limited to, hazardous material as defined by state statute and DEP rules and regulations.
Height of a Telecommunications Tower. The vertical distance measured from the ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point on a Telecommunications Tower, including antennas mounted on the tower and any other appurtenances.
Herbicide. A chemical substance used to destroy or inhibit the growth of plants, especially weeds.
Historic Area Advisory Committee. An advisory board designated by Lititz Borough Council under the authority of the Borough Code for the purpose of dealing with matters pertaining to the Borough’s identified historic and cultural resources.
Historic Context. The geographical location, time period, and function(s) that existed within the period of significance of a historic resource.
Historic Property. A parcel of land containing one or more historic resources.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 19
§ 105. § 105.
Historic Resource. Any building, structure, site, object or district that is listed in the National Register of Historic Places; designated as a historic property under local or state designation law or survey; certified as a contributing resource within a National Register listed or locally designated historic district; or with an opinion of certification that the property is eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places either individually or as a Contributing Resource to a historic district.
Historic structure. Any historic resource that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
• By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
• Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Historic Resources Map. A map of Historic Resources included in the Form-Based Code Regulations of this Ordinance.
Historic Resources Survey. A map of Historic Resources as described and referenced in Section 214.
Home Business. An occupation, profession, commercial activity or use conducted within a residential dwelling unit or accessory building by the resident-operator and not more than one (1) non-resident employee. Home business uses shall be of a service or limited retail nature. The use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling and the exterior appearance of the structures and premises shall remain residential in character. For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, a home business shall not include child or adult day care facilities which are regulated as a separate use.
Home Occupation. An occupation, profession, commercial activity or use conducted within a residential dwelling unit solely by the residents thereof. The use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling and the exterior appearance of the structure and premises shall remain residential in character. For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, a home occupation shall not include child or adult day care facilities which are regulated as a separate use.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 20
§ 105. § 105.
Horticulture. See "Gardening".
Hospital. An institution specializing in giving clinical, temporary, and emergency services of a medical or surgical nature to human patients and injured persons, and licensed by state law to
provide facilities and services in surgery, obstetrics, and general medical practice.
Hotel. A building containing rooms intended or designed to be used or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied or are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests and where only a general kitchen and dining room are provided within the building as an accessory use.
Housing Type. A form of dwelling unit, such as a single-family detached building, a two-family building, an attached building, an apartment or condominium, or a variation in building height and/or façade to provide variety to a building design.
Identified floodplain area. The floodplain area specifically identified in this Ordinance as being inundated by the one hundred (100) year flood.
Impervious Area. Any portion of a lot covered by impervious surfaces.
Impervious Surface. Any surface that has been compacted or covered over with a building, structure, swimming pool, pond, or layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. It includes surfaces such as compacted sand, rock, or clay, as well as driveways and parking areas and most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots and other similar structures and paved areas. (See Appendix).
Incident Ray. Light which falls upon or strikes a sign or other object.
Industrial Use. The production, manufacturing, processing, assembling, packaging and storing of finished products from raw materials and/or components.
Integrity. Historic integrity is the composite of seven qualities: location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association. All seven qualities do not need to be present as long as the overall sense of past time and place is evident. All properties change over time. The retention of integrity depends upon the nature and degree of alteration or change. It is not necessary for a property to retain all the physical features or characteristics that it had during its period of significance. However, the property shall retain the essential physical features that enable it to convey its past identity or character, and therefore its significance.
Junk. Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, stored, baled, disposed of, or for other use or disposition.
Junkyard. A parcel of land on which waste material, junk, or inoperative vehicles and/or other machinery are collected, stored, salvaged, or sold.
Kennel, Commercial. A business offering housing or boarding of domestic animals and which
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 21
§ 105. § 105.
is operated for a profit.
Laboratory. An establishment or other facility equipped for testing and analysis, or for experimental study in the natural, physical or social sciences, which may include engineering and product development.
Lancaster County Wide Communications. The Lancaster County agency responsible for 911 emergency system service, and the dispatching of emergency services agencies within Lancaster County.
Land development. Any of the following activities:
A. The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A. a group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
B. the division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
B. A subdivision of land.
Land Use Ordinance. Any ordinance or map adopted pursuant to the authority granted in Articles IV, V, VI, VII, and VII-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
Landowner. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a proprietary interest in land.
Landscaping. The non-agricultural planting of turf, trees, shrubs, and other appropriate vegetative materials and ground cover within the open areas of a lot, and including the maintenance and replacement thereof, for the purposes of soil erosion control, retention of precipitation, protection against the elements and promotion of human comfort and welfare.
Lane. See Alley.
Laundry, Self-Service. A business that provides home-type washing, drying and/or ironing machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises.
Liner Shop. Smaller stores and service businesses that are connected and form the frontage of a
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 22
§ 105. § 105.
building, typically in conjunction with a larger building.
Lititz Historic District. The Historic District depicted on the Historic Resources Map (originally designated as the Lititz-Moravian Historic District).
Live-Work Unit. A ground floor business use, such as an office, studio, shop, café, or personal service establishment, or other place of business in combination with an office and a dwelling unit located above such place of business. A person or persons other than the proprietor of the ground floor business may occupy the dwelling unit portion of a Live-Work Unit.
Loading Space. An off-street space on the same lot with, and contiguous to, a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and which abuts on a street or other appropriate means of access.
Lot. A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, and having frontage on a dedicated street or road. (See Appendix).
Corner lot: A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection does not exceed 135 degrees. A lot abutting a curved street shall be deemed a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street lines intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished, flood resistant, and partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.
Flag lot: A lot or parcel that has been approved with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor. Said lot has less frontage on a public street than is normally required.
Interior lot: Any lot other than a corner lot.
Through lot: A lot extending between and having frontage on two streets.
NOTE:
NOTE:
The
The followingfollowing definitiondefinition ooff "Lowest"Lowest Floor"Floor" shouldshould bebe usedused onlyonly ifif PartiallyPartially EnclosedEnclosed
Space Below the Lowest Floor (Section 4.02 C.2.) will be
Space Below the Lowest Floor (Section 4.02 C.2.) will be permittedpermitted..
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 23
§ 105. § 105.
Lot Area. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot following exclusion of:
A. Areas within an existing or proposed, public or private, easement or right-of-way the terms or conditions of which restrict or limit the nature, dimensional characteristics, or intensity of development or development activities within the said easement or right-of- way; and
B. In the case of an interior lot, any right-of-way, easement or accessway connecting such interior lot to a road or street.
Lot Coverage. The total percentage of a lot that includes all non- vegetated surfaces. This includes Building Coverage, pavement (pervious or impervious), stone, or other impervious surfaces. This shall not include planting beds or tree wells.
Lot Depth. A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of its side lot lines.
Lot - Developable Area. The gross area of a tract of land excluding any area that includes the following natural features: wetlands, steep slopes, floodplains, streams and waterbodies. Natural features do not include any manmade conditions.
Lot Frontage. The lot dimension measured along the street line of any street abutting a lot.
Lot Line. A line dividing one lot from another lot or from a street or alley. (See Appendix).
Lot Line, Front: On an interior lot, the lot line abutting the street; on a corner or through lot, each lot line which abuts a street; on a flag lot, the interior lot line most parallel to and nearest the street from which access is obtained.
Lot Line, Rear: A lot line which does not intersect a front lot line and is most distant from, and most parallel to, a front lot line. Corner lots shall not have a rear lot line. For the purposes of this Ordinance, where the side lot lines of an interior lot meet in a point, the rear lot line shall be assumed to be a line not less than 10 feet long drawn within the lot between the two side lot lines, which is parallel to, or in the event of a curved front lot line, equidistant to, to the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side: Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.
Lot Width. In the case of an interior lot, lot width shall be the horizontal distance measured at the minimum building setback line between the side lot lines. In the case of a corner lot, lot width shall be the horizontal distance measured at the minimum building setback line between each front lot line and its opposite side lot line. Such distance shall be measured along a straight line which is at right angles to the axis of a lot. The mean lot width shall not be less than the required lot width. (See Appendix).
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 24
§ 105. § 105.
Maintenance. To keep in its existing state; to upkeep; to preserve from failure or decline.
Manufactured Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation and attachments to the required utilities. The term includes manufactured home, park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days. Substitute the term manufactured home for the term mobile home.
Manufactured Home Park. A parcel of land under single ownership, which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more manufactured homes for non-transient use.
Substitute the term manufactured home park for mobile home park
Manufacturing. Any process whereby the nature, size or shape of articles or raw materials are changed, or where articles are assembled or packaged.
Maximum Flood Elevation. The water surface elevations of a flood which would completely fill the floodplain to the boundaries of the floodplain area.
Mean Sea Level. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide, using the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.
Medical Center/Clinic. The use of land and/or a building for examination, diagnosis, and treatment of ill or afflicted human outpatients, including office, laboratory and dispensaries for the use of physicians, dentists, technicians and pharmacists.
Medical Laboratory. A laboratory specializing in testing and analysis, or research and experimentation specifically related to the medical sciences.
Microwave Antenna for Satellite Communication. A reflector, together with its pedestal and any other attachments and parts thereof, used or intended to receive or transmit radio or electromagnetic waves from an overhead satellite or other sources. A microwave antenna for satellite communication, as herein defined, does not include federally licensed communication services.
Minor Repair. The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 25
§ 105. § 105.
Mixed Occupancy. Occupancy of a building for more than one use.
Mixed-Use. Two (2) or more principal uses on a lot, that are permitted in specified districts, such as Live-Work Units, Apartments Above Commercial Use, and multiple non-residential tenant occupancy.
Mixed-Use Building. A vertically integrated building, such as a Live-Work Unit, and Apartments Above Commercial Use.
Mixed-Use Neighborhood. Two (2) or more principal uses on a block that are permitted in specified districts, such as: a Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) in the TNDO District; or in the Downtown; or the NSD.
Modular Housing Unit. A structure designed primarily for family dwelling, eating, sleeping and with complete year-round facilities. It is constructed at a location other than the building lot and transported to the building lot in one or more segments where it is permanently set upon a foundation. The means of transporting a modular housing unit is not an integral part of the structure.
Monopole. A WCF or site which consists of a single pole structure, designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure, to support communications antennas and connecting appurtenances.
Motel. A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in connected units, used as individual sleeping or living units with direct outside access, designed primarily for transient vehicle travelers, and provided with accessory off-street parking facilities. The term includes buildings designed as tourist courts, motor lodges, auto courts, and other similar facilities, but shall not be construed to include Mobile Home Parks or Manufactured Home Parks.
Motor Vehicle. A motorized, self-propelled means of transportation of passengers or cargo, including, but not limited to automobiles, trucks, motorcycles and buses.
Motor Vehicle Body Shop. A building or structure on a lot that is used for the repair or painting of bodies, chassis, wheels, fenders, bumpers and/or accessories of automobiles, trucks and other vehicles for conveyance.
Motor Vehicle Repair Garage. A building or structure on a lot designed and/or used primarily for mechanical and/or body repairs, storage, or servicing to automobiles, trucks and similar vehicles.
Motor Vehicle Sales. The use of a building or structure on a lot that is used for the sale of automobiles, trucks, and similar vehicles.
Motor Vehicle Service Station. A building or lot or part thereof supplying and selling gasoline or other equivalent fuel for motor vehicles at retail direct from pumps and storage tanks and which may include accessory facilities for rendering vehicle services such as lubrication, washing
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 26
§ 105. § 105.
and minor repairs.
Motor Vehicle Wash. A building on a lot, designed and used primarily for the washing and polishing of motor vehicles and which may provide accessory services as set forth herein for
Vehicle Service Stations.
Municipality. The Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
New construction. Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after October 15, 1980, and includes any subsequent improvements thereto.
Multi-Use. A form of Mixed-Use, where a combination of principal uses are horizontally integrated, such as a Mixed-Use Neighborhood.
National Register of Historic Places. The official federal list of districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects significant in American history, architecture, archeology, engineering and culture.
Nightclub. A bar, restaurant, coffee house, or similar establishment where a dance floor or entertainment is provided.
No-Impact Home-Based Business. A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an accessory use (permitted by right), which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premise, in excess of those normally associated with a residential use. The business is also known as a home occupation and shall be in accordance with Section 401 herein.
Nonconforming Lot. A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
Nonconforming Structure. A structure or part of a structure which does not comply with the applicable provisions in a zoning ordinance or any amendment thereto, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NOTE:
NOTE:
The date to be used in the following definition of "New Construction" shall be the
The date to be used in the following definition of "New Construction" shall be the
effective
effective datedate ofof thethe firstfirst floodplainfloodplain managementmanagement ordinance/regulationsordinance/regulations enactedenacted byby a a municipality for the purpose of complying with the requirements of the National municipality for the purpose of complying with the requirements of the National Flood InsuranceFlood Insurance Program.Program.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 27
§ 105. § 105.
Nonconforming Use. A use, whether of land or of a structure, which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
Nursery, Greenhouse. Any lot, parcel of land, building, or structure used to cultivate, propagate, and grow trees, shrubs, vines, and other plants.
Nursing or Convalescent Home. A building designed and used for the full-time care of human beings and which may include housing or lodging, meals, and nursing.
Object. A construction primarily artistic in nature or relatively small in scale and simply constructed, such as a monument, pier, wall, and the like.
Occupancy. The act of being inside of and sheltered by a building or structure, whether in a professional capacity or as a resident.
Off-Street Parking. Parking on a lot, away from the street.
One-Hundred Year Flood. A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e. that has one (1) percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
One-Hundred Year Flood Boundary. The outer boundary of an area of land that is likely to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one (1) percent chance of being flooded each year). A study of the Federal Insurance Administration, the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Department of Agriculture's Soil Conservation Service, the United States Geological Survey, the Susquehanna River Basin Commission, or a licensed professional engineer registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania is necessary to define this boundary.
One-Hundred Year Flood Elevation. The water surface elevations of the One-Hundred Year Flood.
On-Lot Utilities:
Sewage Disposal System: Any septic system or structure designed to biochemically treat sewage within the boundaries of an individual lot.
Water Distribution System: A system for supplying and distributing potable water to a single dwelling or other building from a source located on the same lot.
On-Street Parking. Parking along the street, typically parallel to the curb line.
Open Space. An area that is intended to provide light and air, and is designed for either environmental, scenic or recreational purposes. Open space may include, but is not limited to,
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 28
§ 105. § 105.
lawns, decorative plantings, walkways, active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, civic space, greens, fountains, swimming pools, wooded areas and watercourses. Open space shall not be deemed to include driveways, parking lots or other surfaces designed or intended for vehicular
travel.
Open Space, Common. (See Common Open Space)
Outdoor Storage. The keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any goods, material, merchandise, junk, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours.
Park, Playground or Recreation Area. An open air recreational facility which is not accessory to any other use on the same or any other lot, but excluding amusement parks, and further defined below:
Park, Playground, or Recreation Area, Commercial - Recreational facilities operated as a business and open to the general public for a fee.
Park, Playground or Recreation Area, Restricted - Recreational facilities operated for restricted use in conjunction with (1) a particular non-profit organization, and open only to its members and guests or (2) a particular housing development or private residences, and open only to the residents and guests of said developments or private residences.
Park, Playground or Recreation Area, Public - Recreational facilities operated as a nonprofit enterprise by a governmental or nonprofit organization, and open to the general public.
Parking Area. An area on a lot utilized for the parking of vehicles for a single unit of occupancy.
Parking Area, Internal. An off-street parking lot located behind a building, or on-street parking between buildings in the case of a Close.
Parking Compound. An area on a lot containing any use other than agricultural or one (1) single-family detached dwelling for the parking of three (3) or more vehicles. Also known as a "parking lot".
Parking Location. The required parking position, either on-street, behind buildings, and/or to the side of buildings, as specified in certain districts.
Parking Lot. See "parking compound".
Parking Space. An off-street space available for the parking of a motor vehicle and which, in this Ordinance, is held to be an area 18 feet in length and at least one hundred-sixty-two (162) square feet, exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto and giving access thereto; and an on-street parking space that is typically parallel to a curb line and 7 feet wide by 22 feet long .
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 29
§ 105. § 105.
Parking Structure. A parking deck that has two (2) or more levels.
Pedestrian Continuity. The interconnectedness of features such as sidewalks, crosswalks, walkways, pathways, pedestrian promenades, and the like.
Pedestrian Gathering Area. A plaza, green, square, park, playground, or pedestrian pocket within which pedestrians can sit, relax, dine, and/or engage in other leisure time activities.
Person. An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
Personal Services. Includes such uses as barber shops, beauty salons, photographic studios, tailor, dress-making, millinery shops, self-service laundry, and dry cleaning / laundry drop-off points.
Pesticide. Any substance or mixture of substances intended for use in preventing, destroying, repelling, sterilizing or mitigating any insects, rodents, nematodes, predatory animals or other forms of animal life.
Petroleum Product. Oil or petroleum of any kind and in any form, including crude oil and derivatives of crude oil. It may exist singularly, as a sludge, as oil refuse or as a mixture with other wastes.
Place of Worship. A nonprofit use of land or a building or buildings as a place of worship, convent, monastery or similar religious institution, including rectory and parish houses for an organization solely or primarily used as a religious institution when located on the same premise.
Plan. The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether preliminary, tentative or final.
Planning Code. The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, Act 247, as amended, abbreviated as “MPC”.
Planning Commission. Borough of Lititz Planning Commission.
Plat. Same as "Plan."
Playground. An active recreational area with play equipment and playfield or play court areas.
Plaza. A public gathering place and pedestrian gathering area that is designed and maintained with pavers, benches, plantings, and other landscape features as depicted in the Form-Based Code provisions.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 30
§ 105. § 105.
Pocket Park. A small public gathering place, that is designed and maintained with features such as benches, plantings, and other landscape features as depicted in the Form-Based Code provisions.
Porch. An unenclosed extension of a building typically six (6) feet deep by twelve (12) feet wide, but no less than five (5) feet deep by ten (10) feet wide.
Portico. A porch or walkway with a roof supported by columns, often leading to the entrance of a building.
Premises. The area occupied by a business or other commercial, professional or industrial enterprise. When more than one such enterprise occupies a building, each business area shall be considered a separate premises.
Preservation Planning. A series of activities through which goals, priorities, and strategies of identification, evaluation, classification and protection of historic buildings, districts, sites and objects are developed.
Primary Frontage. The façade of a building where the front entrance door is located. On a corner lot, there shall be two primary facades, one of which shall be designed with a front entrance door.
Processing. A function involved in the manufacturing of goods or products in which the material used is not physically changed except for packaging or sizing.
Production. A function involved in the manufacturing of materials, goods, or products in which they are physically changed.
Professional Office. See Business Office.
Protection or Preservation. When used in connection with natural and historic resources, shall include means to conserve and safeguard these resources from wasteful or destructive use.
Public Building. A building owned, operated or controlled by a governmental agency (Federal, State or Local) including a corporation created by law for the performance of certain specialized governmental functions, or the School District.
Public Grounds. Includes the following:
A. parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other public areas;
B. sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly owned or operated facilities; and
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 31
§ 105. § 105.
C. publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
Public Hearing. A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the Borough Council, Zoning Hearing Board or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this Ordinance.
Public Meeting. A forum held pursuant to notice under the act of July 3, 1986 (P.L.388, No.84), known as the "Sunshine Act."
Public Notice. Notice published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall be not more than thirty (30) days and the second publication shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing.
Public Realm. The space between buildings along and within the Streetscape.
Radioactive Material. Any natural or artificially produced substance which emits radiation spontaneously.
Rail Line. A right-of-way with structures currently or previously used for transportation by trains.
Raised Crosswalk. A type of crosswalk, whereby the paving is raised to be flush to the top of curb and an adjoining sidewalk or walkway.
Recreation, Active. Leisure activities, usually of a more formal nature and performed with other individuals, often requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed places, sites or fields. Such areas usually require physical site alterations, are intensively used, and may include facilities such as playgrounds, ball courts and swimming pools.
Recreation, Passive. Leisure activities, usually of an informal nature such as hiking and picnicking which can be carried out with little alteration or disruption to the area in which they occur.
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or able to be towed by a light-duty truck; (iv) not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Recycle or Salvage. When used in connection with historic resources shall mean retention of reusable building materials for reuse.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 32
§ 105. § 105.
Recycling Center. A facility that is not a junkyard and in which recoverable resources, such as plastics, newspapers, glassware, and metal cans, are collected, stored, flattened, crushed, and/or bundled, essentially by hand, within a completely enclosed building.
Recycling Collection Point. An accessory use which serves as a collection point for the temporary storage of refuse items, such as bottles, cans, and newspapers, from which resources are recovered at another location.
Recycling Plant. A facility that is not a junkyard and in which recoverable resources, such as newspapers, magazines, books, and other paper products, glassware, metal cans, and other products, are recycled, reprocessed, and treated to return such products to a condition in which they may again be used for production.
Redevelopment. The re-use, alteration, enlargement or extension of a building by 20% or more of the gross floor area of the building, or the alteration, enlargement or extension by 20% or more of any other site characteristics, i.e. parking, pavements or other structures.
Regulatory Flood Elevation. The one hundred (100) year flood elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of one and one-half (1 ½) feet.
Rehabilitation. The act or process of making possible a compatible use for a property through repair, alterations, and additions while preserving those portions or features which convey its historical, cultural, or architectural values.
Related Equipment. Any piece of equipment related to, incidental to, or necessary for, the operation of a Telecommunications Tower or Telecommunications Antenna. By way of illustration, not limitation, Related Equipment includes generators and base stations.
Renewable Energy Source. Any method, process or substance for which supply is rejuvenated through natural processes and, subject to those natural processes, remains relatively constant, including, but not limited to, biomass conversion, geothermal energy, solar and wind energy and hydroelectric energy, but excluding those sources of energy used in the fission and fusion processes.
Repair Services. Includes such uses as radio, television and appliance repair shops, plumbing shops, carpenter shops, and shoe repair shops.
Repetitive Loss. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
Required Clear Sight Triangle. An area of unobstructed vision at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, access drives or alleys. It is defined, depending on street type, by lines of sight between points at a given distance from the intersection of the centerlines of both streets. No
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 33
§ 105. § 105.
obstructions lower than seven (7) feet nor higher than four (4) feet as measured from the nearest street shall be permitted.
Restaurant. A business establishment where the principal business is the selling of unpackaged food to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, in individual servings, or in non-disposable containers, and where the customer consumes these foods while seated at tables or counters located within the building.
Restaurant, Drive-In. An establishment that delivers prepared food and/or beverages to customers in motor vehicles, regardless of whether or not it also serves prepared food and/or beverages to customers who are not in motor vehicles, for consumption either on or off the premises.
Restaurant, Fast Food. An establishment that offers quick food service, which is accomplished through a limited menu of items already prepared and held for service, or prepared, fried, or griddled quickly, or heated in a device such as a microwave oven. Orders are not served at the same table or counter where the items are consumed.
Retail Business. Includes such uses as variety stores, apparel stores, drug stores, grocery stores, eating establishments, antique shops, music shops, sporting good stores, and book, stationery, magazine, candy and tobacco shops.
Right-of-Way. The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a street, road, or other public or semi-public purposes.
Scale. The size, massing and proportion of buildings in relation to the dimensions of yards, lots, and/or streetscapes, and typically in context with human proportions.
School, Elementary. Any school licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and which meets the requirements for elementary education.
School, Nursery. Any place licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to provide regular instruction and daytime care for children younger than elementary school-age.
School, Secondary. Any school licensed and authorized by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and which is authorized to award diplomas for secondary education.
School, Trade and/or Commercial. An establishment or organization that offers specialized training or instruction in a specific technical field, and which may or may not be operated for profit.
Screening. The use of plant or landscaping materials, fencing, walls and/or earthen berms to aid in the concealment of one element of a development from other elements or from adjacent or contiguous development.
Screen Planting. A landscape planting with the primary purpose of providing a visual barrier to
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 34
§ 105. § 105.
the sight of one or more elements of a neighboring development.
Self-service Storage Facility. A building or group of buildings that contains individual, compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls or lockers for the storage of goods or wares of customers.
Setback. The setback of a building from a particular lot line is the horizontal distance from such lot line to the building line nearest such lot line.
Service Lane. A type of thoroughfare servicing non-residential development, typically in the form of a drive.
Shared Parking. Off-street parking that two (2) or more landowners or tenants share within 500 feet of a lot that is served in the Central Business District, the standards for which are derived from the ULI – Urban Land Institute publication titled “Shared Parking Second Edition”, 2005, or the most recent version thereof.
Shopping Center. A group of stores planned, designed and constructed to function as a unit for the lot on which it is located with off-street parking provided as an integral part of the unit.
Sidewalk. A pedestrian thoroughfare that is built and maintained in accordance with the Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, and this Zoning Ordinance.
Sidewalk Sale. A seasonal and temporary event limited in duration in the Central Business District on sidewalks in front of shops and stores.
Sign. Any device or medium used for the purpose of naming, identifying, illustrating or displaying information to the general public, which is affixed to, painted upon or incorporated into a structure or building, or is freestanding upon a lot, which directs attention to an object, product, place, name, activity, facility, service, event, attraction, person, institution, organization or business, and which is visible from the public right-of-way, or from public property, or is located within a building and is obviously intended to be seen and understood from the public right-of-way. Customary displays of merchandise or other objects, either behind store windows or outdoors, are not signs. Specific sign types are defined as follows:
Animated Sign: Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or to create a visual effect or scene.
Banner: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is permanently mounted to a pole or building by a permanent frame at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or official flags of any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 35
§ 105. § 105.
Beacon: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
Building Marker: Any sign indicating the name of a building and data and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
Building Sign: Any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign.
Business Identification Sign: A sign which contains elements which identify the official name of a business and which may contain the minimal references necessary to products or services which help to clarify the type of business being conducted on the premises.
Canopy Sign: Any sign that is part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outside service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
Changeable Copy Sign: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign, including either a Manual Changeable Copy Sign, or an Electronic Message Center Sign.
Commercial Message: Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity.
Electronic Message Center Sign: A sign type characterized by internally illuminated, changeable copy that includes electronically changing alphanumeric text typically used for time and temperature displays, advertising the prices of retail products, and the like.
Flag: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity.
Freestanding Sign: Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure. (See Appendix).
Ground Sign: A freestanding sign, other than a pole sign, in which the entire bottom is in contact with the ground.
Informational Signage: Window Signs of a permanent or temporary nature which
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 36
§ 105. § 105.
display information about business activities on the premises, such as business hours, products or brands carried, services available, credit cards accepted and commercial and professional affiliations.
Luminous Sign: Any sign which contains a light shining from any source within the body of the sign.
Manual Changeable Copy Sign: A sign in which the copy or symbols are changed manually through placement of characters of symbols on a sign face.
Marquee Sign: Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made part of a marquee.
Nonconforming Sign: Any sign which does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance.
Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material with or without a message, typically existing in series, designed to move in the wind, and suspended from a rope, wire, or string.
Pole Sign: A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support so that the bottom edge of the sign face is 6 feet or more above grade.
Portable Sign: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A-frames or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to, or painted on, parked vehicles visible from the public right-of way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of a business.
Projecting Sign: Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more that twelve (12) inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. (See Appendix).
Promotional Signage: Window Signs of a temporary nature which advertise sales events, product or service promotions, or new product or service introductions related to the business being conducted on the premises.
Real Estate Sign: A sign relating to the property on which it is located offering such property for sale, lease or rent, including open house signs.
Residential Sign: Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if offering such service at such location conforms with all requirements of this Ordinance.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 37
§ 105. § 105.
Roof Sign: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of building supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. (See Appendix).
Roof Sign, Integral: Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure or design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six (6) inches.
Suspended Sign: A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
Temporary Sign: Any sign that is not permanently mounted on or affixed to the ground, a building or display window.
Wall Sign: Any sign attached parallel to, but within twelve (12) inches of, a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface. (See Appendix).
Window Sign: Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof that is placed inside a window, upon a window pane, and where visible from a window exterior to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service. (See Appendix).
Sign Setback. The distance from the property line or street right-of-way to the nearest part of the applicable sign, measured perpendicularly to the property line or street right-of-way line.
Site. The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historic, cultural, or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure.
Site Plan. A plan of a lot or subdivision on which is shown the locations of all buildings, structures, roads, rights-of-way, and boundaries in addition to topography, all essential dimensions, bearings and any other information deemed necessary in unusual or special cases by the Borough Council, Planning Commission or Zoning Hearing Board.
Soil Survey. The latest published version of the United States Department of Agriculture's Soil Survey for Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
Solar Collector. A device, or combination of devices, structure, or part of a device or structure that transforms direct solar energy into thermal energy. Solar collectors harvest solar energy in the form of heat.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 38
§ 105. § 105.
Solar Energy System. A system and all associated equipment which converts solar energy into a usable electrical energy, heats water or produces hot air or other similar function through the use of solar panels.
Solar Panel. A structure containing one or more receptive cells, the purpose of which is to convert solar energy into usable electrical energy by way of a solar energy system.
Solid Waste. Garbage, sludge, refuse, trash, rubbish, debris, and other discarded materials, including but not limited to solid and liquid waste materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, residential, and community activities.
Special Exception Use. A use in one or more districts for which the Zoning Hearing Board may grant a special use permit pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.
Special permit. A special approval which is required for hospitals, nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions (including substantial improvements to such existing parks) when such development is either partially or fully located in a designated floodplain.
Speed Table. A type of traffic calming device, such as a raised crosswalk.
Stealth Technology. Camouflaging methods applied to wireless communications facilities which render them more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted antennas painted to match the existing structure and facilities constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles.
Stoop. An unenclosed structure typically with a roof and columns, at the front door of a building, typically with a step or steps.
Story. A story is that part of a building between the surface of any floor and the next floor above it or, in its absence, then the finished ceiling or roof above it. A "split level" story shall be considered a second story if its floor level is six (6) feet or more above the level of the line of the finished floor next below it. Any floor under a sloping roof at the top of a building which is more than two (2) feet below the top plate shall be counted as a story; and, if less than two feet below the top plate, it shall be counted as a half-story. A basement shall be counted as a story if its floor level is six (6) feet or more below the level of the line of the finished floor next above it and has one-half or more of its height above the average level of the adjoining ground. (See Appendix).
Stream Restoration. Stream restoration work, including, but not limited to: efforts to control erosion and sedimentation; floodplain management techniques; efforts to promote groundwater recharge; efforts to lower flood stages; efforts to reduce nutrient loads; and the placement of in-stream habitat structures to improve fisheries habitat
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 39
§ 105. § 105.
Street. Any public or private right-of-way, set aside for public travel. The word "street" shall include, but not be limited to, the words "road", "highway”, "thoroughfare," “alley,” or service lane. The word "street" includes the entire right-of-way and is not limited to the cartway area.
Streetscape. The space between buildings and/or street walls along a street that forms the “public realm”, and within which street trees and sidewalks are located.
Street Line. The street line is that line determining the limit of the street or highway right of the public, either existing or contemplated. Where a definite right-of-way width has not been established, the street line shall be assumed to be at a point twenty-five (25) feet from the
centerline of the existing street.
Street Tree. A deciduous canopy tree along a street that is installed and maintained in accordance with the Form-Based Code provisions of this Ordinance, and the Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
Street Wall. The wall of a building adjoining a sidewalk near the street right-of-way; or in the case of where an existing building is set back from the Street Wall line, and where a Close is created, the street wall is the street edge feature that is created through the use of architectural elements such as walls, piers, pillars, and colonnades, in lieu of a building wall.
Street Wall Line. The Build-To Line, or the line formed by architectural elements when the building is not located at the Build-To Line.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground including, but not limited to buildings, sheds, manufactured homes, and other similar items. This term includes any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water whether or not affixed to land.
Structure, Accessory. A subordinate structure from but located on the same lot as the principal structure, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure. (See Appendix).
Structure, Principal. A structure or, where the context so indicates, a group of structures in or on which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which such structure is located. (See Appendix).
Structure, Temporary. A structure which is not permanently affixed to the land. Such a structure shall have a given use for a specified time, after which it shall be removed. (An example is an office trailer located on or at a construction site.)
Subdivision. The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs, or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development: Provided, however, that the
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 40
§ 105. § 105.
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
Substantial Damage. Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent or more of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of
a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" (or “repetitive loss” when repetitive loss language is used) regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
• Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or;
• Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure.”
Substantially Change or Substantial Change. A modification to an existing wireless communications facility Substantially Changes the physical dimensions of a tower or base station if it meets any of the following criteria: (1) for Telecommunications Tower outside the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the facility by more than 10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna, not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater; for Telecommunications Tower in the rights-of-way, it increases the height of the facility by more than ten percent (10%) or ten (10) feet, whichever is greater; (2) for Telecommunications Tower outside the public rights-of-way, it protrudes from the edge of the WCF by more than twenty (20) feet, or more than the width of the Tower structures are the level off the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for those Telecommunications Tower in the public rights-of-way, it protrudes from the edge of the structure by more than six (6) feet; (3) it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four (4) cabinets; (4) it entails any excavation of deployment outside the current site of the Telecommunications Tower; or (5) it does not comply with conditions associated with prior approval of construction or modification of the Telecommunications Tower unless the non-compliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width, or addition of cabinets.
Telecommunications Antenna. All non-tower Wireless Communications Facilities, including but not limited to, antennas and Related Equipment attached to the wireless support structure. Telecommunications Antennas shall not include support structures for antennas or any Related Equipment that is mounted to the ground or at ground-level.
Telecommunications Tower. Any structure that is used for the purpose of supporting one or more Antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility poles and light poles. Distributed antenna system hub facilities are considered to be Telecommunications Towers.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 41
§ 105. § 105.
Temporary Occupancy. Occupancy established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue the Occupancy upon the expiration of the time period; or Occupancy that becomes permanent after a Certificate of Occupancy is issued by Lititz Borough.
Temporary Use. A Use established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period specified by Lititz Borough; or a Use that becomes permanent after a Certificate of Use and Occupancy is issued by Lititz Borough.
Theater. A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of moving pictures or theatrical productions on a commercial basis.
Total Floor Area. The area of all floors measured from the exterior face of the structure of a building, including finished attics and finished basements.
Traditional Neighborhood Development. A form of land development consistent with TND as per Article VII-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), wherein a TND is defined as follows: An area of land typically developed for a compatible mixture of residential units for various income levels and non residential commercial and workplace uses, including some structures that provide for a mix of uses within the same building. Residences, shops, offices, workplaces, public buildings and parks are interwoven within the neighborhood so that all are within relatively close proximity to each other. Traditional Neighborhood Development is relatively compact and oriented toward pedestrian activity. It has an identifiable center and discernible edge. The center of the neighborhood is in the form of a public park, commons, plaza, square or prominent intersection of two or more major streets. Generally, there is a hierarchy of streets laid out with an interconnected network of streets and blocks that provides multiple routes from origins to destinations and is appropriately designed to serve the needs of pedestrians and vehicles equally.
Traffic Calming. The art and science of taming vehicular traffic in accordance with “Pennsylvania’s Traffic Calming Handbook, Publication No. 383, January 2001, or the most recent version thereof.
Transitional Housing. A dwelling that provides for temporary occupancy for unrelated adults, typically in the form of a rental unit with shared kitchen facilities, whereby there is at least 250 square feet of housing space per person.
Travel Lane. The area on which vehicles travel , as part of a street or driveway, typically described as a cartway or access drive.
Uniform Construction Code (UCC). The statewide building code adopted by The Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality, a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, The Code adopted The International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction standard applicable with the Commonwealth floodplain construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made specifically to various sections of the
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 42
§ 105. § 105.
IRC and the IBC.
Use. The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
Variance. Relief from any provisions of this Ordinance which is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to the provisions of Article IX of the Municipalities Planning Code.
Veterinary Clinic. See "Animal Hospital".
Walking Path. A sidewalk, or other pedestrian thoroughfare that enables non-motorized travel.
Wall. A man-made structure typically made of brick, stone, or other masonry material, typically located to screen, enclose, or separate areas.
Warehousing. The storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, but excluding bulk storage of materials that are inflammable or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
Watercourse. A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, run, creek, channel, swale, pond, lake, or other body of surface water, carrying or holding surface water, whether natural or manmade.
Watershed. All land from which water drains into a particular watercourse.
Water Feature. A civic amenity, such as a water fountain, reflecting pool, or waterfall that is typically located in a plaza, square or other like type public space.
Water Survey. An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of groundwater and surface-
water resources within a municipality.
WBCA. Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S. §11702.1 et. seq.)
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include, but are not limited to, swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
Wholesaling. The selling of merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other wholesalers.
Wind Energy System. An energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, blades associated controls and appurtenances that convert wind energy to a usable form of energy to meet all or part of the energy requirements of the on-site user and which has a rated capacity that does not exceed the rated capacity appropriate to the on-site user.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 43
§ 105. § 105.
Wind Energy System Height. The distance measured from the ground surface of the wind energy system tower base to the highest point of the extended blade tip or highest point of the wind energy system.
Wind Energy System Turbine. The parts of a wind energy system including the blades, generator and tail.
Windmill. A machine that runs on the energy generated by a wheel of adjustable blades or slats rotated by the wind.
Wind Rotor. A structure which contains the blades and hub that are used to capture wind for purposes of energy conversion. The wind rotor is usually located on a tower, and along with other generating and electrical storage equipment, forms the Wind Energy Conversion System.
Wireless. Transmissions through the airwaves including, but not limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio signals.
Wireless Communications Facility (WCF). The antennas, nodes, control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics and other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving, distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless communications services.
Wireless Communications Facility Applicant (Applicant). Any person that applies for a wireless communication facility building permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the public right-of-way (ROW) or other Borough owned land or property.
Wireless Support Structure. A freestanding structure, such as a Telecommunications Tower or any other support structure that could support the placement or installation of a wireless communications facility if approved by the Borough.
Yard. A required open space on a lot adjoining a lot line, containing only landscaping or other uses as provided by this Ordinance. Distances which represent minimum yards throughout this Ordinance shall include all portions of a lot which are within such distances as measured at right angles from the respective lot line. (See Appendix).
A. Front Yard: A yard extending along the full width of a front lot line between side lot lines and from the front lot line to the front building setback line in depth.
B. Rear Yard: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear lot line and the rear building setback line. Rear yard depth shall be measured at right angles to the rear lot line.
C. Side Yard: A yard lying between the side lot line and the nearest side building setback line and extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or in the absence of either of such front or rear yards, to the front or rear lot lines. Side yard width shall be measured at right angles to side lines of the lot.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 44
§ 105. § 105.
Yard Sale. See Garage Sale.
Zoning District. A portion of the Borough or adjacent municipality(s) within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Ordinance (or the adjacent municipality's Zoning Ordinance).
Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board of and for the Borough of Lititz.
Zoning Map. The Zoning Map of Lititz Borough adopted hereunder, together with all amendments thereto subsequently adopted.
Zoning Officer. The duly constituted municipal official designated to administer and enforce this Ordinance. The Zoning Officer shall administer the Zoning Ordinance in accordance with its literal terms. The Zoning Officer may also serve as the Building Inspector and the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 45
§ 200. § 201.
ARTICLE II
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION 200. Establishment of Districts. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the territory of Lititz Borough is hereby divided into the following districts:
Base Districts
R-S Residential Districts R-1 Residential Districts R-2 Residential Districts R-2A Residential Districts R-A Residential Districts
Office and Professional Districts Commercial Districts
Neighborhood Storefront District (NSD) Neighborhood Storefront District-1 (NSD-1) General Business Districts
Industrial Districts
Lititz Run Revitalization District
Overlay Districts
Historical Resource Protection Overlay District Floodplain Districts
Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO) Downtown Overlay District (DOD)
SECTION 201. Zoning Map. The boundaries of said districts shall be shown upon the map attached to and made a part of this Ordinance which shall be designated "Borough of Lititz Zoning Map." The said map and all the notations, references and other data shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this Ordinance as if all were fully described herein. A copy of said map, indicating the latest amendments, shall be kept up to date and displayed for the use and benefit of the public at the Lititz Borough Municipal Building.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 46
§ 202. § 204.
SECTION 202. Interpretation of District Boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the districts shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines;
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines;
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipality limits shall be construed as following municipality limits;
D. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines;
E. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines;
F. Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipality limits shall be construed as following municipality limits:
G. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks;
H. Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines and, in the event of change in the shore line, shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines;
I. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in sub-sections A. through H. above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map;
J. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map or in circumstances not covered by sub-sections A. through I. above, the Zoning Hearing Board shall interpret the district boundaries.
SECTION 203. Use Adjustment on District Boundaries. In unsubdivided land where a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate ownership, the permitted use of the more restrictive district shall apply.
SECTION 204. Application of District Regulations. The regulations set by this Ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 47
§ 204. § 205.
of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided.
A. No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
B. No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:
1. To exceed the height,
2. To accommodate or house a greater number of families,
3. To occupy a greater percentage of lot area, or,
4. To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces than herein required except in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
C. No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this Ordinance shall be included as part of a yard, open space or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building or use.
D. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein except in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Ordinance.
SECTION 205. Uses Not Provided For. Whenever a use is not specifically permitted under the provisions of this Ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall refer the matter to the Zoning Hearing Board to hear and decide such use as a special exception request. The party seeking the use determination is required to file a special exception request with the Board. The Board shall have the authority to permit the use or deny the use in accordance with the standards governing special exception applications. The use may be permitted if it is similar to and compatible with the permitted uses in the zoning district, and in no way is in conflict with the general purposes and intent and the Supplementary Regulations of this Ordinance, and is not in conflict with the Form- Based Code Regulations of Article VIII. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to demonstrate that the proposed use would not be detrimental to the public health , safety and welfare of the neighborhood. No zoning permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer for any such unspecified use until this determination has been made by the Zoning Hearing Board.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 48
§ 206. § 206
.
SECTION 206. R-S Residential District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this District is to promote the continuation of low density residential neighborhoods and to protect such neighborhoods from incompatible land uses. Single-family detached dwellings represent the most prevalent land use throughout this District. The minimum lot sizes required within this District are larger than those required in other residential districts to ensure compatibility with existing neighborhoods.
B. Permitted Uses.
1. Single-family detached dwellings.
2. Customary accessory uses, buildings, and structures incidental to the above permitted uses subject to Section 301.
3. Gardening.
4. Public Parks, Playgrounds or Recreation Areas subject to Section 410.
5. Essential Services Structures subject to Section 408.
6. Animals and Animal Shelters subject to Section 415.
7. Home Occupations (no-impact home-based businesses as defined herein) in accordance with Section 401.
C. Special Exception Uses.
1. Public/Municipal Buildings and Uses subject to Section 412.
2. Essential Services Buildings subject to Section 408.
3. Restricted Parks, Playgrounds or Recreation Areas subject to Section 410.
4. Accessory Apartments subject to Section 416.
D. Conditional Uses
1. Demolition of an existing structure subject to Section 322
E. Lot and Yard Requirements.
1. New Construction shall follow the Lot and Yard Requirements Presented in the Form Based Codes. The minimum lot and yard requirements shall be determined by the following table as well as all other applicable provisions contained in this Section. Within the following table "square feet" and "feet" are abbreviated as "S.F." and " ft " respectively.
Minimum Lot Area (S.F.)
12,500
Minimum Lot Width (ft)
90
Minimum Side Yard (ft)
12
Minimum Rear Yard (ft)
20
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)
35
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 49
§ 206. § 207
.
2. If the block on which the lot is located is more than fifty percent (50%) developed, the
average setback of the existing structures on that block may be used as the minimum front
yard building setback line. Otherwise, the setbacks within the Form-Based Code in
Article VIII shall apply.
F. Height Requirements.
All principal structures shall have a maximum height of 35 feet. All accessory structures
shall have a maximum height of 20 feet.
G. Application of Supplementary Provisions.
All uses, structures, and lots shall comply with all applicable Supplementary Provisions
as provided in Article III, as well as all other pertinent provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 207. R-1 Residential District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this District is to promote the continuation of medium density
residential neighborhoods and to protect such neighborhoods from incompatible land
uses. Single-family detached dwellings represent the most prevalent land use throughout
this District. Certain nonresidential uses, which are compatible with the Borough's
medium density residential neighborhoods, are permitted by special exception.
B. Permitted Uses.
1. Single family detached dwellings.
2. Customary accessory uses, buildings, and structures incidental to the above
permitted uses subject to Section 301.
3. Gardening.
4. Public Parks, Playgrounds or Recreation Areas subject to Section 410.
5. Essential Services Structures subject to Section 408.
6. Animals and Animal Shelters subject to Section 415.
7. Home Occupations (no-impact home-based businesses as defined herein) in
accordance with Section 401.
C. Special Exception Uses.
1. Public/Municipal Buildings and Uses subject to Section 412.
2. Essential Services Buildings subject to Section 408.
3. Home Businesses subject to Section 401.
4. Day Care Home subject to Section 402.
5. Restricted Parks, Playgrounds or Recreation Areas subject to Section 410.
6. Places of worship subject to Section 405.
7. Public libraries subject to Section 412.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 50
§ 207 § 207
8. Schools (General Education) subject to Section 407.
9. Cemeteries subject to Section 414.
10. Bed and breakfast inns subject to Section 404.
11. Hospitals, Nursing/Convalescent Homes subject to Section 417.
12. Social and Fraternal Clubs and Organizations subject to Section 411.
13. Boarding of Horses subject to Section 415.
14. Accessory Apartments subject to Section 416.
D. Conditional Uses
1. Demolition of an existing structure subject to Section 322
E. Lot and Yard Requirements.
1. New Construction shall follow the Lot and Yard Requirements Presented in the
Form Based Codes. The minimum lot and yard requirements shall be determined
by the following table as well as all other applicable provisions contained in this
Section. Within the following table "square feet" and "feet" are abbreviated as
"S.F." and " ft " respectively.
Minimum Lot Area (S.F.) 8400
Minimum Lot Width (ft) 70
Minimum Side Yard (ft) 10
Minimum Rear Yard (ft) 20
Maximum Lot Coverage (%) 50
2. If the block on which the lot is located is more than fifty percent (50%)
developed, the average setback of the existing structures on that block may be
used as the minimum front yard building setback line. Otherwise, the setbacks
within the Form-Based Code in Article VIII shall apply..
F. Height Requirements.
All principal structures shall have a maximum height of 35 feet. All accessory structures
shall have a maximum height of 20 feet.
G. Application of Supplementary Provisions.
All uses, structures, and lots shall comply with all applicable Supplementary Provisions
as provided in Article III as well as all other pertinent provisions of this Ordinance.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 51
§208
§ 208
SECTION 208. R-2 Residential Districts.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this District is to promote the continuation of high density residential neighborhoods and to protect such neighborhoods from incompatible land uses. Single-family detached dwellings represent the most prevalent land use throughout this District. Certain nonresidential uses, which are compatible with the Borough's high density residential neighborhoods, are permitted by special exception.
B. Permitted Uses.
1. Single-family detached dwellings.
2. Single-family semi-detached dwelling.
3. Customary accessory uses, buildings, and structures incidental to the above
permitted uses subject to Section 301.
4. Gardening.
5. Public Parks, Playgrounds or Recreation Areas subject to Section 410.
6. Essential Services Structures subject to Section 408.
7. Animals and Animal Shelters subject to Section 415.
8. Home Occupations (no-impact home-based businesses as defined herein) in
accordance with Section 401.
C. Special Exception Uses.
1. Public/Municipal Buildings and Uses subject to Section 412.
2. Essential Services Buildings subject to Section 408.
3. Home Businesses subject to Section 401.
4. Day Care Homes subject to Section 402.
5. Restricted Parks, Playgrounds or Recreation Areas subject to Section 410.
6. Places of worship subject to Section 405.
7. Public libraries subject to Section 412.
8. Schools (General Education) subject to Section 407.
9. Funeral homes subject to Section 413.
10. Cemeteries subject to Section 414.
11. Bed and breakfast inns subject to Section 404.
12. Hospitals, Nursing/Convalescent Homes subject to Section 417.
13. Social and Fraternal Clubs and Organizations subject to Section 411.
14. Accessory Apartments subject to Section 416.
15. Conversion Apartments subject to Section 406.
D. Conditional Uses
1. Demolition of an existing structure subject to Section 322
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 52
§208
§ 208.1
E. Lot and Yard Requirements.
1. New Construction shall follow the Lot and Yard Requirements Presented in the Form Based Codes. The minimum lot and yard requirements shall be determined by the following table as well as all other applicable provisions contained in this Section. Within the following table "square feet" and "feet" are abbreviated as "S.F." and " ft " respectively.
Minimum Lot Area (S.F.)
6,000
Minimum Lot Width (ft)
50
Minimum Side Yard (ft)
8
Minimum Rear Yard (ft)
20
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)
65
2. If the block on which the lot is located is more than fifty percent (50%) developed, the average setback of the existing structures on that block may be used as the minimum front yard building setback line. Otherwise, the setbacks within the Form-Based Code in Article VIII shall apply.
F. Height Requirements.
All principal structures shall have a maximum height of 35 feet. All accessory structures shall have a maximum height of 20 feet.
G. Application of Supplementary Provisions.
All uses, structures, and lots shall comply with all applicable Supplementary Provisions as provided in Article III as well as all other pertinent provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 208.1 R-2A Residential Districts.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this District is to promote the continuation of high density residential neighborhoods that provide a mixture of housing types that are interspersed throughout the neighborhood rather than concentrated in a particular section. Certain nonresidential uses, which are compatible with the Borough’s high-density residential neighborhoods, are permitted by special exception. Central goals for the district are compatibility with the Neighborhood Storefront district, and with the general pattern and visual character of historic Lititz. All structures shall conform to the Design Regulations of the Form-Based Code, Article VIII.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 53
§208.1
§ 208.1
B. Permitted Uses.
1. Single-family detached dwellings.
2. Single-family semi-detached dwelling.
3. Townhouses.
4. Apartments.
5. Customary accessory uses, buildings, and structures incidental to the above permitted uses subject to Section 301.
6. Private swimming pools, in accordance with Section 312.
7. Private garages, playhouses, gardens, garden houses or green houses not used for commercial purposes, in accordance with Section 301.
8. Home occupations (no-impact home-based businesses as defined herein), in accordance with Section 401.
9. Parking lots and structures accessory to multi-family uses, in accordance with Section 307 and as stipulated herein.
10. Animals and Animal Shelters subject to Section 415.
11. Public Parks, Playgrounds or Recreation Areas, including neighborhood greens, civic space, and other common open space subject to Section 410.
12. Essential Services Structures subject to Section 408.
C. Special Exception Uses.
1. Public/Municipal Buildings and Uses subject to Section 412.
2. Home Businesses subject to Section 401.
3. Day Care Homes subject to Section 402.
4. Restricted Parks, Playgrounds or Recreation Areas subject to Section 410.
5. Schools (General Education) subject to Section 407.
6. Bed and breakfast inns subject to Section 404.
7. Hospitals, Nursing/Convalescent Homes subject to Section 417.
8. Accessory Apartments subject to Section 416.
D. Conditional Uses
1. Demolition of an existing structure subject to Section 322
E. Lot Requirements.
1. New Construction shall follow the Lot and Yard Requirements Presented in the Form Based Codes. The minimum lot and yard requirements shall be determined by the following table as well as all other applicable provisions contained in this Section.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 54
§208.1
§ 208.1
Area Requirement
Detached Units
Semi- Detached Units
Interior Townhouse Units
Exterior Townhouse Units
Multiple- Family
Non Residential Uses
Minimum Lot Area (S.F.)
5,000
4,000
2,000
3,500
20,000
12,500
Minimum Lot Width (ft)
50
40
20
35
100
80
Minimum Side Yard (ft.)
8
8
0
15
25
20
Minimum Rear Yard (ft)
20
20
20
20
20
30
Minimum Front Yard (ft)
10
10
10
10
10
10
Maximum Front Yard (ft)
25
25
25
25
25
25
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)
65
70
80
65
65
65
Amount Permitted of Each Dwelling Type (Max % of Total Dwelling Types).
60
25
20
-
20
N/A
Amount Permitted of Each Dwelling Type – Min. % of Total Dwelling Types
25
10
10
-
10
N/A
* Note: Porches may encroach within the setback.
2. If the block on which the lot is located is more than fifty percent (50%) developed, the average setback of the existing structures on that block may be used as the minimum front yard building setback line. Otherwise, the setbacks within the Form-Based Code in Article VIII shall apply.
F. Height Requirements.
All principal structures shall have a maximum height of fifty (50) feet. Buildings shall be one and one half-story minimum to two and one-half stories, to a maximum of fifty (50) feet. All accessory structures shall have a maximum height of eighteen (20) feet, unless the second story is used for housing. If so, the maximum height shall not exceed twenty- eight (28) feet.
G. Signage Requirements.
All signage shall conform to the requirements as listed for the RS Residential District.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 55
§208.1
§ 209
H. Application of Supplementary Provisions.
All uses, structures, and lots shall comply with all applicable Supplementary Provisions as provided in Article III as well as all other pertinent provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 209. R-A Residential Districts.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this District is to promote high density residential neighborhoods with a wide range of housing types and to protect such neighborhoods from incompatible land uses. Single-family semi-detached dwellings, townhouses, and apartments are permitted to encourage a variety of dwelling types and to advocate affordable housing. Certain nonresidential uses, which are compatible with these neighborhoods, are permitted by special exception.
B. Permitted Uses.
1. Single-family detached dwellings.
2. Single-family semi-detached dwellings.
3. Apartments.
4. Condominiums.
5. Townhouses.
6. Customary accessory uses, buildings, and structures incidental to the above permitted uses subject to Section 301.
7. Gardening.
8. Public Parks, Playgrounds or Recreation Areas subject to Section 410.
9. Essential Services Structures subject to Section 408.
10. Animals and Animal Shelters subject to Section 415.
11. Home Occupations (no-impact home-based businesses as defined herein) in accordance with Section 401.
C. Special Exception Uses.
1. Public/Municipal Buildings and Uses subject to Section 412.
2. Essential Services Buildings subject to Section 408.
3. Restricted Parks, Playgrounds or Recreation Areas subject to Section 410.
4. Places of worship subject to Section 405.
5. Public libraries subject to Section 412.
6. Social and Fraternal Clubs and Organizations subject to Section 411.
7. Accessory Apartments subject to Section 416.
8. Conversion Apartments subject to Section 406.
9. Transitional Housing subject to Section 424.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 56
§208.1
§ 209
D. Conditional Uses
1. Demolition of an existing structure subject to Section 322
E. Lot and Yard Requirements.
1. New Construction shall follow the Lot and Yard Requirements Presented in the Form Based Codes. The minimum lot and yard requirements shall be determined by the following table as well as all other applicable provisions contained in this Section. Within the following table "square feet" and "feet" are abbreviated as "S.F." and " ' " respectively.
WITH PUBLIC SEWER AND PUBLIC WATER
MINIMUM LOT AREA (S.F.)
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
MINIMUM SIDE YARD
MINIMUM REAR YARD
MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE
Single-family detached
6,000
50'
8'
20'
65%
Single-family semidetached (per unit)
5,000
40'
10'
20'
65%
Townhouses
Interior Units
2,000
20'
0'
20'
80%
End Units
4,000
35'
15'
20'
65%
Multiple-Family
20,000
100'
25'
20'
65%
Non-residential uses
12,500
80'
20'
30'
65%
2. If the block on which the lot is located is more than fifty percent (50%) developed, the average setback of the existing structures on that block may be used as the minimum front yard building setback line. Otherwise, the setbacks within the Form-Based Code in Article VIII shall apply.
F. Height Requirements.
All principal structures shall have a maximum height of 35 feet. All accessory structures shall have a maximum height of 20 feet.
G. Application of Supplementary Provisions.
All uses, structures, and lots shall comply with all applicable Supplementary Provisions as provided in Article III as well as all other pertinent provisions of this Ordinance.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 57
§210
§ 210
SECTION 210. Office and Professional Districts.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this District is to provide an environment which is conducive to professional office businesses. These areas are intended to function as distinct office centers without retail sales or other such uses which are incompatible with professional office uses. Uses which are consistent with the intent of this District, yet require a higher level of scrutiny, are permitted by special exception.
B. Permitted Uses.
1. Medical clinics and dental clinics.
2. Business offices and professional offices/studios.
3. Banks and other financial institutions.
4. Medical laboratories.
5. Non-profit clubs.
6. Customary accessory uses, buildings, and structures incidental to the above permitted uses subject to Section 301.
7. Gardening.
8. Public Parks, Playgrounds or Recreation Areas subject to Section 410.
9. Essential Services Structures subject to Section 408.
10. Business conversions subject to Section 418.
11. Home Occupations (no-impact home-based businesses as defined herein) in accordance with Section 401.
12. Single family detached dwellings.
C. Special Exception Uses.
1. Public/Municipal Buildings and Uses subject to Section 412.
2. Essential Services Buildings subject to Section 408.
3. Home Businesses subject to Section 401.
4. Accessory apartments subject to Section 416.
5. Day Care Center as accessory use to a permitted use subject to Section 402.
6. Schools subject to Section 407.
7. Funeral homes subject to Section 413.
8. Social and Fraternal Clubs and Organizations subject to Section 411.
D. Conditional Uses
1. Demolition of an existing structure subject to Section 322
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 58
§ 210. § 211
E. Lot and Yard Requirements.
1. New Construction shall follow the Lot and Yard Requirements Presented in the Form Based Codes. The minimum lot and yard requirements shall be determined by the following table as well as all other applicable provisions contained in this Section. Within the following table "square feet" and "feet" are abbreviated as "S.F." and " ft " respectively.
Minimum Lot Area (S. F.)
No Minimum
Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
No Minimum
Minimum Side Yard (ft.)
No Minimum
Minimum Rear Yard (ft.)
20
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)
85
2. If the block on which the lot is located is more than fifty percent (50%) developed, the average setback of the existing structures on that block may be used as the minimum front yard building setback line. Otherwise, the setbacks within the Form-Based Code in Article VIII shall apply.
F. Height Requirements.
All structures shall have a maximum height of fifty (50) feet. All principal buildings shall have a minimum height of twenty (20) feet.
G. Application of Supplementary Provisions.
All uses, structures, and lots shall comply with all applicable supplementary provisions as provided in Article III as well as all other pertinent provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 211. Commercial District.
A. Purpose. The regulations for this District are intended to preserve and enhance the sense of place which is experienced within the Borough's central business district through the encouragement of a mixture of commercial uses, accompanied by upper story residential, which continues and compliments the Borough’s historic character. Commercial uses are generally limited by size and intensity to prevent the establishment of intensive commercial uses which exceed the historic scale of the District. Residential uses are permitted within the district as upper story apartments, accessory apartments, and a limited number of single-family homes. Uses which are consistent with the intent of this District, yet require a higher level of scrutiny, are permitted by special exception.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 59
§ 211 § 211
B. Permitted Uses.
1. The following business uses shall be permitted in the Commercial District provided that the use shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area when in a building of two stories, or four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor area when in a building of three or more stories.
a. Personal Services
b. Retail Businesses
2. The following business uses shall be permitted in the Commercial District provided that the use shall not exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor area when in a building of two stories, or ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area when in a building of three or more stories. However, the use may exceed the above square footage as a special exception, but shall be designed to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that the exterior of the building will continue to give the appearance of a small storefront area.
a. Banking and other financial institutions.
b. Business and professional offices and studios, including medical and dental offices.
c. Restaurants, Taverns, and Cafes.
1. Outdoor seating for eating establishments shall maintain a minimum six-foot clear zone for pedestrian movements.
3. Hotels subject to Section 420.
4. Public garages.
5. Conversion apartments subject to Section 406.
6. Essential Services Structures subject to Section 408.
7. Customary accessory uses, buildings, and structures incidental to the above permitted uses subject to Section 301.
8. Business conversions subject to Section 418.
9. Home Occupations (no-impact home-based businesses as defined herein) in accordance with Section 401.
10. Event Space
11. Upper story apartments above another permitted non-residential use.
C. Special Exception Uses.
1. Public/Municipal Buildings and Uses subject to Section 412.
2. Essential Services Buildings subject to Section 408.
3. Day Care Center subject to Section 402.
4. Social and Fraternal Clubs and Organizations subject to Section 411.
5. Bed and breakfast inns subject to Section 404.
6. Adult-oriented businesses subject to Section 403.
7. Home Businesses subject to Section 401.
8. Single Family Homes, not to exceed 20% of the principal uses in the district.
9. Accessory Apartments subject to Section 416.
10 Theatres in accordance with Section 428.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 60
§ 211.1 § 211.1
D. Conditional Uses
1. Demolition of an existing structure subject to Section 322
E. Lot and Yard Requirements.
1. New Construction shall follow the Lot and Yard Requirements Presented in the Form Based Codes. The minimum lot and yard requirements shall be determined by the following table as well as all other applicable provisions contained in this Section. Within the following table "square feet" and "feet" are abbreviated as "S.F." and " ft " respectively.
Minimum Lot Area (S. F.)
No Minimum
Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
No Minimum
Minimum Side Yard (ft.)
No Minimum
Minimum Rear Yard (ft.)
20
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)
85
2. If the block on which the lot is located is more than fifty percent (50%) developed, the average setback of the existing structures on that block may be used as the minimum front yard building setback line. Otherwise, the setbacks within the Form-Based Code in Article VIII shall apply.
F. Height Requirements.
All structures shall have a maximum height of fifty (50) feet. All principal buildings shall have a minimum height of twenty (20) feet.
G. Application of Supplementary Provisions.
All uses, structures, and lots shall comply with all applicable Supplementary Provisions as provided in Article III as well as all other pertinent provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 211.1 Neighborhood Storefront District. (NSD)
A. Purpose. The regulations for this District are intended to provide for business enterprises and commercial needs while preserving and enhancing the sense of place, which is experienced within the Borough. This District encourages commercial uses, which primarily function to serve the needs of the local neighborhood and not compete with the function of the Borough's historic downtown. The Neighborhood Storefront District, in combination with the adjacent residential districts, provides the mixture of uses and the expansion of service and retail activities set forth in the Lititz-Warwick Joint Strategic
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 61
§ 211.1 § 211.1
B. Comprehensive Plan.
Commercial uses are generally limited by size and intensity to allow a mixture of uses and to prevent the establishment of intensive commercial uses, which exceed the neighborhood orientation of this District. Residential uses are permitted, when combined with a commercial use in the same structure, to allow access to local goods and services. Uses are encouraged to be developed in ways that control traffic ingress and egress, provide convenient and adequate off-street parking and promote pedestrian access through the use of sidewalks and walking paths.
1. The following elements characterize the district:
a. The inclusion of a public square or plaza as a central organizing feature;
b. The inclusion of residential living units above street-level shops;
c. A mix of office with some civic and retail uses;
d. Compatibility with the historic character, architectural styles and pattern of the existing community;
e. The protection of significant natural, cultural, and historic features.
C. Permitted Uses. Drive-in facilities; drive-in service place; restaurant, drive-in; and adult- oriented uses are not permitted. Mixed-use structures are encouraged.
1. The following business uses shall be permitted in the NSD provided that the use shall not exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor area when in a building of one and one-half story, or ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area when in a building of two or more stories. However, the use may exceed the above square footage as a special exception, but shall be designed to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that the exterior of the building will continue to give the appearance of a small storefront area. Outdoor seating for eating establishments shall maintain a minimum six-foot clear zone for pedestrian movements.
a. Banking and other financial institutions.
b. Business and professional offices and studios, including medical and dental offices.
c. Restaurants and cafes.
2. The following business uses shall be permitted in the NSD provided that the use shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area when in a building of one and one-half story, or four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor area when in a building of two or more stories. Outdoor seating for eating establishments shall maintain a minimum six-foot clear zone for pedestrian movements.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 62
§ 211.1 § 211.1
a. Personal services, including but not limited to barber, beauty, tanning and health salons, tailors, off-site dry cleaning, self-service laundry, and repair shops.
b. Retail business, including but not limited to pharmacies, music and video shops, news centers and book stores, bakery and delicatessens, convenience store without gasoline service, confectionary stores, dry goods and art supply shops, flower shops, photographic studios and supply shops, electronic supply stores, office supply shops, and sporting good stores.
3. The following residential uses shall be permitted in the NSD area:
a. Multiple family dwellings
b. Nursing/convalescent homes in accordance with Section 417.
c. Upper-story residential uses to be located over shops and/or offices.
d. Single-family attached dwelling units, including quadraplexes.
4. Public parks, playgrounds or recreation areas, including greens, neighborhood squares, civic space, and botanical gardens subject to Section 321 and 410.
5. Customary accessory uses, buildings, and structures incidental to the above permitted uses subject to Section 301, including:
a. Private swimming pools, in accordance with Section 312.
b. Private garages, playhouses, garden houses or green houses not used for commercial purposes, in accordance with Section 301.
c. Home occupations (no-impact home-based businesses as defined herein), in accordance with Section 401.
d. Parking lots and structures accessory to multi-family and nonresidential uses, in accordance with Section 307 and as stipulated herein.
D. Special Exception Uses.
1. Public/Municipal Buildings and Uses subject to Section 412.
2. Day care center in accordance with Section 402.
3. Elementary and secondary schools in accordance with Section 407.
4. Churches and similar places of religious worship. These uses shall be in accordance with the dimensional requirements of the NSD and not Section 405.
5. Bed and breakfast inns subject to Section 404.
6. Home businesses subject to Section 401.
E. Conditional Uses
1. Demolition of an existing structure subject to Section 322
F. Lot Requirements.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 63
§ 211.1 § 211.1
1. New Construction shall follow the Lot and Yard Requirements Presented in the Form Based Codes. The minimum lot and yard requirements shall be determined by the following table as well as all other applicable provisions contained in this Section.
Minimum Lot Area (S.F.)
No minimum - add twenty (20) percent to the land area needed for the structure, on- lot parking, ingress/egress, and any other on-site infrastructure that is required. The additional twenty (20) percent shall constitute setbacks and landscaped buffers
Minimum Lot Width (ft)
20
Maximum Front Yard (ft)
10
Minimum Side Yard (ft)
5
Minimum Rear Yard (ft)
20 feet, except for structures along alleys in which case the minimum setback shall be ten (10) feet from the edge of pavement
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)
85
2. A thirty-five (35) foot wide side yard is required on the side abutting a residential district without an intervening street, alley, and lane or railroad right-of-way.
3. Parking shall be placed to the rear of the lot.
G. Height Requirements.
Principal buildings shall be between one-and-one half and four stories above grade as seen from their front sides with a maximum height of fifty feet (50’), and a minimum height of 20 feet. The height limit shall not apply to bell or clock towers, cupolas, steeples, or similar architectural features in accordance with Section 304 herein.
H. Signage Requirements.
All signage shall conform to the requirements as listed for the Commercial District.
I. Application of Supplementary Provisions.
All uses, structures, and lots shall comply with all applicable Supplementary Provisions as provided in Article III as well as all other pertinent provisions of this Ordinance.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 64
§ 211.2 § 211.2
SECTION 211.2 Neighborhood Storefront District – 1 (NSD-1)
A. Purpose. The regulations for this District are intended to provide for business enterprises and commercial needs while preserving and enhancing the sense of place, which is experienced within the Borough. This District encourages commercial uses, which primarily function to serve the needs of the Borough residents. The Neighborhood
Storefront District - 1, in combination with the adjacent commercial districts of the historic Downtown, provides the mixture of uses and the expansion of service and retail activities set forth in the Lititz-Warwick Joint Strategic Comprehensive Plan.
The Neighborhood Storefront District - 1 provides a compatible mixture of residential and nonresidential uses that is suitable in areas along Main Street and in close proximity to residential neighborhoods, but prevents the establishment of intensive commercial uses, which would negatively impact the flow of traffic and access through these areas. Residential uses are permitted, when combined with a commercial use in the same structure, to allow access to local goods and services. Uses are encouraged to be developed in ways that control traffic ingress and egress and provide convenient and adequate off-street parking.
B. Permitted Uses. Drive-in facilities; drive-in service place; restaurant, drive-in; and adult- oriented uses are not permitted. Mixed-use structures are encouraged.
1. The following business uses shall be permitted in the NSD-1 provided that the use shall not exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor area when in a building of one and one-half story, or ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area when in a building of two or more stories. However, the use may exceed the above square footage as a special exception, but shall be designed to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that the exterior of the building will continue to give the appearance of a small storefront area. Outdoor seating for eating establishments shall maintain a minimum six-foot clear zone for pedestrian movements.
a. Banking and other financial institutions.
b. Business and professional offices and studios, including medical and dental offices.
c. Restaurants and cafes.
2. The following business uses shall be permitted in the NSD-1 provided that the use shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area when in a building of one and one-half story, or four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor area when in a building of two or more stories. Outdoor seating for eating establishments shall maintain a minimum six-foot clear zone for pedestrian movements.
a. Personal services, including but not limited to barber, beauty tanning and
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 65
§ 211.2 § 211.2
health salons, tailors, off-site dry cleaning, self-service laundry, and repair shops.
b. Retail business, including but not limited to pharmacies, music and video
shops, news centers and book stores, bakery and delicatessens, convenience store without gasoline service, confectionary stores, dry goods and art supply shops, flower shops, photographic studios and supply shops, electronic supply stores, office supply shops, and sporting good stores.
3. The following residential uses shall be permitted in the NSD-1 area:
a. Attached dwelling units over shops and/or offices.
b. Nursing/convalescent homes in accordance with Section 417.
4. Customary accessory uses, buildings, and structures incidental to the above permitted uses subject to Section 301, including:
a. Home occupations (no-impact home-based businesses as defined, herein), in accordance with Section 401.
b. Parking lots and structures accessory to multi-family and nonresidential uses, in accordance with Section 307 and as stipulated herein.
C. Special Exception Uses.
1. Churches and similar places of religious worship in accordance with Section 405
2. Day care center in accordance with Section 402.
3. Public/municipal buildings and uses subject to Section 412.
4. Social and fraternal clubs and organizations subject to Section 411.
5. Accessory apartments subject to Section 416.
6. Conversion apartments subject to Section 406.
7. Home businesses subject to Section 401.
8. Bed and Breakfast inns subject to Section 404.
D. Conditional Uses
1. Demolition of an existing structure subject to Section 322
E. Lot and Yard Requirements.
1. New Construction shall follow the Lot and Yard Requirements Presented in the Form Based Codes. The minimum lot and yard requirements shall be determined by the following table as well as all other applicable provisions contained in this Section.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 66
§ 211.2 § 211.2
Minimum Lot Area (S.F.)
No minimum – add twenty (20) percent to the land area needed for the structure, on-lot parking, ingress/egress, and any other on-site infrastructure that is required. The additional twenty (20) percent shall constitute setbacks and landscaped buffers
Minimum Lot Width (ft)
20
Maximum Front Yard (ft)
20
Minimum Side Yard (ft)
5
Minimum Rear Yard (ft)
20 feet, except for structures along alleys in which case the minimum setback shall be ten (10) feet from the edge of pavement
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)
85
2. Parking shall be placed to the rear of the lot.
F. Height Requirements.
Principal buildings shall be between one-and-one half and four stories above grade as seen from their front sides with a maximum height of fifty (50’) feet, and a minimum height of 20 feet. The height limit shall not apply to bell or clock towers, cupolas, steeples, or similar architectural features in accordance with Section 304 herein.
G. Signage Requirements.
All signage shall conform to the requirements as listed for the Commercial District.
H. Application of Supplementary Provisions.
All uses, structures, and lots shall comply with all applicable Supplementary Provisions as provided in Article III as well as all other pertinent provisions of this Ordinance.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 67
§ 212. § 212.
SECTION 212. General Business District.
A. Purpose. The regulations for this District are intended to provide suitable locations for commercial uses, including both small-scale and large-scale businesses. The uses permitted in this District serve local residents as well as motorists passing through the Borough. Uses which are consistent with the intent of this District, yet require a higher level of scrutiny, are permitted by special exception.
B. Permitted Uses.
1. Retail business up to 20.000 square feet on the ground floor.
2. Medical clinics and dental clinics.
3. Business offices and professional offices/studios.
4. Banks and other financial institutions.
5. Hotels and motels subject to Section 420.
6. Restaurants and taverns, including restaurants with drive-in facilities.
7. Public garages.
8. Bed and breakfast inns subject to Section 404.
9. Commercial recreation.
10. Amusement arcades.
11. Motor vehicle service stations.
12. Motor vehicle washes.
13. Motor vehicle repair garages and body shops.
14. Motor vehicle sales.
15. Hospitals and nursing/convalescent homes subject to Section 417.
16. Self-service laundry.
17. Dry cleaners.
18. Night clubs.
19. Self-service storage facilities.
20. Convenience stores.
21. Non-profit clubs.
22. Business conversions subject to Section 418.
23. Customary accessory uses, buildings, and structures incidental to the above permitted uses subject to Section 301.
24. Essential services structures, subject to Section 408.
25. Home Occupations (no-impact home-based businesses as defined herein) in accordance with Section 401.
26. Personal services.
C. Special Exception Uses.
1. Public/Municipal Buildings and Uses subject to Section 412.
2. Essential services buildings subject to Section 408.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 68
§ 212. § 212.
3. Recreational, health, or fitness clubs conducted for profit.
4. Commercial kennels subject to Section 409.
5. Veterinary clinics and animal hospitals subject to Section 409.
6. Recycling centers/plants subject to Section 421.
7. Day Care Centers subject to Section 402.
8. Home Businesses subject to Section 401.
9. Retail business of 20,000 square feet and greater on the ground floor, subject to the Form-Based Code Regulations of Article VIII.
10. Theatres in accordance with Section 428.
D. Conditional Uses
1. Demolition of an existing structure subject to Section 322
E. Lot and Yard Requirements.
1. New Construction shall comply with the Building Location & Size regulations set forth in the Form Based Code. The minimum lot and yard requirements shall be determined by the following table as well as all other applicable provisions contained in this Section. Within the following table "square feet" and "feet" are abbreviated as "S.F." and " ft " respectively.
Minimum Lot Area (S. F.)
No Minimum
Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
No Minimum
Minimum Side Yard (ft.)
No Minimum
Minimum Rear Yard (ft.)
20
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)
85
2. If the block on which the lot is located is more than fifty percent (50%) developed, the average setback of the existing structures on that block may be used as the minimum front yard building setback line. Otherwise, the setbacks within the Form-Based Code in Article VIII shall apply.
3. A thirty-five (35) foot wide side yard is required on the side abutting a residential district without an intervening street, alley, lane or railroad right-of-way.
F. Height Requirements.
All structures shall have a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet. All principal buildings shall have a minimum height of twenty (20) feet.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 69
§ 212. § 213.
G. Application of Supplementary Provisions.
All uses, structures, and lots shall comply with all applicable Supplementary Provisions as provided in Article III as well as all other pertinent provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 213. Industrial Districts.
A. Purpose. This District is intended to strengthen the Borough's economy and employment base by accommodating a wide range of industrial uses. Railroads and major roads provide access to the majority of the areas within this District.
B. Permitted Uses.
1. Manufacturing businesses.
2. Businesses involved with processing and assembling operations.
3. Recycling centers/plants subject to Section 421.
4. Warehouses and wholesaling.
5. Self-service storage facilities.
6. Building materials sales rooms.
7. Contractors' equipment yards.
8. Laboratories and medical laboratories.
9. Essential services buildings and structures subject to Section 408.
10. Public garages.
11. Motor vehicle service stations.
12. Motor vehicle washes.
13. Motor vehicle repair garages and body shops.
14. Motor vehicle sales.
15. Business conversions subject to Section 418.
16. Non-profit clubs.
17. Customary accessory uses, buildings, and structures incidental to the above permitted uses subject to Section 301.
18. Home Occupations (no-impact home-based businesses as defined herein) in accordance with Section 401.
C. Special Exception Uses.
1. Public/Municipal Buildings and Uses subject to Section 412.
2. Greenhouses/nurseries subject to Section 419.
3. Recreational, health, or fitness clubs conducted for profit.
4. Commercial kennels subject to Section 409.
5. Veterinary clinics and animal hospitals subject to Section 409.
6. Day Care Centers as an accessory use to a permitted use subject to Section 402.
7. Home Businesses subject to Section 401.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 70
§ 213. § 213.
D. Conditional Uses
1. Demolition of an existing structure subject to Section 322
E. Lot and Yard Requirements.
1. New Construction shall comply with the Building Location & Size regulations set forth in the Form Based Code. The minimum lot and yard requirements shall be determined by the following table as well as all other applicable provisions contained in this Section. Within the following table "square feet" and "feet" are abbreviated as "S.F." and " ft " respectively.
Minimum Lot Area (S. F.)
No Minimum
Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
No Minimum
Minimum Side Yard (ft.)
No Minimum
Minimum Rear Yard (ft.)
20
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)
85
2. If the block on which the lot is located is more than fifty percent (50%) developed, the average setback of the existing structures on that block may be used as the minimum front yard building setback line. Otherwise, the setbacks within the Form-Based Code in Article VIII shall apply.
3. A thirty-five (35) foot wide side yard is required on the side abutting a residential district without an intervening street, alley, lane or railroad right-of-way.
4. No setback is required adjacent to a railroad right-of-way.
F. Height Requirements.
All structures shall have a maximum height of 60 feet, and a minimum height of 20 feet.
G. Application of Supplementary Provisions.
All uses, structures, and lots shall comply with all applicable Supplementary Provisions as provided in Article III as well as all other pertinent provisions of this Ordinance.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 71
§ 214. § 215.
SECTION 214. Historical Areas and Historic Overlay.
A. Applicability of Regulations.
1. Within the Historical Areas, the Zoning Officer shall review all applications in accordance with Article VI and the Historic Overlay District regulations of Section 426.
2. The Historical Areas are as shown on the Historic Resources Map in Article VIII.
SECTION 215. Floodplain District.
Ordinance C-544, adopted by Borough Council on March 29, 2016, established a standalone Flood Plain ordinance. Article II, Section 2.01.B of C-544 states that this ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance are to be consistent. When provisions of the two ordinances cannot be interpreted in a consistent fashion, the provisions of C-544 shall be controlling regarding floodplain issues.
A. Purpose.
1. The Floodplain District shall include the areas of the Borough of Lititz which are subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters. This inundation results in loss of life and property; health and safety hazards; disruption of commerce and governmental services; extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief; impairment of the tax base; and other adverse effects on the public health, safety and general welfare.
2. In the interest of public health, safety and welfare, the regulations of the Floodplain District are designed and intended to protect floodplains subject to and necessary for floodwaters, to permit and encourage the retention of open land uses so located and utilized and to guide incompatible development into more appropriate zoning districts.
3. In advancing these principles and the general purposes of this Zoning Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan, and as a supplement to Section 101 of this Ordinance, the specific intent of these regulations include the following:
a. Regulating uses, activities and development, which, acting alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities, and frequencies.
b. Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development from locating within areas subject to flooding.
c. Requiring all those uses, activities and developments that do occur in flood-prone areas to be protected and/or floodproofed against flooding and flood damage.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 72
§ 215. § 215.
d. Informing individuals when buying lands and structures which are
unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazard.
B. District Boundaries.
1. The identified floodplain area shall be those areas of the Borough of Lititz,
Lancaster County, which are subject to the one hundred (100) year flood, as
identified in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated April 19, 2005 and the
accompanying maps as prepared for by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision thereof.
2. Where the complete and definite information necessary to delineate the boundary
of the Floodplain District or to determine the 100-year flood elevation
(approximate zones) is not available to the Zoning Officer in his consideration of
an application for a permit, he shall require such on-site studies and/or surveys to
be made as necessary to fix the precise boundaries of the Floodplain District and
the elevation of the 100-year flood as defined in this Section. Such studies and
surveys shall be signed, sealed and certified by a licensed, professional engineer
registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to perform such studies and
surveys. Such certification shall acknowledge the accuracy of the study or survey
and the qualifications of the individual to perform such study or survey. Copies of
such studies and surveys may be submitted by the Zoning Officer to the Borough
Engineer and the United States Department of Agriculture's Soil Conservation
Service, who shall have 30 days to comment. Any property owner whose property
is so studied and/or surveyed to justify an application for a permit shall pay all
costs of these studies and surveys.
3. All changes to the boundaries of the Floodplain District are subject to the review
and approval of the Federal Insurance Administrator for compliance with the
Rules and Regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
C. Boundary Disputes.
1. Should any person dispute the initial boundary determination of the Floodplain
District as determined by the Zoning Officer from the information referred to in
Section 215.C., an appeal may be made to the Zoning Hearing Board. The burden
of proof in such an appeal shall be on the property owner. The property owner
shall pay costs in accordance with established procedures for a Zoning Hearing
Board appeal.
2. The provisions of this Section create an overlay zoning district which is applicable
within floodplains in all zoning districts established by this Ordinance, as defined
and delineated by this Section. To the extent that the provisions of this Section
are applicable and more restrictive, they shall supersede conflicting provisions
within all other Articles of this Ordinance, and all other ordinances of the
Borough of Lititz shall remain in full force and effect.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 73
§ 215. § 215.
D. Permitted Uses. The following uses and no others are permitted in the Floodplain District, and they are permitted only if accomplished under and in accordance with the provisions of the Clean Streams Law of Pennsylvania, Act 394 of 1937, as amended, the Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and all other provisions of this Article and other applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
1. Agriculture, horticulture, and forestry, all excluding any fill or structures and excluding any grading or filling which would cause any increase in flood heights or frequency.
2. Erosion and sedimentation control measures, facilities and structures, provided that no unhealthful ponding or other unsanitary conditions shall occur.
3. Public recreational uses, such as parks, play areas, picnic groves, lawns, gardens, fishing, paved bicycle paths, and hiking and horseback riding trails, all excluding any fill or structures except as provided in this Section and excluding any grading or filling which would cause any increase in flood heights or frequency.
4. Activities related to the preservation of natural amenities, including wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, woodland preserves, botanical gardens, or arboretums, excluding any grading or filling which would cause any increase in flood heights or frequency.
5. Open space and front, side or rear yards required by other Articles of this Ordinance. Floodplain land may be used to meet minimum open space, yard and lot area requirements, provided that the purpose and intent of this Section, as set forth in this Section, together with the requirements of any other pertinent municipal regulations, is complied with.
6. Stream improvements whose sole purpose is to improve aquatic life habitat and which are approved by the Pennsylvania Fish Commission and reviewed by the Lancaster County Conservation District and subject to the provisions of Section 215.I.2.c.
7. One- or two-strand wire fences and rail-type fences consisting of one or two rails.
8. Picnic tables, park benches, fireplaces, grills, and playground equipment, all if anchored to prevent flotation.
9. Circuses, carnivals and similar transient enterprises, provided that natural vegetative ground cover is not destroyed, removed or covered in such a way as to create erosion or sedimentation.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 74
§ 215. § 215.
10. Farm ponds which are constructed in accordance with a conservation plan reviewed by the Lancaster County Conservation District and which do not create any increase in flooding, and subject to the provisions of Section 215.I.2.c.
11. Floodproofing and flood hazard reduction structures to protect only lawfully existing nonconforming structures and lawfully existing nonconforming uses within structures.
12. Public utility facilities, except buildings, under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission and specifically exempted from control by Municipal Zoning Ordinances, subject to the provisions of Section 215.I.7.
13. Water monitoring devices.
14. Culverts, bridges and approaches to public and private culverts and bridges, provided that the same meet all the following conditions:
a. Review and/or approval by the Lancaster County Planning Commission, if required.
b. Approval by the Susquehanna River Basin Commission, if required.
c. Approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, if required. Approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT), if required.
d. If approval by PennDOT is not required, the proposed use must still meet all of the appropriate minimum design standards of PennDOT.
e. Approval by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, if required.
f. The proposed structure must be designed in such a way as to have the capacity to allow the unrestricted passage of waters of maximum flood elevation below and through it without any upstream or downstream increase in water surface elevation.
E. Special Exception Uses.
1. The following uses in the Floodplain District are permitted only when special exceptions are granted by the Zoning Hearing Board as provided for herein and in Article VI, and when permitted by the underlying zoning district as permitted uses or special exception uses, provided that they are accomplished under and in accordance with the provisions of the Clean Streams Law of Pennsylvania, Act 394 of 1937, as amended, the Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and all other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance:
a. Parking lots, loading areas and driveways for vehicle use only.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 75
§ 215. § 215.
b. Public utility facilities not under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, subject to the following conditions:
(1) Facilities such as pipe lines, gas lines, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water lines, outlet installations for sewage treatment plants, sealed public and private water supply wells, pumping stations, and underground communication facilities shall, together with associated structures, but excepting necessary vents, be designed and installed underground so as to be at or below the existing natural surface grade within the floodplain and in such a manner as will prevent flotation, minimize or eliminate flood damage, and not alter the cross-sectional areas of the floodplain.
(2) All new or replacement water supply facilities and/or sanitary sewage facilities shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharges from the facilities into floodwaters.
(3) All gas lines shall have a system of shutoff valves for service to the Floodplain District to allow positive control during flood emergencies.
c. Fish hatcheries, including uncovered ponds and raceways, which are approved by the Pennsylvania Fish Commission, but excluding other structures.
d. Extraction of sand, gravel and other mineral resources.
e. Expansion of existing structures and the construction of additional buildings for existing industrial and commercial uses; provided, however, that the expansion of existing structures and/or the construction of additional buildings shall not be constructed in the floodway.
f. Other uses similar to the above, provided that the use will not reduce the cross-sectional area of the floodplain.
g. Storage of petroleum products for industrial heating or processes, provided that any aboveground structures are located outside the floodway and elevated or floodproofed to remain dry up to at least 1½ feet above the
100-year flood elevation.
2. Standards and criteria for special exceptions within the Floodplain District. In addition to the provisions of Article VI, the Zoning Hearing Board, when deciding upon special exceptions to be granted or denied under the provisions of this Section shall also determine that the following standards and criteria have been complied with:
a. That danger to life and property due to increased flood heights, velocities
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 76
§ 215. § 215.
or frequencies caused by encroachment is minimized.
b. That no or a minimum of floodwaters or materials will be swept onto other lands or downstream to cause injury to others.
c. That the possibility of disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions is minimized.
d. That the proposed facility needs a waterfront or floodplain location.
e. That available alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use or the expansion of the existing structure and use do not exist.
f. That the proposed use is compatible with existing anticipated development.
g. That the proposed use is consistent with the Borough of Lititz Comprehensive Plan and any floodplain management program for the area.
h. That safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles will be assured.
i. That the expected area, height, depth, velocity, pressure, frequency, duration, rate of rise, seasonality and sediment debris, and pollutant load of floodwaters expected at the site is not inconsistent with the proposed use.
j. That the proposed activity will not unduly alter natural water flow or water temperature.
k. That archeological or historic sites and structures endangered or threatened species of animals or plant, high-quality wildlife habitats, scarce vegetation types, and other irreplaceable land uses will not be degraded or destroyed.
l. That the natural, scenic and aesthetic values at the proposed site will be conserved.
m. That a minimal amount of danger, damage and injury to all adjoining properties on both sides of any watercourse, regardless of municipality, will occur. In this regard, any proposal affecting an adjacent municipality shall be submitted to that municipality's planning commission and governing body for review and comment.
n. That the grant of the special exception shall not cause:
(1) Increases in flood heights.
(2) Additional threats to public safety.
(3) Extraordinary public expense.
(4) Creation of nuisances
(5) Conflicts with local laws or ordinances.
3. In hearing and deciding upon special exceptions to be granted or denied under the provisions of this Section, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant. The Zoning Hearing Board may require the applicant to submit such plans,
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 77
§ 215. § 215.
specifications and other information as it may deem necessary to assist it in arriving at a fair and impartial determination. Such required information may include but not be limited to the following:
a. Plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, floodproofing measures, and the relationship of the above to the location of the channel.
b. A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of the watercourse, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel and cross- sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development and high water information.
c. A plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply facilities and sanitary facilities; photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation upstream and downstream; soil types; and other pertinent information.
d. A profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the watercourse.
e. Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of materials, water supply facilities, and sanitary facilities.
4. In hearing and deciding upon special exceptions to be granted or denied under the provisions of this Section, the Zoning Hearing Board may call upon any experts or authorities as it may deem necessary to assist it in arriving at a fair and impartial determination.
5. In granting any special exceptions, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach some reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this Ordinance, as it may deem necessary to implement the purpose of this Ordinance.
6. Variances from the provisions of this Section are discouraged. Where, however, a variance is essential, the following requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program must be complied with in addition to all other variance provisions of this Ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. In all variance proceedings, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant.
a. No variance shall be granted for any development, structure, use or activity within the floodway which would cause any increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood as defined by this Section.
b. Variances shall only be granted upon a:
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 78
§ 215. § 215.
(1) Showing of good and sufficient cause.
(2) Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(3) Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with any other applicable laws, ordinances or regulations.
(4) Determination that the grant of a variance will not jeopardize the flood insurance program of the Borough of Lititz.
c. Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
d. Whenever a variance is granted, the Board shall notify the applicant in writing that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
(2) Such variance may increase the risks to life and property.
e. A complete record of all variance requests and actions, including justifications for granted variances, shall be maintained by the Board.
F. Prohibited Uses.
The following uses are prohibited in the Floodplain District:
1. All uses prohibited expressly or implicitly in the underlying zoning district for the land in question.
2. All structures, with the exception of those specifically allowed in Sections 215.E. and F.
3. Sanitary landfills, dumps, junk and salvage yards, and outdoor storage of vehicles and/or materials.
4. Placing, depositing and dumping any spoil, fill or solid waste, except such grading, filling or depositing necessary to accomplish and carry out the permitted uses and uses by special exception specified in Sections 215.E. and F.; provided, however, that no grading or filling is permitted which would cause any increase in flood heights or frequency.
5. Removal of topsoil, excluding sod production and nursery activities as allowed in Sections 215.E. and F and except such removal of topsoil as is necessary to
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 79
§ 215. § 215.
accomplish and carry out the permitted uses and uses by special exception specified in Sections 215 E. and F.; provided, however, that no grading or filling is permitted which would cause any increase in flood heights or frequency.
6. Damming or relocation of any watercourse, except as provided for in Sections 215
E. and F.
7. Any parts of any on-site sewage disposal systems.
8. Swimming pools.
9. Stockpiling, storage, or disposal of buoyant materials, logging slash, herbicides, domestic or industrial waste, flammable materials, explosives, poisonous materials or other materials which, if flooded, would pollute the watercourse or be injurious to human, animal or plant life.
10. Cemeteries for humans or animals.
11. Zoo, menagerie, wild animal farm or domestic or farm animal enclosures which will not allow all animals to escape floodwaters of maximum flood elevation without human intervention while remaining safely confined.
12. The construction of new residential structures.
13. Any development, structure or use which may, whether alone or in combination with others:
a. Endanger human life.
b. Obstruct, impede, retard, change or increase the velocity, direction or flow of floodwaters.
c. Increase the surface elevation of floods or the frequency of floods.
d. Catch or collect debris carried by floodwaters.
e. Be placed where the natural flow of the stream or floodwaters would carry it downstream to the damage or detriment of property within or adjacent to the Floodplain District.
f. Degrade the water-carrying capacity of any watercourse, channel or floodplain.
g. Degrade the quality of surface water or the quality or quantity of groundwater.
h. Be susceptible to flotation and subsequent movement which would cause damage to other property.
i. Not be in harmony with the intent and purpose of this Section as set forth in Section 215.A.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 80
§ 215. § 215.
14. Feedlots.
15. Any new or substantially improved structure or activity which will involve the production, storage, use or disposal of any of the following dangerous materials and substances or require the maintenance of a supply on the premises of any amount of radioactive substances or more the 550-gallons (or other comparable volume) of any other of these dangerous materials or substances: acetone, ammonia, benzene, calcium carbide, carbon disulfide, celluloid, chlorine, hydrochloric acid, hydrocyanic acid, magnesium, nitric acid, and oxides of nitrogen, petroleum products (except as provided for in Section 215.F.), phosphorous, potassium, sodium, sulphur, and sulphur products, pesticides, (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides), radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.
16. The commencement of any of the following uses or the construction, enlargement or expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities: hospitals, nursing homes, jails or prisons.
17. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new mobile home park, or the substantial improvement to an existing mobile home park.
18. Fully and partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) are prohibited.
19. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction enlargement, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially improved structure which:
a. will be used for the production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or,
b. will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or,
c. will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances;
20. Shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are considered
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 81
§ 215. § 215.
dangerous to human life:
a. Acetone
b Ammonia
(1) Benzene
(2) Calcium carbide
(3) Carbon disulfide
(4) Celluloid
(5) Chlorine
(6) Hydrochloric acid
(7) Hydrocyanic acid
(8) Magnesium
(9) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
(10) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
(11) Phosphorus
(12) Potassium
(13) Sodium
(14) Sulphur and sulphur products
(15) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
(16) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.
21. The expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
a. hospitals
b. nursing homes
c. jails or prisons
G. Nonconforming Uses and Structures.
1. Continuation. All uses or structures in the Floodplain District lawfully existing on the effective date of this Ordinance which are not in conformity with the provisions of this Section shall be deemed nonconforming uses or structures.
Such nonconforming uses or structures may be continued, maintained, repaired, and floodproofed, except as otherwise provided for in this Section. However, such nonconforming uses or structures may at any time be improved to comply with existing Pennsylvania or Borough of Lititz health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living and working conditions.
2. Abandonment. Nonconforming uses or structures which have been discontinued or vacated for 12 consecutive months shall be considered abandoned. Vacation of
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 82
§ 215. § 215.
land or structures or the non-operative status of the use normally carried on by the property shall be evidence of discontinuance. No abandoned use or structure may be re-established, repaired or reoccupied. The Lititz Borough Council may require the removal of any abandoned nonconforming use or structure upon proper notice to the owner of the property on which an abandoned nonconforming use or structure exists. If the owner has not completely removed the abandoned use or structure within a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed nine months, or an additional three months' extension which may be granted by Lititz Borough Council upon documentation of just cause, the Lititz Borough Council shall have the authority itself cause the removal to be accomplished, the costs of such removal to be paid by the property owner.
3. Expansion and modification. A nonconforming use or structure may not be expanded or modified except as provided for in Section 215.F., subject to further provisions of Section 215.G. No nonconforming use or structure shall be expanded, enlarged or altered in any way which increases its nonconformity with respect to height, area, yard, and other requirements established in other Articles of this Ordinance.
4. Replacement and rebuilding. A nonconforming use or structure may be replaced, repaired or rebuilt if it is damaged or destroyed by any means, including floods. In such a case, however, the nonconformity of the new use or structure with respect to requirements as expressed in provisions of this Section shall not exceed that of the original use or structure which was damaged or destroyed. Nothing shall be done which would otherwise violate any of the provisions of this Section. When the structure is replaced, repaired or rebuilt, consideration shall be given to providing facilities for improving stormwater flow.
5. Historic structures. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the right to waive, as a special exception, any of the requirements of this Section and Section 215.I. for any structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places; provided, however, that the provisions of Sections 215.F.2., 3., 4., and 5. shall be applied in such a case.
H. Design and Performance Standards.
1. Applicability. Unless otherwise specified in this Section, the standards and criteria included in this Section are to be used, together with the provisions of all other Articles and all other ordinances in force in the Borough of Lititz, by the Zoning Officer and Zoning Hearing Board in their administration of this Section.
2. Regulations and reviews by other agencies.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 83
§ 215. § 215.
a. Where applicable and where possible, all necessary permits or other written approvals must be obtained from all other agencies before any approvals of plans, special exceptions, variances or permits may be granted by the Borough of Lititz or its agencies, officials or employees.
b. Where necessary permits or written approvals from other agencies cannot be obtained prior to action by the Borough of Lititz, any approval of plans, special exceptions, variances or permits by the Borough of Lititz or its agencies, officials or employees shall be conditioned upon receiving such other agencies' permits or written approval.
c. No regulations of the commonwealth governing watercourses are amended or repealed by this Section. Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any watercourse, a permit shall be obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Dams and Encroachment Division, and notification of any such proposal shall be given to all affected adjacent municipalities. Copies of such permit, application and municipal notifications shall be forwarded to the Federal Insurance Administration and to the PA Department of Community Affairs.
3. Place and construction of authorized uses and structures.
a. All uses and structures shall be designed, constructed and placed so as to offer the minimum obstruction possible to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow, velocity or height of floodwaters. Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow, and so far as is practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood lines as those of nearby structures.
b. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage and shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
c. All new or replacement drains, water supply facilities or sanitary sewage facilities shall be designed to preclude infiltration or backup of sewage or floodwaters into the facilities or structures and discharges from the facilities into floodwaters.
d. All new construction and substantial improvements of permanent nonresidential structures shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the 100-year flood elevation as defined by Section 215.C.1. or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 84
§ 215. § 215.
facilities, be floodproofed so that below one foot above the 100-year flood elevation as defined by Section 215.C.1. the structure is watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
e. All authorized improvements or additions to existing residential structures shall, to the greatest extent possible, be elevated. Any portion of the structure not elevated to one foot above the 100-year flood elevation as defined by Section 215.C.1. shall be floodproofed.
4. Floodproofing. Where floodproofing is authorized by this Section, it shall be done according to the standards and provisions for floodproofing classes W-2, W- 3 or W-4 as contained in Floodproofing Regulations published by the Office of the Chief of Engineers, United States Army, publication EP 1165 2 314 (June 1972 and as subsequently amended) where such standards and provisions do not conflict with other provisions of this Section. Where reference is made in Floodproofing Regulations to the "RFD" (Regulator Flood Datum), it shall be interpreted to mean the 100-year flood elevation as defined by this Section.
5. Anchoring. All structures, including buildings, air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks, within the Floodplain District shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, movement or collapse, thus reducing the possibility of the blockage of bridge openings and other restricted sections of the watercourse.
6. Surface drainage. Adequate drainage shall be provided for all new development to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
7. Public utility facilities and structures. Public utility facilities and structures, except buildings, subject to the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission are requested to comply with the following standards in the interest of achieving the purpose and intent of this Section:
a. Public utility facilities and associated structures such as pipe lines, gas lines, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water lines, outlet installations for sewage treatment plants, sealed public and private water supply wells, pumping stations, and underground communications facilities should, except for necessary vents, be designed and installed underground so as to be at or below the existing natural surface grade within the floodplain and in such a manner as will prevent flotation, minimize or eliminate flood damage and not alter the cross-sectional area of the floodplain. All new or replacement water supply facilities and/or sanitary sewage facilities should be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 85
§ 215. § 215.
facilities and discharges from the facilities into floodwaters. All gas lines should have a system of shutoff valves for service to the Floodplain District to allow positive control during flood emergencies.
b. Public utility electrical transmission lines and supporting structures should be installed so as to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
8. Agricultural standards.
a. A filter strip is required between any watercourse and any tilled land. Such strip shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width measured from the bank of the watercourse channel. The filter strip shall be planted and maintained in natural riparian vegetation.
b. Within the Floodplain District, a cover crop, such as annual rye grass, is required whenever the land is not being tilled for major crops.
9. Uniform Construction Code Coordination.
a. The Standards and Specifications contained 34 PA Code (Chapters 401- 405), as amended and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the above and other sections and sub-sections of this ordinance, to the extent that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of this ordinance.
b. International Building Code (IBC) 2003 or the latest edition thereof: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
c. International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2003 or the latest edition thereof: Secs. R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
I. Building Permits.
1. Irrespective of the provisions of Section 701 of this Ordinance, within the Floodplain District a building permit shall be required for all proposed development, construction, reconstruction, placement, replacement, expansion, renovation, extension, repair or other improvement of uses or structures, regardless of value, including the placement of mobile homes and activities such as filling, grading, paving, and excavation. Building permits shall not be required for normal maintenance other than as required by Borough of Lititz Code.
2. Every building permit application for work or uses within the Floodplain District
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 86
§ 215. § 215.
shall include or be accompanied by all information necessary for the Zoning Officer to determine that the proposal meets all the provisions of this Section and all other Articles of this Ordinance.
3. The following information is specifically required to accompany all building permit applications involving structures within the Floodplain District:
a. The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement.
b. Whether or not the structure includes a basement.
c. If the structure has been floodproofed, the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was floodproofed.
4. Where floodproofing is proposed to be utilized for a particular structure, the building permit application shall be accompanied by a document certified by a licensed professional engineer registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a licensed professional architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania certifying that the floodproofing methods used meet the provisions of Section 215.I. and are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated with the 100-year flood as defined by Section 215.C., and indicating the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structure is floodproofed.
5. A copy of all plans and applications for proposed construction or other improvements within the Floodplain District to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Zoning Officer to any other appropriate agencies and/or individuals for review and comment.
J. Municipal Liability.
The lawful granting of a permit or the making of any other administrative decision under this Section shall not constitute a representation, guaranty or warranty of any kind by the Borough of Lititz, or by any official, agent or employee thereof, of the practicability or safety of any structure, use or other plan proposed with respect to damage from flood or otherwise and shall create no liability upon or cause of action against such public body, official, agent or employee for any flood damage that may result pursuant thereto or as a result of reliance on this Section. There is no assurance that lands not included in the Floodplain District are now or ever will be free from flooding or flood damage.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 87
§ 215. § 216.
K. Specific Provision.
All references to the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) shall be changed to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). All references to the Department of Community Affairs, Bureau of Community Planning shall be changed to the Department of Community and Economic Development. All references to the Department of Environmental Resources, Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management shall be changed to the Department of Environmental Protection.
SECTION 216. Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District. (TNDO)
A. Purpose. The TNDO - Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District is intended to allow for higher density and higher intensity, mixed-use development designed according to special Design Regulations and Form-Based Code Regulations to ensure that the resulting form incorporates design principles that will be compatible with the Borough’s traditional character, form, and function. All buildings and structures shall conform to the applicable sections of the Downtown Lititz Master Plan, September 2008, and to the Form-Based Code Regulations. The Purposes of TNDO are:
1. To implement Article VII-A, Traditional Neighborhood Development of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended).
2. To implement the Lititz/Warwick Strategic Comprehensive Plan Design Guidelines Strategy, Opportunity Site #2, as amended.
3. To enable TNDO to overlay eligible properties in the R-1, R-2, R-A, R-2A and NSD Districts.
4. To provide for a range of complementary residential and nonresidential uses.
5. To provide for diversity necessary to maximizing human interactions and opportunities.
6. To meet daily retail, office, and service needs within walking distance of residences.
7. To contain a variety of housing types and related uses.
8. To continue to protect environmentally sensitive areas.
9. To support preservation and expansion of green spaces.
10. To provide open spaces that will provide opportunities for physical activity, and promote civic identity.
11. To continue to actively develop safe pedestrian connections to activity nodes, neighborhoods, recreational amenities, and civic spaces.
B. Applicability.
1. The Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO) applies to areas shown on the Zoning Map of Lititz Borough.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 88
§ 216. § 216.
2. The TNDO applies to properties of ten (10) acres and greater in the R-1, R-2,
R-A, R-2A and NSD Districts unless the Borough Council determines that a
property between 5 and 10 acres could be developed as a complete TNDO.
C. Permitted Use Areas and Uses.
1. The TNDO shall have a Neighborhood Residential Area (NRA), a Central
Residential Area (CRA), and a Neighborhood Storefront Area (NSA) as described
below.
2. The Neighborhood Residential Area is reserved for single-family dwellings. The
following residential uses shall be permitted in the NRA:
a. Single-family detached dwelling units.
b. Single-family semi-detached dwelling units.
3. The Central Residential Area is reserved for a broad range of housing types and
ownership options. The following residential uses shall be permitted in the CRA.
a. Multiple-family dwellings.
b. Attached dwelling units (Townhouse or Row).
c. Single-family detached dwelling units.
d. Single-family semi-detached dwelling units.
e. Two-family detached or semi-detached dwelling units.
4. The Neighborhood Storefront Area is intended as mixed-use area to provide uses
that meet the retail and service needs of the residents within the TNDO and to
provide compatible public (civic) and institutional uses of community-wide
importance. Drive-in facilities; drive-in service place; restaurant, drive-in; and
adult-oriented uses are not permitted. Mixed-use buildings are encouraged.
a. The following residential uses shall be permitted in the NSA area:
(1) Bed and breakfast inns in accordance with Section 404.
(2) Multiple family dwellings
(3) Nursing/convalescent homes in accordance with Section 417.
(4) Upper-story residential uses to be located over shops and/or
offices.
(5) Single-family attached dwelling units.
b. The following uses shall be permitted in the NSA provided that the use
shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of floor
area when in a building of one and one-half story, or four thousand
(4,000) square feet of floor area when in a building of two or more stories.
Outdoor seating for eating establishments shall maintain a minimum sixfoot
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 89
§ 216. § 216.
clear zone for pedestrian movements.
(1) Personal services, including but not limited tobarber, beauty tanning
and health salons, tailors, off-site dry cleaning, self-service laundry, and repair shops.
(2) Retail business, including but not limited to pharmacies, music and video shops, news centers and book stores, bakery and delicatessens, cafes, convenience store without gasoline service, confectionary stores, dry goods shops, art supply shops, flower shops, photographic studios and supply shops, electronic supply stores, office supply shops, and sporting good stores.
c. The following uses shall be permitted in the NSA provided that the use shall not exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor area when in a building of one and one-half stories or ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area when in a building of two or more stories. Outdoor seating for eating establishments shall maintain a minimum four (4) foot clear zone for pedestrian movements.
(1) Banking and other financial institutions.
(2) Business and professional offices and studios, including medical and dental offices.
(3) Restaurants and cafes.
d. The following public and utility uses shall be permitted in the NSA.
(1) Public utility uses and facilities, excluding material and truck storage.
(2) Public libraries, municipal and community activity buildings in accordance with Section 412
e. The following institutional uses shall be permitted in the NSA.
(1) Day care center in accordance with Section 402.
(2) Elementary and secondary schools in accordance with Section 407.
(3) Churches and similar places of religious worship. These uses shall be in accordance with the dimensional requirements of the NSA and not Section 405.
f. A use permitted in Sections (c) and (d) of this Section may exceed the maximum permitted floor area within the NSA if Borough Council agrees that the proposed building façade reflects an appearance of compliance
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 90
§ 216. § 216.
with the Ordinance. The applicant shall supply architectural elevations of any building that includes a use(s) that exceed(s) the maximum square footage permitted in Sections (c) and (d) of this Section. The architectural elevations shall demonstrate that the building façade design gives the appearance of tenant spaces that comply with the maximum permitted square footage requirements for a use within the NSA.
5. The following list of uses shall be allowed in all areas of the TNDO.
a. Open space land in accordance with Section 216.F herein.
b. Botanical gardens.
c. Community maintenance, storage, and service facilities.
d. Customary accessory uses and buildings incidental to any permitted uses including:
(1) Private swimming pools, in accordance with Section 312.
(2) Private garages, playhouses, garden houses or green houses not used for commercial purposes, in accordance with Section 301.
(3) Home occupations (no-impact home-based businesses as defined, herein) and home businesses, in accordance with Section 401.
(4) Parking lots and structures accessory to multi-family and nonresidential uses, in accordance with Section 307 and as stipulated herein.
e. Continuing Care Retirement Community (CCRC) in accordance with Section 427.
D. General Tract Requirements. The design of the TNDO shall be governed by the following tract standards:
1. Ownership: The tract of land may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership; however, when a tract is held in multiple ownership, it shall be planned as a single entity with common authority and common responsibility.
2. Sensitive Area Disturbance: The proposed design shall strictly minimize disturbance of environmentally sensitive areas, including wetlands, steep slopes (greater than 25%), floodways and 100-year floodplains. Demonstration by the applicant that these features will be protected by the proposed developer shall be prerequisite to approval of the preliminary and final plan. These areas shall not be calculated as part of the minimum required open space.
3. The minimum land area required for a TNDO shall not be less than ten (10) acres.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 91
§ 216. § 216.
4. Each sub-area (NRAs, CRAs, and NSAs) of the TNDO shall be delineated and the area and residential density shall be specified for each.
a. Under no circumstances shall the NSA exceed thirty percent (30%) of the entire tract.
b. At least two percent (2%) of the entire tract shall be NSA if the gross tract area is 25 acres and greater. If the gross tract area is less than 25 acres, the NSA may be 0%.
c. A minimum of seventy percent (70%) of the tract shall be in NRA or CRA use.
d. No more than fifty-five percent (55%) of the housing units may be within the same housing type.
e. A mix of housing types shall be provided in each sub-area.
5. If the project is phased, under no circumstances shall more than eighty-five percent (85%) of all housing units be built prior to the development of the mixed- use area.
6. The gross density for the tract shall be a minimum of four (4) and a maximum of eight (8) dwelling units per acre, except as provided in Section 216.E.4. This density does not include units within nursing or convalescent homes, but shall include independent-living apartments, and does not include areas devoted to non- residential use.
7. No more than six (6) attached dwelling units or townhouses shall be built in a row.
8. The minimum open space requirement for the tract shall be fifteen percent (15%) of the tract.
9. The maximum front yard setback and build-to line shall:
a. be measured from the street right-of-way to the building facade.
b. be measured (whenever a Street or Close does not have a right-of-way) from the interior edge of the sidewalk, which shall be a maximum of 10 feet from the back of curb or edge of pavement, to the building facade.
c. not apply whenever an approved Green, Square, Plaza, Pocket Park, or other Pedestrian Gathering Area is created, but shall be measured at the edge of such features to the building facade.
d. be interpreted to permit architectural features such as porches, steps, bay windows, and the like to be located within the maximum front yard setback, provided that a minimum sidewalk width of 4’-6” is maintained.
e. be interpreted to permit relief of on-street parking requirements, and
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 92
§ 216. § 216.
thereby result in a reduction in the street right-of-way width; provided however, if a street or a Close does not have a right-of-way, the maximum setback shall be measured from the predominant interior edge of the sidewalk, which edge shall be a maximum of ten (10) feet from the back of curb, or edge of pavement in areas without curbing.
E. Bulk, Area, Dimensional and Related Regulations for NRA, CRA and NSA.
1. Neighborhood Residential Area. The following bulk, area, and dimensional regulations shall apply to the NRA.
a. Minimum lot requirements for single-family detached dwellings.
(1) Minimum area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet. Up to twenty percent (20%) of the lots may be reduced to a minimum of three thousand (3,000) square feet to provide design flexibility.
(2) Minimum lot width: Thirty (30) feet.
b. Minimum lot requirements for single-family semi-detached dwellings.
(1) Minimum area: Four thousand (4,000) square feet. Up to twenty percent (20%) of the lots may be reduced to a minimum of three thousand (3,000) square feet to provide design flexibility.
(2) Minimum lot width: Thirty (30) feet.
c. Maximum front yard setback and build-to line shall comply with Section 216.D.9, and the following:
(1) Principal building shall be twelve (12) feet (six feet to front porches/steps). The developer is urged to consider variations in the principal building position and orientation, particularly as it relates to solar orientation, and architectural design.
(2) Attached garages and carports (front-loaded / facing the street) shall be twenty (20) feet behind the front plane of the house.
(3) Detached garages (front loaded) shall be forty (40) feet from the street right-of-way.
d. Minimum side yard setback: Twelve (12) feet aggregate, five (5) feet minimum and ten (10) feet each side on a corner lot.
e. Minimum rear yard setback:
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 93
§ 216. § 216.
(1) Principal building: Twenty (20) feet.
(2) Accessory buildings or structures: Six (6) feet.
(3) Detached garages (rear-loaded): Eight (8) feet from alleyway when the driveway apron is parallel to the alley, and eighteen (18) feet when the driveway is perpendicular to the alley.
f. Maximum impervious lot coverage.
(1) Single-family detached dwelling units: Sixty-five (65%) percent.
(2) Single-family semi-detached dwelling units: Seventy (70%) percent.
g. Minimum lot width at streets or alleys: Lots shall have a minimum lot width of thirty (30) feet either on a street or a alley.
h. Frontage on parks or greens. Dwellings served by rear alleys may front directly onto parks or greens, which shall be designed with perimeter sidewalks. The minimum green frontage shall be no less than the minimum lot width.
i. Maximum height: Thirty-five (35) feet.
2. Central Residential Area. The following bulk, area, and dimensional regulations shall apply to the CRA.
a. Dimensional lot characteristics for single-family detached and single- family semi-detached dwellings shall meet the requirements for Neighborhood Residential Areas with the exception that up to thirty percent (30%) of the lots may be reduced to a minimum lots size of five thousand (5,000) square feet for single-family detached and four thousand (4,000) square feet for single-family semi-detached to provide design flexibility.
b. Dimensional lot characteristics for single-family attached and multiple family dwellings shall meet the requirements for the Neighborhood Storefront Areas, E.3.b below.
3. Neighborhood Storefront Area. The following bulk, area, and dimensional regulations shall apply to the NSA.
a. Maximum tract area for commercial buildings. Commercial buildings shall not occupy more than five percent (5%) of the developable area of the Traditional Neighborhood Development, unless ground floor space is reserved for pedestrian-oriented retailing, offices, and services, with offices and housing above, in which case the following commercial area bonus shall apply. Under no circumstances shall the commercial buildings
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 94
§ 216. § 216.
exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total TNDO developable area.
(1) An additional five percent (5%) of the area shall be granted if at least half of the new commercial building coverage (foundation footprint) shall be of at least two-story construction and at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the upper-story space is designed for office use.
(2) An additional five percent (5%) of the TNDO developable area shall be granted if at least half of the new commercial building coverage (foundation footprint) shall be of at least two-story construction with at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the upper- story space designed for residential use.
b. Dimensional characteristics for Neighborhood Storefront Areas shall be in accordance with the following requirements.
(1) Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be determined by adding twenty percent (20%) to the land area needed for the structure, on-lot parking, ingress/egress, and any other on-site infrastructure that is required and private amenity areas designed for the units by the developer. The additional twenty percent (20%) shall constitute setbacks and landscaped buffers.
(2) Minimum lot width at streets or alley: Lots must have a minimum lot width of twenty (20) feet either on a street or a back alley.
(3) Frontage on parks or greens. Dwellings served by rear alleys may front directly onto parks or greens, which shall be designed with perimeter sidewalks. The minimum green frontage shall be no less than the minimum lot width.
(4) Minimum lot width at building line. The minimum lot width at the building line shall be twenty (20) feet.
(5) Yard regulations. New buildings in this subdistrict shall have a maximum front setback rather than a minimum setback in order to maintain a strong sense of streetscape. A minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the building façade shall be on the Build-to Line, as defined by the maximum building setback, and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 216.D.9:
(a) Maximum front yard setback for the NSA: Five (5) feet
(b) Maximum front yard setback for the CRA: Ten (10) feet.
(c) Minimum side yard setback. Five (5) feet.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 95
§ 216. § 216.
(d) Minimum rear yard setback. Twenty (20) feet, except for structures along alleys in which case the minimum setback shall be ten (10) feet from the edge of pavement.
(6) Maximum impervious lot coverage: Eighty-five percent (85%).
(7) Minimum and maximum height. Buildings shall be between one- and-one half (1 ½) and four (4) stories above grade as seen from their front sides with a maximum height of fifty (50) feet, with the exceptions listed in Section 304.B herein.
4. Residential density bonuses. The density may be increased at the discretion of the Council to meet Borough objectives of affordable housing and public greenways and trails, and conservation land endowments in accordance with the following density bonuses.
a. Affordable housing. A density increase is permitted where the
subdivision/land development proposal provides opportunities for low- or
moderate-income units to be sold or leased. For each affordable housing
unit provided, three (3) additional building lots or dwelling units shall be
permitted up to a fifteen percent (15%) increase in the maximum density.
For affordable housing to be available for purchase, the applicant shall
demonstrate that the affordable housing shall initially be sold to
households where the gross annual income is less than or equal to 115 percent of the most recent median family income ("MFI") for Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, as issued by the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development as adjusted for family size and updated annually.
For affordable housing to be available for lease, the applicant shall
demonstrate that each affordable housing unit shall be leased to tenant
households whose gross annual income is less then or equal to 80 percent
of the most recent MFI. Notwithstanding the income limit, affordable housing rental rates, including tenant-paid utilities, shall not exceed 30 percent of the income of a tenant earning less than 80 percent of the most recent MFI. In order to obtain the density bonus for leased affordable housing, the applicant must certify that the dwelling units shall be leased for a period of not less than 15 years.
(1) To utilize this density bonus, the applicant shall, as part of the
application, provide documentation to show how the affordable
housing program will be funded and implemented and agree that
the affordable housing program conditions and requirements shall
be a condition of approval.
(2) Affordable housing units shall blend into the neighborhood in
design and appearance.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 96
§ 216. § 216.
b. Public access to common open space and trails. A density bonus for public usage of greenway land in new subdivisions shall be computed on the basis of a maximum of four (4) dwelling units per acre of common open space or per 2,500 feet of trail that becomes publicly accessible. The decision whether to accept an applicant’s offer to dedicate land to public usage shall be at the discretion of the Borough Council.
F. Open Space Land and Design Standards. The greenway and open space land shall meet the following location and design standards. In addition all TNDO shall meet the design and ownership and maintenance regulations in accordance with Section 320 of this Ordinance.
1. The following uses and combination thereof are permitted in the designated greenway / open space areas.
a. Active recreation areas such as: playfields or tennis courts; however, no more than thirty percent (30%) of the minimum required open space area may be comprised of these areas in total.
b. Agriculture buffer areas or perimeter areas. A fifty (50) feet building setback shall be required where the tract abuts an agriculture parcel, whether the agriculture tract is located within or outside the Borough.
c. Central greens, neighborhood squares, plazas or commons.
d. Community parks.
e. Conservation of open land in its natural state.
f. Easements for drainage, access, sewer or water lines, or other public purposes.
g. Greenbelts.
h. Stormwater detention areas designed, and available for use as an integral part of the greenway trails and footpaths.
i. Underground utility rights-of-way.
2. Conservation Easement. The required open space land shall be subject to permanent conservation easements prohibiting future development and defining the range of permitted activities.
3. Not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the open space shall be in a form useable to and accessible by the residents. These areas shall include the following special places and shall be designed in accordance with the following:
a. A main TNDO green from four to forty thousand (4,000 to 40,000) square feet, located within the Neighborhood Storefront Area and adjacent to or as a terminal vista to the principal street running through the NSA. Commercial buildings, public and institutional uses shall be located either adjacent to or across the street from the central green.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 97
§ 216. § 216.
b. Smaller greens shall be dispersed throughout the remainder of the TNDO so that no residential lot is more than a short walking distance (generally 1,500’) from a green, square, or park that is a minimum of four thousand (4,000) square feet.
G. Traditional Neighborhood Design Standards. The following standards shall be applied to all TNDOs in the Borough. Additional design requirements are found in the Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
1. The following design standards shall apply to single-family attached and multiple family dwellings.
a. Single-family attached and multiple family buildings shall be designed to fit within the same streetscape of single-family dwellings and nonresidential buildings in both architecture and scale.
b. Single-family attached and multiple-family buildings shall be integrated into the neighborhood.
2. The following standards shall apply to the physical layout of the TNDO.
a. Residential lots shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any arterial highway having four or more lanes, nor within two hundred (200) feet of any existing two-lane state-numbered highway, unless effectively screened from the public viewshed by virtue of topography, dense vegetation, or physical or visual barriers such as a wall or fence.
b. The Neighborhood Storefront Areas shall be located within walking distance of Central Residential Areas and at least one–quarter of the lots in the Neighborhood Residential Areas (walking distance is generally 1,500’ feet from the houses).
c. Nonresidential uses intended to serve an area beyond the TNDO itself shall be located to permit vehicular access from outside the neighborhood without the traffic passing through the Neighborhood Residential Areas.
d. The required greenway/open space shall be located and designed to add to the visual amenities of the TNDO and to the surrounding area by maximizing the visibility of internal open spaces as terminal vistas and external open space as perimeter greenbelts.
e. New major collector roadways that serve the development shall be constructed prior to completion of fifty percent (50%) of the development.
3. The following standards shall apply to parking areas in the TNDO.
a. Non-residential off-street parking shall be to the side or rear, or located
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 98
§ 216. § 216.
within internal parking areas screened from the street.
b. On-street parking spaces along the street frontage of a lot shall be counted toward the minimum number of parking space required for the use.
c. On-street parking spaces shall be designed to be parallel to the curb, and angled parking may be provided for a Close.
d. Off-street parking may be located with six hundred (600) feet (measured along a publicly accessible route) from the lot containing the use to which the parking is accessory. Said lot containing the parking shall be owned or leased to the owner of the principal use, or the lot containing the parking shall be dedicated to parking as long as the use to which it is accessory shall continue and it is owned by an entity capable of assuring its maintenance as accessory parking. Shared parking shall be in accordance with Section 307.G, herein.
e. On-street parking within a Close may be permitted in accordance with Article VIII, Form Based Code Regulations.
4. All buildings shall meet the following tract setback requirements.
a. Setback from all external road ultimate right-of-way: Fifty (50) feet.
b. Setback from the tract boundary: Fifty (50) feet, unless the use(s) proposed along the TNDO tract boundary is permitted in the adjoining Zoning District. If the TNDO use(s) is permitted in the adjoining Zoning District the tract boundary setback may be reduced to the adjoining Zoning District setback requirements.
c. Setback from active recreation areas, with the exception of tot-lots: One hundred fifty (150) feet.
5. All Traditional Neighborhood Developments shall have an interior interconnected street system, which provides access to all sub-areas and lots.
6. A landscaping plan for the entire tract shall be required and shall be in accordance with Section 609 of the Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. It is recommended that a Landscape Architect licensed by Commonwealth of Pennsylvania be retained to complete such a plan to ensure the proper species, use and arrangement of plant materials. The preservation of existing vegetation is strongly encouraged for landscaping purposes.
a. Earthen berms may be incorporated into the landscaping plan along public street frontage and along property lines abutting existing dwellings when approved by the Borough.
b. Landscaped areas shall be continually maintained by the landowner, or a
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 99
§ 216
.
§ 218
.
homeowner’s association, or a property owners association, or a
condominium association. Care, grooming, and replacement of plants
shall be included as part of the required maintenance. Failure to
adequately maintain landscaped areas shall be subject to a citation issued
by the Borough.
c. Parking areas within a TNDO shall be adequately landscaped in order to
provide shade, to screen vehicles from public streets, and to reduce glare
and noise within the development itself and shall be designed in
accordance with Section 603 of the Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
d. Buffers and screens shall be in accordance with Section 609 of the Lititz
Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
7. All signage within the NSA shall conform to the requirements list for the
Borough’s Commercial District.
8. The design principles and design guidelines in the Downtown Lititz Master Plan
shall apply when applicable to the planning, design, and implementation of a
TNDO in the NSA, CRA, and NRA.
9. The Form-Based Code Regulations of Article VIII, shall apply.
SECTION 217. Form-Based Code Regulations for Districts.
A. The Form-Based Code Regulations of Article VIII shall apply to the Zoning Districts that
are overlaid by the boundary of the Downtown area depicted in the Downtown Overlay
District.
B. The Form-Based Code Regulations of Article VIII shall apply to Redevelopment in all
Zoning Districts.
C. The Form-Based Code Regulations of Article VIII shall apply to the TNDO Overlay
District.
D. The Form-Based Code Regulations of Article VIII shall apply to any new development or
redevelopment on a property of 8,400 square feet or larger within any zoning district.
SECTION 218. Downtown Overlay District.
A. All Form-Based Code Regulations of Article VIII shall apply to the Downtown Overlay
District.
B. Whenever an existing lot is proposed for Redevelopment, the Form-Based Code
Regulations of Article VIII shall apply.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 100
§ 218
.
§ 218
.
C. Development Incentives
1. Parking: As an incentive to business activities in the Downtown Overlay District, the parking required under the provisions of Section 307., Off-Street and On-Street Parking Requirements, may be reduced as follows:
a. Only thirty percent (30%) of the required parking shall be provided for buildings with 20,000 square feet or greater of gross floor area.
b. Only twenty percent (20%) of the required parking shall be provided for restaurants and facilities with liquor licenses up to 100 seats. Additional seats beyond 100 shall have parking provided at standard rate. The parking reduction for full-time employees will remain regardless of size.
c. Only ten percent (10%) of the required parking shall be provided for all other uses in the Downtown.
2. Floodplain Restoration & Reduction of Impervious Surfaces: A large portion of the underutilized land in the Downtown District lies within the floodplain, much of which is paved. As an incentive to restore the floodplain and increase the natural areas adjacent to Lititz Run, projects undertaking restoration activities can take advantage of height bonuses and will be permitted to cluster the gross allowable density into a smaller footprint.
a. A 45% reduction in existing impervious surfaces and/or a floodplain restoration on 45% of the site permits an increase of 10 feet to the maximum allowable height and permits the applicant to cluster the total allowable density onto the remaining 55% of the site.
3. Affordable Housing: The affordable housing residential density bonuses in §216.4.a shall apply to any development within the Downtown Overlay District.
D. Open-Space, Lititz Run, & the Lititz Rail Trail – Any development adjacent to either Lititz Run or the Lititz Rail Trail (either identified on the Borough’s Official Map or its subsequent implemented alignment) shall orient required open space towards either or both of these features to the greatest extent practical. Additionally, part of this required open space shall provide ground for the trail if such ground would help extend the trail towards Lititz Springs Park. Whenever possible, buildings shall be oriented to overlook these features while vehicular access shall be provided on the opposite side.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 101
§ 219
.
§ 219
.
SECTION 219. Lititz Run Revitalization District
A. Purpose
Lititz Run has been the heart of our community since its earliest days. However, generations of industrial use have left the stream corridor to be underutilized and impacted by an overabundance of paved surfaces. While the corridor presents the Borough’s largest redevelopment opportunity, the stream’s floodplain and industrial heritage presents challenges to conventional development.
The purpose of the Lititz Run Revitalization District is to allow for appropriate commercial and residential development that achieves the vision set forth in the Downtown Redevelopment Plan. Such development would connect and complement both Downtown and the residences along Front Street while incentivizing the restoration of Lititz Run.
B. Permitted Uses
1. The following business uses shall be permitted in the LRRD provided that the use shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area when in a building of two stories, or four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor area when in a building of three or more stories.
a. Personal Services
b. Retail Businesses
2. The following business uses shall be permitted in the LRRD provided that the use shall not exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor area when in a building of two stories, or ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area when in a building of three or more stories. However, the use may exceed the above square footage as a special exception, but shall be designed to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that the exterior of the building will continue to give the appearance of a small storefront area.
a. Banking and other financial institutions.
b. Business and professional offices and studios, including medical and dental offices.
c. Restaurants, Taverns, and Cafes.
(1) Outdoor seating for eating establishments shall maintain a minimum six-foot clear zone for pedestrian movements.
3. Apartments and Condominiums
4. Single-Family Attached including quadraplexes
5. Breweries or Distilleries
a. Outdoor seating for eating establishments shall maintain a minimum six-foot clear zone for pedestrian movements.
6. Live Music Venues
7. Business conversions subject to Section 418
8. Hotels subject to Section 420
9. Public Garages, Private Garages, and Parking Structures
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 102
§ 219
.
§ 219
.
10. Public Parks, Playground, Recreation Areas or Trails, including greens and civic space, subject to Section 410
11. Stream Restoration in accordance with Section 427
12. Conversion Apartments subject to Section 406.
13. Commercial Recreation
14. Customary accessory uses, buildings, and structure incidental to the above permitted uses subject to Section 301.
15. Event Space
Drive-in facilities and adult-oriented uses are not permitted in this District. Mixed-use structures are encouraged in this District.
C. Special Exception Uses
1. Theatre in accordance with Section 426
2. Home Businesses
3. Day Care center in accordance with Section 402.
D. Conditional Uses
1. Demolition of an existing structure subject to Section 322
E. Lot Requirements
1. The minimum lot and yard requirements shall be determined by the following table as well as all other applicable provisions contained in this Section.
Minimum Lot Area (S.F.)
No Minimum
Minimum Lot Width (ft)
No Minimum
Maximum Front Yard (ft)
10, unless the front yard incorporates restoration work. New structures shall be oriented to new or existing streets and shall be placed on the right-of-way whenever possible.
Minimum Side Yard (ft)
No Minimum
Minimum Rear Yard (ft)
20 feet, except for structures along alleys in which case the minimum setback shall be ten (10) feet from the edge of pavement
Maximum Lot Coverage
85%
F. Height Requirements
By right, principal buildings shall be between two and five stories above grade with a
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 103
§ 219
.
§ 219
.
maximum height of sixty (60’) feet and a minimum of twenty (20’) feet. The height limit shall not apply to bell or clock towers, cupolas, steeples, or similar architectural features in accordance with Section 304 herein. Heights in this district, including heights increased through Downtown Overlay incentives, shall take precedence over the heights noted in the Form Based Code.
G. Signage Requirements
All signage shall conform to the requirements as listed for the Commercial District
H. Frontage on N. Broad, N. Cedar, and N. Water
New development along these streets shall be massed so as to present a streetscape between downtown and the residential neighborhoods to the north. To achieve this goal new structures shall be built on the right-of-way. Furthermore, no more than 20% of the new streetscape shall be residential on the first floor.
I. Redevelopment of Existing Buildings
The redevelopment of existing buildings on parcels of one acre or greater shall be a mixed-use. The buildings shall be redeveloped so that a single use does not comprise more than 80% of the redevelopment.
J. Residential Density
The maximum gross residential density in this zone, prior to the application of incentives, shall be twenty-five (25) dwelling units per acre.
§ 300. § 301.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 104
ARTICLE III SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
SECTION 300. Supplementary Regulations.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject to such exceptions, additions or modifications as herein provided by the following Supplementary Regulations.
SECTION 301. Accessory Buildings and Structures.
A. An accessory building attached to a principal building shall comply in all respects with the yard requirements of this Ordinance for the principal building.
B. Detached accessory buildings.
1. Detached accessory buildings shall be located to the rear of the front building line of the principal building.
2. Accessory buildings for principal uses other than residential shall be located not closer than eight (8) feet to any side or rear property line abutting a residential district or lot used for residential purposes.
3. Detached accessory buildings shall not be located in the flood plain.
4. Detached accessory buildings in residential districts.
In the R-S, R-1, R-2, R-2A and R-A Districts, the following additional regulations apply:
a. Detached private garages.
(1) Maximum capacity - three (3) automobiles.
(2) Maximum height - twenty (20) feet.
(3) No temporary garage structures shall be permitted.
(4) Detached private garages shall be located a minimum of six (6) feet from any side property line. Rear setback shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet from an alley right of way line or twenty (20) feet from any rear property line that directly abuts another parcel.
b. Other detached accessory buildings. Other detached accessory buildings may be located in any required rear yard provided:
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 105
§ 301. § 302.
(1) Such building shall not exceed one story or be more than fifteen
(15) feet in height.
(2) All such buildings in the aggregate shall not occupy more than
thirty (30) percent of the area of the required rear yard
where so located.
(3) Such building shall not exceed 144 square feet in floor area.
(4) Detached accessory buildings in rear yards shall be located a
minimum of eight (8) feet from any property line.
c. Detached accessory buildings for permitted attached and semi-detached
dwellings shall be located no closer than six (6) feet from any side lot
line formed by a building party wall.
5. Detached accessory buildings in nonresidential districts.
In the nonresidential districts, the following additional regulations apply:
a. In any nonresidential district, an accessory building on that portion of a lot
not included in any required yard shall conform with the height
regulations for principal buildings.
b. Accessory buildings located in a rear yard area shall be a minimum of
twenty (20) feet from the rear property line.
c. Accessory buildings shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from any side
property line.
C. Accessory Structures.
1. Driveways shall be at least three (3) feet from a side property line.
2. Fish ponds, fountains, and like type structures shall be at least six (6) feet from a
property line.
3. Swimming pools shall be at least ten (10) feet from any property line.
4. Any other structure not addressed above, shall be at least six (6) feet from any
property line, or as determined by the Zoning Hearing Board.
SECTION 302. Temporary Structures for Dwelling Purposes.
No cabin, mobile home, garage, basement without a full story above, or other temporary
structure, whether of a fixed or mobile nature, may hereafter be erected or established for any
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 106
§ 302. § 304.
dwelling purpose for any length of time unless approval for temporary use is granted as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
SECTION 303. Water Supply and Sewage Facilities Required.
In the interest of protecting the public health, safety and welfare, every building or part thereof intended for human occupation or inhabitation hereafter erected, altered or moved shall be provided with public water and public sewer service.
SECTION 304. Exceptions.
A. Public Utility Corporations. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to any existing or proposed building, or extension thereof, used or to be used by a public utility corporation if, upon petition of the corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation of the building in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public. It shall be the responsibility of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission to ensure that both the corporation and the Borough have notice of the hearing and are granted an opportunity to appear, present witnesses, cross-examine witnesses presented by other parties and otherwise exercise the rights of a party to the proceedings.
B. Exceptions to Height Limitations. Exceptions to Height Limitations. All buildings and structures shall be subject to the maximum height regulations specified within each zoning district except chimneys, church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy, monuments, public utility lines, smokestacks, poles, antennas, towers, water storage tanks, signs, elevators, penthouses, flagpoles, silos, windmills, farm accessory buildings or other similar structures. However, no penthouse, roof structure nor any space above the height limit specified in the applicable zoning district shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional habitable floor space for residential, commercial or industrial use. The height of any such structure or projection shall not exceed seventy (70) feet in height unless the following criteria can be satisfied:
C. Certification from a professional engineer that the proposed height of said use does not extend above the permitted height ceiling depicted on the Airport Hazard Area for Lancaster Airport Map.
D. The applicant shall furnish a letter from the Lancaster Airport Authority indicating that the proposed use has been reviewed and would not violate the permitted height restrictions listed in the Federal Aviation Regulations No. 77.
Should a disagreement between the applicant's engineer and the Lancaster Airport Authority occur as to the satisfaction of a proposed use’s height, the Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct a hearing and render a decision regarding the matter in accordance with Article VI of this Ordinance. The provisions of this Section 304 (B) shall not apply
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 107
§ 304. § 306.
to wireless or cellular communication towers, antennas and cell sites.
SECTION 305. Required Street Access.
A. All uses and parking shall be provided with adequate access to an abutting improved public or private street. Such access shall be part of an approved Land Development Plan.
B. No more than two (2) lots shall share a private lane, alley or unpaved thoroughfare. Whenever, three (3) or more lots are created, an improved thoroughfare, paved with all- weather material, shall exist or shall be created.
SECTION 306. Yard and Lot Requirements.
A. Corner Lots:
1. Front yards are required on all street frontages, and the other yards shall be deemed to be side yards.
2. No obstructions to vision exceeding four (4) feet in height above curb level shall be erected or maintained within the required clear-sight triangles.
B. Projections Into Required Yards:
1. Cornices, canopies, eaves or other architectural features may project into side yards a distance not exceeding two (2) inches per one (1) foot of side yard width but may not exceed a total of three (3) feet.
2. Bay windows, balconies, fireplaces, uncovered stairways and necessary landings, and chimneys may project a distance not exceeding three (3) feet into a required side yard.
3. Patios and paved terraces may be located in side and rear yards provided that they do not extend closer than five (5) feet from any property line. In case of a corner lot, no such structures shall extend into the required yard adjoining each street.
4. Front porches, by Special Exception in accordance with Section 422.
C. Through Lots:
Where a lot extends through from street to street, the applicable front yard regulations shall apply on both street frontages. However, in the event of a complete system of through lots which are designed for reversed frontage, the front yard need only be along the more minor street of the subdivision.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 108
§ 307. § 307.
SECTION 307. Off-Street and On-Street Parking Requirements.
Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall be provided for any use where specified in the District Regulations, in this Section, or in any other regulations found in this Ordinance, subject to the following provisions:
A. Location of Parking Areas. Enclosed off-street parking spaces, including public and private garages, shall conform to the applicable building setback requirements of this Ordinance.
B. Areas Computed as Parking Spaces. Areas which may be computed as open or enclosed off-street parking spaces include any private garage, carport, or other area available for parking, other than a street or driveway. However, a driveway within a required front yard for a single-family or two-family residence may count as one parking space per every 162 square feet of area, provided such space is at least 18 feet deep.
C. Size of Spaces in Parking Compounds/lots. 162 square feet shall be considered one parking space. Entrance and exit lanes shall not be computed as parking space.
D. Large Parking Lots. Parking lots designed for ten (10) or more spaces shall be part of an approved Land Development Plan.
E. Adequate Access. Unobstructed access to and from a street shall be provided.
F. Drainage and Surfacing. All open parking areas shall be drained in a manner that does not create a hazard or damage other properties and paved in accordance with the following minimum standards:
1. Crushed aggregate base course with a minimum thickness of six (6) inches, as specified in PennDOT Specifications, Form 408, and its latest revisions.
2. The bituminous surface shall consist of a minimum of one and one-half (1-1/2) inches of ID-2 binder course and one (1) inch ID-2 wearing course. Material shall be equal or superior to PennDOT Specifications, Form 408, as amended, and shall be applied in accordance with those same specifications.
3. In the alternative, a pervious surfacing material approved by the Borough Engineer may be used.
G. Minimum Number of Spaces Required. Except as partially exempted in the Downtown Overlay District, as per Section 218.D., the minimum number of off -street parking spaces by type of use shall be determined in accordance with the following provisions. When the computation to determine the number of required parking spaces results in a
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 109
§ 307. § 307.
requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half (0.5) shall be disregarded, and fractions over one-half (0.5) shall equal one (1) space.
1. Parking Requirements for Residential Uses
a. Apartment houses: The total number of parking or garage spaces shall be one and a half (1.5) times the number of dwelling units in the building. An additional 10% of the required spaces will be provided to accommodate guests.
b. Apartment units in combination with permitted commercial uses shall provide parking spaces as required if both uses were established separately unless meeting the requirements of §307.G.
c. Hotels, Motels, and Bed and Breakfast Inns: At least one (1) parking space for each guest room, plus one additional space for every two (2) full- time employees. If a restaurant in connection with the above is open to the public, the off-street parking facilities shall be not less than those required for restaurants, in addition to those required for guest rooms.
d. Dwellings: Two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit.
2. Parking Requirements for Commercial Uses
a. Beauty shops and barber shops: Three (3) parking spaces for each chair to be utilized in the business. If, however, the beauty shop or barber shop is legally part of a residence, two (2) spaces for each chair provided there are two (2) parking spaces for the residents.
b. Bowling Alleys: At least four (4) spaces per bowling lane.
c. Commercial Kennels: One (1) space per employee plus three (3) spaces for customer parking.
d. Commercial Recreation: One (1) space per five (5) seats or similar accommodation; or one (1) space per two (2) lockers or similar accommodation, whichever yields the larger parking requirement.
e. Commercial Vehicles: Space shall be provided at the rear of each commercial or business building for the parking of commercial vehicles
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 110
§ 307. § 307.
f. Dance Halls, Roller Rinks, Clubs, Lodges and Other Similar Places: At least one (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area.
g. Department/Variety Stores: Not less than one (1) parking space per every three hundred (300) square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof.
h. Drive-in Restaurants or similar establishments: At least two (2) spaces for each fifty (50) square feet of building floor area.
i. Food Stores and Pharmacies: At least one (1) space for every two hundred
(200) square feet of floor area.
j. Medical, Dental and Veterinary Offices and Clinics: At least four (4) parking spaces per practitioner.
k. Mortuaries, Funeral Homes and Undertaking Establishments: At least one
parking space for each three (3) seats for public use. Such space shall be in addition to employee parking needs, and service area for mobile equipment such as hearses and ambulances.
l. Office Buildings: At least one (1) parking space for each three hundred
(300) square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof.
m. Open Areas Used For Commercial Purpose: At least one (1) parking space for each one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of area, or fraction thereof.
n. Personal service establishments (not otherwise provided for): One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof devoted to such use plus one (1) space per employee.
o. Restaurants and Bars: At least one (1) parking space for each four (4) customer seats, plus one (1) additional space for every two (2) full-time employees.
p. Retail Stores: At least one (1) parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area, exclusive of areas not used for sale or display of merchandise.
q. Self-Service Laundries: One (1) space per every 1.5 washing machines.
r. Shopping Centers: Not less than 4.5 parking spaces per every one thousand (1000) square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 111
§ 307. § 307.
s. Motor Vehicle Sales and Service or Motor Vehicle Body Shops and Repair Garages: At least one (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area devoted to sales, repairs, or service facilities, in addition to display and storage spaces.
t. Motor Vehicle Service Stations: At least one (1) parking space for every three (3) service bays plus one (1) parking space for every two (2) fuel pumps, or fraction thereof. In no case shall there be fewer than five (5) parking spaces provided.
u. Motor Vehicle Washes: No less than four (4) spaces per wash lane.
v. All other commercial uses: One (1) space per employee plus such space as may be determined by the Zoning Hearing Board on a case by case basis. The Board shall make an attempt to set the required number of spaces by reviewing this ordinance for comparable uses.
w. In addition to all of the above minimum requirements, additional spaces for visitor parking and salesmen shall be provided according to the specific requirements of each use as determined by the ZHB.
3. Parking Requirements for Industrial Uses.
a. Bus and Trucking Terminals: Sufficient parking to accommodate employees and visitors, subject to the approval of the Borough.
b. Manufacturing, Printing or Publishing, and other Industrial Establishments: At least one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees on the largest shift, or each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
c. Wholesale Sales, Storage or Distribution: At least one (1) space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of sales and storage area or each two (2) employees working on the largest shift.
d. In addition to all of the above minimum requirements, additional spaces for visitor parking and salesmen shall be provided according to the specific requirements of each use.
4. Parking Requirements for Public and Quasi-Public Uses.
a. Day Care Centers and Nursery schools: One (1) space per employee plus three (3) spaces for a drop-off area.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 112
§ 307. § 307.
b. Elementary Schools: Two and one half (2.5) spaces for each classroom plus one (1) space for each five (5) seats in any auditorium or other place of public assembly.
c. Golf Course: At least six (6) parking spaces for each tee.
d. Golf Driving Range: At least one (1) parking space per tee.
e. Hospitals, Nursing or Convalescent Homes: Parking space shall be provided for visitors at the rate of at least one (1) parking space for each three (3) accommodations (beds) for patients, plus one (1) space for each employee on largest shift.
f. Miniature Golf Courses: At least two (2) parking spaces per hole.
g. Park or Recreation Area; Private Club for Hunting, Horseback Riding, Tennis or other Racquet Sports; or Other Outdoor Recreational Use: Variable, depending upon proposed intensity of use, and subject to the approval of the Borough.
h. Secondary Schools and Similar Educational Establishments: Four (4) spaces for each classroom plus one (1) space for each five (5) seats in any auditorium or other place of public assembly.
i. Swimming pools: Where a swimming pool is the principal use at least one
parking space for each four (4) persons based upon the designed capacity of the pool.
j. Theaters, Auditoriums (excluding schools), Places of Worship, Stadiums, or any other place of public or private assembly: At least one (1) parking space for each four (4) seats or two hundred (200) square feet of floor space provided for public or private assembly, whichever is greater.
5. All Other Uses
For other uses which do not fit into one of the above categories, determination of the required number of off-street parking spaces shall be made by the Zoning Hearing Board. It is the intent of these regulations that adequate off-street parking and loading facilities be provided for each land use.
H. Combined Spaces. When any lot or structure contains two (2) or more uses having different parking requirements, the parking requirements for each use shall apply to the extent of that use. Where it can be conclusively demonstrated that one (1) or more such uses will be generating a demand for parking spaces primarily during periods when the
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 113
§ 307. § 307.
other use or uses is not or are not in operation, the Zoning Hearing Board may reduce the total parking spaces required for that use with the least requirement.
I. Location and Ownership. Required accessory parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall be located within 500 feet walking distance of the use which they serve. In all cases such parking spaces shall conform to all the regulations of the District in which the parking spaces are located; and in no event shall such parking spaces be located in any Residential District unless the use to which the spaces are accessory is permitted in such Residential Districts. If the proposed parking spaces are under separate ownership, the applicant shall provide a written agreement, acceptable to the Borough, establishing permission to use said parking spaces.
J. On Lots Divided by District Boundaries. Parking spaces on lots divided by zoning district boundaries may be located without regard to district lines, provided that no such parking spaces shall be located in any Residential District, unless the use to which they are accessory is permitted in such district.
K. Regulations for Parking Spaces Adjacent to Lots in Any Residential District. Buffer planting shall be provided for parking compounds and access drives which are adjacent to lots in residential districts, lots in existing residential use and public rights-of-way.
L. Regulations for Parking Spaces in the Commercial District. Required off-street parking spaces in the Commercial District shall not be located closer to the front lot line than the face of the principal building. Off-street parking located in any side yard or in the building area to the side of the principal building shall be screened so as to not create a nuisance to neighboring properties.
M. Handicapped Parking. Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the applicable requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
N. On-Street Parking. Except as set forth below, On-Street Parking shall be provided on both sides of all streets in accordance with Article VIII, Form-Based Code Regulations and the Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
1. On-street parking may be provided along streets only when approved as part of the Land Development Plan approval process.
2. On-street parking may be counted toward the required parking as set forth in Section 307.G., only if such parking is located along the frontage owned by the applicant or landowner, exclusive of any curb cut.
3. A bona-fide on-street parallel parking area shall measure seven (7) feet in width and twenty-two (22) feet in length, and shall be parallel to the curb line or other
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 114
§ 307. § 308.
edge of pavement.
4. Within a Close, on-street angled parking may be permitted.
5. All eligible on-street parking areas shall be clearly depicted on a plan. Such
parking areas shall not conflict with any turning movements off the cartway or
obstruct access to any street, driveway, sidewalk, crosswalk, other accessway, or
fire hydrant.
O. Deferred Parking Areas. The total number of required parking spaces shall receive all
required approvals and permits. At The construction of a maximum of twenty five
percent (25%) of the number of parking spaces required by this Ordinance may be
deferred during the initial construction of a project. The Recorded Plans for any project
where parking is deferred shall include the design of the deferred parking area on the plan
and the following note “The Borough has the right at any time to direct the current and/or
future owner of the property to install a portion or all of the deferred required parking
spaces. The owner of the property shall construct any deferred parking area within six (6)
months of receiving a written request of the Borough”.
SECTION 308. Off-Street Loading Requirements. Off-street loading spaces (loading
spaces), open or enclosed, are permitted accessory to any use (except one-or two-family
residences) subject to the following minimum provisions:
A. Uses for Which Required. Accessory off-street loading spaces shall be provided for any
use specified below. Any land which is developed as a unit under single ownership and
control shall be considered a single lot for the purpose of these minimum loading
requirements.
1. For a public library, museum, or similar quasi-public institution, or governmental
building, community center, hospital or sanitarium, nursing or convalescent home,
institution for children or the aged, or school with floor area of up to 10,000
square feet, one (1) loading space; for each additional 25,000 square feet or
fraction thereof, one (1) additional loading space.
2. For buildings with professional, governmental, or business offices, or laboratory
establishments, with floor area of 10,000 to 25,000 square feet, one (1) loading
space; for each additional 25,000 square feet or fraction thereof up to 100,000
square feet, one (1) additional loading space; for each additional 50,000 square
feet or fraction thereof, one (1) additional loading space.
3. For buildings with offices and retail sales and service establishments, one (1)
loading space for 8,000 to 25,000 square feet of floor area, and one (1) additional
loading space for each additional 25,000 square feet of floor area or fraction
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 115
§ 308. § 309.
thereof so used.
4. For mortuaries and funeral homes, one (1) loading space for each chapel. (Such
loading spaces shall be at least 10 feet wide, 20 feet long, and 14 feet high).
5. For hotels, motels and resorts, one (1) loading space for each 25,000 square feet of
floor area.
6. For manufacturing, wholesale and storage uses, and for dry -cleaning and rug
cleaning establishments and laundries, one (1) loading space for 5,000 to 10,000
square feet of floor area in such use, and one (1) additional loading space for each
additional 20,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof so used.
7. Off-street loading requirements for uses not specifically cited above will be
determined by the Zoning Officer on a case-by-case basis.
B. Size of Spaces. Each required loading space shall conform to a dimension of not less
than twelve (12) feet by fifty (50) feet, or six hundred (600) square feet in area, with a
minimum overhead clearance of not less than sixteen (16) feet in height.
C. Location and Access. Unobstructed access, at least ten (10) feet wide, to and from a
street shall be provided. Such access may be combined with access to a parking lot. All
permitted or required loading spaces shall be on the same lot as the use to which they are
accessory. Where possible, no off-street loading space shall be located in any front yard.
Where possible, off-street loading space shall be located on the face of a building not
facing any adjoining land in a residential district. Wherever possible, required off-street
parking space shall not be utilized for loading space.
D. Joint Facilities. Permitted or required loading spaces, open or enclosed, may be provided
in spaces designed to serve jointly two (2) or more adjacent establishments on the same
lot, provided that the number of required loading spaces in such joint facilities shall not
be less than the total required for all such requirements.
E. On Lots Divided by District Boundaries. Loading spaces on lots divided by zoning
district boundaries may not be located in any Residential District, unless the use to which
they are accessory is permitted in such district.
SECTION 309. Outdoor Storage.
A. Outdoor storage shall be completely screened from view of any adjacent residential use.
Screening shall consist of evergreen plantings, architectural screen, fence or wall, in
accordance with the requirements of Section 313 of this Ordinance.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 116
§ 309. § 310
.
B. No storage shall be permitted within the front yard of any lot.
C. Outside storage of raw materials and/or finished products shall be permitted only within the buildable area of the lot to the rear of the front building wall of the principal building, and shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height in residential districts and twenty (20) feet in height in other districts.
D. In multiple family, commercial, industrial and other nonresidential developments, garbage storage shall be centralized and enclosed on three sides by architectural screening or a planting strip in accordance with Section 313 of this Ordinance.
E. In R-S, R-1, R-2, R-2A and R-A districts, no commercial vehicle, truck, trailer, recreational vehicle over four (4) feet in height or similar equipment, shall be regularly parked or stored within any of the required yards for more than 24 hours within a thirty
(30) day period.
F. No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk above ground, except for tanks of fuel (1) directly connected to energy or heating devices or (2) used in conjunction with active agricultural or construction activities. A list of such liquids, solids or gases stored on site shall be supplied to the appropriate fire companies serving the Borough. The applicant shall also demonstrate compliance with all applicable regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection; and the Pennsylvania State Police, Fire Marshall Division, including notification and registration requirements.
G. No structure or land shall be used or developed, and no structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered unless the applicant takes all reasonable measures to minimize the impacts of the above ground and underground storage of heating oil, gasoline, diesel fuel, chemical solutions or other substances which, if released, would constitute pollutants to surface water or groundwater. The applicant shall also demonstrate compliance with all applicable regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; PA Department of Environmental Protection; and the Pennsylvania State Police, Fire Marshall Division, including notification and registration requirements.
SECTION 310. Fences and Walls.
A. In the R-1, R-2, R-S, R-A, and R-2A residential districts, no fences and/or walls shall exceed a total of four (4) feet in height in any front yard or a total of six (6) feet in height in any side yard beyond the front yard setback or front yard build-to line, and any rear yard. A front yard fence or wall shall be located behind the sidewalk. Side and rear yard fences and/or walls may be placed on the property line. Fences and/or walls may be erected to a total height not exceeding eight (8) feet when located beyond the required side and rear yard setbacks of any lot.
B. In nonresidential districts, fences or walls may be erected to a height not exceeding eight
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 117
§ 311. § 311
.
(8) feet along the side and rear lot lines, with the following exceptions:
1. No fences and/or walls or combination of fences and/or walls shall exceed four
(4) feet in height along any side lot line between the front property line and the front setback line, nor across the front of any commercial or industrial property if such location is forward of any abutting property's front setback line.
2. Where such lots abut property zoned for residential use, fences and/or walls or a combination of fences and/or walls may not exceed six (6) total feet in height along lot lines where so abutting.
C. Fences surrounding tennis courts shall be erected to a height not exceeding ten (10) feet, per the further requirements of Section 315.
D. No fences and/or walls shall obstruct any required clear sight triangle.
E. A Building Permit shall be required for the construction of any fences and/or walls within the Borough.
SECTION 311. Sign Regulations.
A. Purposes. The purposes of these sign regulations are (1) to regulate the nature and use of signage in order to maintain and enhance the traditional aesthetic environment of the Borough; (2) to promote pedestrian and traffic safety; (3) to minimize the adverse effects of signage on nearby properties; and (4) to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these Sign Regulations.
B. Applicability - Effect. Signs may be erected, placed, established, created, altered or maintained only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions and other requirements of this Section and any and all other ordinances and regulations relating to signs. Zoning permits shall be required for the erection, placement, establishment, creation or alteration of all signs, unless otherwise indicated in this Section.
The effect of this Section, as more specifically set forth herein, is as follows:
1. To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in non-residential districts, and a limited variety of signs in all other districts, subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this Section;
2. To allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive and incidental to the principal use of the respective lots on which they are located, subject to the substantive requirements of this Section, but without a requirement for permits;
3. To provide for temporary signs without commercial messages in limited circumstances in the public right-of-way;
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 118
§ 311. § 311
.
4. To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this Section; and
5. To provide for enforcement of the provisions of this Section.
C. Computations. The following regulations shall control the computation of sign area and sign height.
1. Computation of Area of Individual Signs. The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, triangle, rectangle or circle, or combination thereof, that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets regulations of this Ordinance and is clearly incidental to the display itself.
2. Computation of Area of Multi-faced Signs. The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces.
3. Computation of Sign Height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign.
D. Design, Construction, and Maintenance. All signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards:
1. All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of any building and electrical codes as adopted by the Borough.
2. Except for banners, flags, temporary signs and window signs conforming in all respects with the requirements of this Section, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame or structure.
3. All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition.
E. Signs Allowable in All Districts.
Signs listed in this Sub-section are allowed in all zoning districts as defined by this Ordinance and shall not require permits and shall not be included in any calculations of total square footage limitations. However, such signs shall conform with all other applicable regulations of this Section.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 119
§ 311. § 311
.
1. Name and Address of Resident - Name and address of resident, but not to include any commercial advertising, of not more than two (2) square feet in sign area.
2. No Trespassing Signs - No trespassing signs or other such signs regulating the use of a property, such as "No Hunting" and "No Fishing," of not more than two (2) square feet in sign area in residential districts, and five (5) square feet in all non- residential districts, shall be located no closer than fifty (50) feet apart.
3. Signs Regulating On-Premise Traffic and Parking or Other Functional Subjects - Signs regulating on-premise vehicular and pedestrian traffic and parking (Examples: “In-Out”, “Enter-Exit”, “One Way”, “Do Not Enter”, “Handicapped Entrance”, “Deliveries in Rear”) of not more than two (2) square feet in residential districts and five (5) square feet in non-residential districts. No such signs shall bear any commercial advertising.
4. Signs Erected by a Governmental Body - Signs erected by a governmental body or under the direction of such a body and bearing no commercial advertising, such as traffic signs, railroad crossing signs, safety signs, and signs identifying public schools and playgrounds.
5. Memorial Signs or Tablets - Memorial signs or tablets and signs denoting the date of erection of buildings.
6. Garage or Yard Sales - Such signs shall be limited to a maximum size of five (5) square feet in area and shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the event or activity advertised thereby has occurred. All such signs shall be permitted only on the premises where the event or activity is to take place, and shall not be erected more than forty-eight (48) hours prior to such event and activity. See also Sub-section 311 J. 3.
7. Temporary Signs Announcing Special Events of Charitable or Public Service Groups - Such signs may be window signs or freestanding signs and shall be limited to a maximum size of thirty-two (32) square feet in area, shall not be permitted to exist more than thirty (30) days prior to the event or activity which they advertise, and shall be removed as soon as the related event or activity has concluded.
8. Permanent Residential Development Signs - Permanent residential development signs at major entrances designed to identify a residential subdivision and containing no commercial advertising shall have a maximum area of twenty-five
(25) square feet and be limited to one (1) sign per street entrance.
F. Signs Prohibited in All Zoning Districts.
The following signs shall not be permitted, erected or maintained in any zoning district,
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 120
§ 311. § 311
.
notwithstanding anything else to the contrary contained in this Section or elsewhere:
1. Animated signs and signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing or moving illumination or with illumination which varies in intensity or which varies in color, and signs which have any visible moving part, visible revolving parts, or visible mechanical movement of any description, or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical pulsations or by action of normal wind currents. Clocks, hanging signs which move with air currents, time and temperature signs and barber poles are exempted, provided they otherwise comply with all other provisions of this part.
2. Light sources which cast light on signs unless shielded by opaque material so that bulbs are not visible from off the property on which the signs are located.
3. Any sign or sign structure which constitutes a hazard to public safety or health.
4. Signs which by reason of size, location, content, coloring, or manner or intensity of illumination, distract or obstruct the vision of drivers, either when leaving a roadway or driveway, or obstruct or detract from the visibility or effectiveness of any traffic sign or control device or public streets and roads.
5. Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a fire escape, door, window or other required building exit.
6. Signs which make use of the words such as "Stop," "Look," "One-Way," "Danger," "Yield," or any similar words, phrases, symbols, lights or characters, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
7. Any sign which advertises a defunct business or product no longer sold.
8. Signs on public property or public rights-of-way, unless erected by a governmental body, or unless required to be so located by order of a governmental body.
9. Signs painted on, attached to, or supported by a street sign or street light standard, stone, cliff, or other natural object.
10. Searchlights, pennants, spinners, banners and streamers, inflatable balloons and similar devices, except for temporary occasions not to exceed fifteen (15) days' duration, such as grand openings, and then only with special prior permission of the Zoning Officer, who shall grant such permission only when the request is demonstrated to be harmonious with the proposed location.
11. Manual changeable copy signs not permanently affixed to the ground or business structure, including those on wheels or in moveable frames.
12. Electronic Message Center Signs, whether static or animated.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 121
§ 311. § 311
.
G. Limit on Height of Signs.
No sign or any part thereof (including braces, supports or lights) shall exceed a height of twenty feet (20') if erected at the right-of-way line of the street, road or highway adjoining the premises on which the sign is located, plus one foot (1') additional height for each three (3) lineal feet that said sign is located from such street, road or highway as measured on a perpendicular line from such right-of-way line to the nearest part of the sign, provided, however, that no sign shall exceed thirty-five feet (35') in height regardless of its distance from the right-of-way line. No freestanding sign shall exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
H. Signs in the Public Right-of-Way. No signs shall be allowed in the public right-of-way, except for the following:
1. Permanent Signs. Permanent signs, including:
a. Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices, identify public property, convey public information and direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
b. Bus stop signs erected by a public transit company;
c. Identification signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes or facilities.
2. Temporary Signs. Temporary signs, including:
a. Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices, convey public information and direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
b. Signs announcing special events of charitable or public service groups, provided such signs shall be approved by the Borough and shall:
(1) be limited to a maximum size of thirty-two (32) square feet in area; and;
(2) be removed as soon as the event or activity thereby has occurred and shall not be permitted to exist more than thirty (30) days prior to such event or activity.
3. Emergency Signs. Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, a public utility company or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the public right-of-way.
4. Other Signs Forfeited. Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 122
§ 311. § 311
.
conformance with the requirements of this Section, shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. In addition to other remedies hereunder, the Borough shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign.
I. Signs Allowable By Permit in Zoning Areas and Districts. Signs are allowable by permit in the Borough of Lititz as follows:
1. Historical Area. Signs are subject to the applicable district regulations. In addition, with the exception of Informational and Promotional Signage, the Zoning Hearing Board may approve, as a special exception, the application for a permit to erect, alter or modify any permanent sign in this area. The Board shall
determine the size and type of sign so as to protect the appearance and character of the historical area in which it is located.
2. Residential R-S, Residential R-1, Residential R-2 and Residential R-A Districts.
a. Signs allowed under Sub-section 311.E.
b. Residential signs. One (1) identification sign per dwelling unit and one (1) sign indicating the private nature of a driveway or premises. If lighted, signs shall be illuminated by incident rays adequately shielded to avoid glare. Luminous signs are prohibited.
c. Signs for uses allowed by special exception and signs for non-conforming uses. Signs for the identification of those uses allowed by special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board and for the identification of non- conforming uses shall be approved, as a special exception, by the Zoning Hearing Board. The Board shall approve the size and type of sign so as to protect the appearance and character of the district in which it will be located.
d. Real estate signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet [six (6) square feet if single-sided] and shall be removed within a week after settlement on the sale or lease of the property. Such signs shall be limited to one (1) per street frontage.
e. All signs are also subject to all other applicable regulations of this Section, including those outlined in Sub-section 311 K.
3. Office and Professional District.
a. Signs allowed under Sub-section 311.E.
b. Business Identification Signs and Informational Sign age
c. The total area of all signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet. If lighted,
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 123
§ 311. § 311
.
signs shall be illuminated by incident rays adequately shielded to avoid glare. Luminous signs are prohibited.
d. Real estate signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet [six (6) square feet if single-sided] and shall be removed within a week after settlement on the sale or lease of the property. Such signs are limited to one (1) per street frontage.
e. All signs are also subject to all other applicable regulations of this Section,
including those outlined in Sub-section 311 K.
4. Commercial District.
a. Signs allowed under Sub-section 311.E.
b. Business Identification Signs, Informational Signage and Promotional Signage.
c. The total area of all signs and signage shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet for premises of up to fifteen (15) lineal feet of public street frontage. An additional four (4) square feet of signage area is permitted for every additional five (5) lineal feet or fraction thereof of frontage. No single sign shall exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in area.
d. Within the total permitted area of signage for any premise, a maximum of five (5) percent of the first floor window area or five (5) square feet, whichever is greater, shall be permitted for Informational Signage, and a maximum of fifteen (15) percent of the first floor window area or fifteen
(15) square feet, whichever is greater, shall be permitted for Promotional Signage.
e. If lighted, signs shall be illuminated by incident rays adequately shielded to avoid glare. Luminous signs are prohibited.
f. Real estate signs shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet and shall be removed within a week after settlement on the sale of the property. Such signs are limited to one (1) per street frontage.
g. All signs are also subject to all other applicable regulations of this Section, including those outlined in Sub-section 311 K.
5. General Business District.
a. Signs allowed under Sub-section 311.E.
b. Business Identification Signs, Informational Signage and Promotional Signage.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 124
§ 311. § 311
.
c. The total area of all signs and signage shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet for the first one hundred linear feet, or fraction thereof, of public street frontage. An additional fifty (50) square feet of sign area is permitted for each additional one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage, or fraction thereof, not to exceed three hundred (300) square feet for the
entire property (including doors and windows). Under no circumstances shall the size of any one (1) sign exceed sixty-four (64) square feet; however, the total surface area of any Freestanding Sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
d. Within the total permitted area of signage for any premise, a maximum of five (5) percent of the first floor window area or five (5) square feet, whichever is greater, shall be permitted for Informational Signage, and a maximum of fifteen (15) percent of the first floor window area or fifteen
(15) square feet, whichever is greater, shall be permitted for Promotional Signage.
e. Projecting signs shall be no higher than the eaveline of the building, and subject to size as stated in Sub-section 311.J.5.c.
f. If lighted, signs shall be illuminated by incident rays adequately shielded to avoid glare.
g. Luminous signs are permitted by Special Exception.
h. Real estate signs shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet and shall be removed within a week after settlement on the sale or lease of the property. Such signs are limited to one (1) per street frontage.
i. All signs are also subject to all other applicable regulations of this Section, including those outlined in Sub-section 311 K.
6. Industrial District.
a. Signs permitted under Sub-section 311.E.
b. Business Identification Signs, Informational Signage and Promotional Signage.
c. The total area of all signs and signage shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet for the first one hundred linear feet, or fraction thereof, of public street frontage. An additional fifty (50) square feet of sign area is permitted for each additional one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage, or fraction thereof, not to exceed three hundred (300) square feet for the entire property (including doors and windows). Under no circumstances shall the size of any one (1) sign exceed sixty-four (64) square feet;
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 125
§ 311. § 311
.
however, the total surface area of any Freestanding Sign shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet.
d. Within the total permitted area of signage for any premise, a maximum of five (5) percent of the first floor window area or five (5) square feet, whichever is greater, shall be permitted for Informational Signage, and a maximum of fifteen (15) percent of the first floor window area or fifteen (15) square feet, whichever is greater, shall be permitted for Promotional Signage.
e. Projecting signs shall be no higher than the eaveline of the building, and subject to size as stated in Sub-section 311.K.1.
f. If lighted, signs shall be illuminated by incident rays adequately shielded to avoid glare.
g. Luminous signs are permitted by Special Exception.
h. Real estate signs shall not exceed forty (40) square feet and shall be removed within a week after settlement on the sale or lease of the property. Such signs are limited to one (1) per street frontage.
i. All signs are also subject to all other applicable regulations of this Section, including those outlined in Sub-section 311 K.
J. Non-Permanent Signs
1. Temporary, non-permanent signs of contractors, engineers, architects, mechanics, landscapers, artisans and similar services are allowed without permit, provided that:
a. Such signs shall be erected only on the premises where such work has commenced.
b. The sign area of any such sign shall not exceed the area permitted for real estate signs in the district where the work is being performed. Larger signs may be permitted when required by government agencies.
c. Such signs shall be removed within five (5) days of completion of advertised work.
2. Temporary, non-permanent signs are allowed without permit, provided that such signs shall not be displayed in excess of one (1) month. Any sign displayed for longer than one (1) month shall be considered as permanent and will be subject to all applicable provisions of this Section.
3. Temporary, non-permanent signs advertising single-day garage, porch and/or yard
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 126
§ 311. § 311
.
or similar types sales may be allowed without permit provided they are placed only on the premises which is the site of the sale and are not placed not more than forty-eight (48) hours prior to nor removed later than twenty-four (24) hours after the sale.
K. Additional Criteria for Certain Sign Types and Uses.
1. Projecting Signs. In addition to the other applicable provisions of this Section, the following regulations shall apply to all projecting signs:
a. No projecting sign shall project more than five feet (5') beyond the building line in the direction of the street, nor shall any portion of any projecting sign be closer than five feet (5') to the face of the street curb or curb line, or the edge of an alley.
b. No portion of any projecting sign shall be less than eight feet (8') above normal grade as defined in Sub-section 311 C.3.
c. No single face of a projecting sign shall exceed fifteen (15) square feet in sign area.
d. No projecting sign shall have a vertical dimension greater than six feet (6').
e. There shall be no more than one (1) projecting sign for any premises unless the building is located on a corner lot or has public entrances on two (2) or more public ways, in which case one (1) projecting sign may be erected for and toward each public way.
2. Wall Signs. In addition to the other applicable provisions of this Section, the following regulations shall apply to all wall signs:
a. No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall upon which it is placed.
b. No wall sign, or any part thereof, shall project more than twelve inches (12") from the wall upon which it is mounted. If external lighting is used, reflectors must be at least ten feet (10') above the surface of the ground level, equipped with wire mesh guards and no part of the lighting device may project more than two feet (2') from the wall of the building.
c. No wall sign shall extend beyond the left and right extremities of the wall
to which it is attached.
d. There shall be no more than two (2) signs per wall on any building or structure, and the aggregate wall sign area shall have a total area of not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the wall area.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 127
§ 311. § 311
.
3. Freestanding Signs. In addition to the other applicable provisions of this Section, the following regulations shall apply to all freestanding signs.
a. Every freestanding sign and all parts, braces and supports thereof shall be located entirely within the property lines of the premises and shall not project over public rights-of-way or other adjoining lands. Freestanding signs may be permitted between the property line and the building setback lines, except where otherwise prohibited by this Ordinance. The base of the sign shall be located behind the street right-of-way. The sign shall be no less than three (3) feet and not more than fifteen (15) feet above the curbline, and shall not project closer than seven (7) feet from the curbline or two (2) feet from the right-of-way, which ever is more restrictive of the two.
b. A freestanding sign shall have no more than two (2) faces or advertising sides.
c. No freestanding sign face or advertising side shall have any dimension (length, width, diameter, etc.) in excess of ten (10) lineal feet.
d. All freestanding signs hereafter erected shall be centrally located within a planted green area at least equal to the allowable area of a single face or advertising side for the subject sign, which area shall also include ornamental evergreen shrubbery to minimize the visibility of poles, supports and braces of such sign.
e. Freestanding signs shall not be installed in the Downtown area, except for Pole Signs used as Wayfinding Signs or signs of the State or Borough.
4. Pole Signs. In addition to the other applicable provisions of this Section, the following regulations shall apply to all pole signs.
a. Pole signs shall be no less than eight (8) feet and not more than fifteen
(15) feet above the curbline.
b. A pole sign shall have no more than two (2) faces or advertising sides, opposite of one another.
c. No pole sign face or advertising side shall have any dimension (length, width, diameter, etc.) in excess of nine (9) lineal feet.
d. Pole Signs may be used as Wayfinding Signs or signs of the State or Borough.
5. Roof Signs. In addition to the other applicable provisions of this Section, the following regulations shall apply to all roof signs:
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 128
§ 311. § 311
.
a. The highest point of a roof sign shall not exceed the building height limitation as provided in this Ordinance as applicable to the pertinent zoning district.
b. Not more than one (1) roof sign may be erected or maintained on a single premises.
6. Shopping Center Signs. In addition to the general provisions of this Section, the following regulations shall apply to shopping centers having more than four (4) individual businesses:
a. Only freestanding signs which bear the name of the shopping center may be erected on the lands occupied by the center, subject to the provisions of Subsection 311.L.3.
b. Each individual business shall be limited to wall signs in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 311.L.2.
7. Luminous Signs. In Zoning Districts where permitted, luminous signs must be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board, as a special exception, to determine that the location, design, type and color of sign will not be detrimental to the character of the district. Only one sign per premises shall be lighted when the business is not open.
L. Non-conforming Signs.
1. The owner of a nonconforming sign which has been nonconforming or becomes nonconforming as a result of the enactment or amendment of this Ordinance shall have five (5) years to remove the sign or replace the sign with a conforming sign. The owner may apply to the Zoning Hearing Board for a variance to continue the use of such sign beyond the five (5) year limitation, for a period of not to exceed an additional five (5) years. The Board shall consider the hardship provisions in making its decision on granting or denying the variance.
2. New signs for businesses existing as non-conforming uses may be permitted as a
special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board under the listed regulations, and the Zoning Hearing board may attach certain conditions to its approval which it feels are necessary in order to preserve the character of the district in which the proposed sign would be located.
M. Applications and Permits.
1. Applications for permits to erect, alter or modify permanent signs shall be made to the Zoning Officer. With the exception of signs listed in Sub-section 311 E, permits shall be required for all permanent signs.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 129
§ 311. § 312
.
2. It shall be unlawful to commence the erection of any permanent sign or to
commence the moving or alteration of any permanent sign until the Zoning
Officer has issued a sign permit for such work.
3. In applying to the Zoning Officer for a sign permit, the applicant shall submit a
dimensional sketch or scale plan indicating the shape, size, height and location of
all signs to be erected, altered or moved and supply such other information as may
be required by the Zoning Officer for determining whether the provisions of this
Section are being observed. If the proposed sign as set forth in the application is
in conformity with the provisions of this Section and other ordinances of the
Borough then in force, the Zoning Officer shall issue a sign permit for such sign.
If the sign permit is refused, the Zoning Officer shall state such refusal in writing
with the cause and shall immediately thereupon mail notice of such refusal to the
applicant at the address indicated in the application. The Zoning Officer shall
grant or deny the permit within fifteen (15) days from the date the application is
submitted. The issuance of a permit shall in no case be construed as waiving any
provisions of this Section.
N. Removal of Certain Signs. After one (1) year, any sign which advertises business or
service no longer in existence on the premises shall be considered to be abandoned.
Signs that are abandoned shall be removed by the persons responsible for the erection
and/or maintenance thereof within thirty (30) days after notice of the abandonment to
such persons by the Zoning Officer. If such persons fail or refuse to remove such
abandoned signs after the notice aforesaid, the Zoning Officer may remove the signs at
the expense of the property owner or the persons responsible for the erection and/or
maintenance thereof.
O. Violations. Any of the following shall be a violation of this Ordinance and shall be
subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this Ordinance and by
state law:
1. To install, create, erect or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any
plan or permit governing such sign or the premises on which the sign is located;
2. To install, create, erect or maintain any sign requiring a permit without such a
permit;
3. To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected or maintained in
violation of this Ordinance; or
4. To continue any such violation. Each such day of a continued violation shall be
considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 312. Private Outdoor Swimming Pools. A building permit shall be required for
the installation or construction of a private outdoor swimming pool on the same lot as the
principal residence subject to the following conditions:
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 130
§ 312. § 313
.
A. Such pool and associated paving/decking shall not be erected or installed in any required side yard setback, front yard setback and rear yard setback, or within ten (10) feet of a property line, whichever is greater.
B. The pool shall not be located closer to the front of the lot than the front wall of the principal building.
C. Any such pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall that is not less than four
(4) feet in height. All gates or doors opening through said fence shall be erected, maintained and provided with a self-closing, lockable gate to prevent unauthorized use of the pool and to prevent accidents. However, if said pool is an above-ground pool with sidewalls extending more than four (4) feet above the ground level, then a fence is not required, provided that all points of access to said pool are adequately protected.
D. An approved temporary construction fence shall be erected around the excavation site during the construction of an in-ground pool and shall remain in place until the permanent fence is installed.
E. Water shall not be placed into a swimming pool until a Certificate of Use and Occupancy has been issued.
F. No swimming pool shall occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of the lot on which it is built.
G. Floodlighting or other illumination used in conjunction with any swimming pool shall be shielded and directed away from adjacent properties.
SECTION 313. Landscaping, Screening and Buffering.
A. Planting Strip/ Buffer Planting Strip.
All commercial, industrial and nonresidential uses shall be separated from all side property boundaries, all rear property boundaries, and all street right-of-way lines by a planting strip/buffer planting strip. The planting strip/buffer planting strip may be included in the required yard space, and it shall comply with the following criteria:
1. The planting strip/buffer planting strip shall be at least ten (10) feet wide, measured from the property line or street right-of-way line, except where there is approved shared parking and the planting strip is not required along the side or rear boundaries.
2. Said planting strip/buffer planting strip shall be planted in lawn, groundcovers, shrubbery, trees, or other plant materials, but in no case shall this areas be paved or covered by an impervious surface.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 131
§ 313. § 313
.
3. Said planting strip/buffer planting strip shall be interrupted only by approved
entrances or exits.
4. Vegetation in the planting strip/buffer planting strip shall not obstruct any
required clear sight triangle.
B. Screening and Buffering.
1. Screening requirements shall be applicable under the following circumstances:
a. Where a proposed commercial or industrial use abuts an existing
residential use or residential district on the same side of a street.
b. Where any proposed multiple family residential use with more than 12
units abuts an existing single-family detached, single-family semidetached,
two-family detached or two-family semi-detached dwelling.
c. Any other instance where screening is required by this Ordinance or by the
Borough, such as in Article VIII as part of the Form-Based Code
Regulations.
2. Screening shall consist of (1) evergreen plantings, (2) architectural screens, or (3)
fences/walls, in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
C. Off-Street Parking Areas. All off-street parking compounds shall be screened from
adjoining properties with either plantings or architectural screening, as indicated in the
Appendix, and in the Form-Based Code Regulations of Article VIII, as applicable.
D. Service, Loading and Trash Disposal Areas.
1. All service, delivery, loading, outdoor storage and trash disposal areas shall be
screened from all residential districts and uses, public streets, and parking lots.
2. These areas shall be totally screened from the above -listed places by the use of
opaque fences, walls, berms, evergreen plant material, or a combination of these,
not less than six (6) feet in height.
E. All mechanical equipment not enclosed within a structure shall be fully and completely
screened in an architecturally appropriate manner acceptable to the Zoning Officer.
F. Water towers, tanks, processing equipment, fans, cooling towers, vents and any other
structures or equipment which extend above any roof line shall be effectively shielded
from any public or private dedicated street, and such screen shall be approved, in writing,
by the Borough before construction or erection of said structures or equipment is
initiated.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 132
§ 314. § 317
.
SECTION 314. Environmental Performance Standards. No land or building in any District in the Borough shall be used or occupied in such a manner so as to create any dangerous or objectionable elements in such amount as to adversely affect the surrounding area or premises. All uses of land or building shall initially and continuously comply with all applicable performance standards established by Federal and State agencies.
SECTION 315. Tennis Courts. Tennis courts are permitted accessory uses in all Residential Zoning Districts, subject to the following:
A. No facility shall be permitted unless it is protected by a permanent, open mesh, chain link fence ten (10) feet in height behind each baseline extending ten (10) feet beyond the playing area in each direction.
B. Any such facility, including fence, shall conform to all minimum setbacks.
C. No facility, including fence, shall be located closer to the front of the lot than the front wall of the principal building.
D. If lighting is provided, it shall be arranged so that there is no objectionable glare on adjoining properties.
SECTION 316. Satellite Antennas. Satellite antennas are permitted accessory structures in all Zoning Districts, subject to the following:
A. Antennas shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications and shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in diameter. They may be located only in rear or side yards or on the roof of a building and must adhere to the specified setback requirements for the Zoning District in which they are located.
B. Ground-mounted antennas shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
C. Roof-mounted antennas are subject to the requirements of Section 316 B. except that they may not project more than ten (10) feet above the roofline.
SECTION 317. Solar Energy Systems.
A. Solar Energy Systems.
1. The primary purpose of a solar energy system shall be to provide power for the principal use of the property whereon said system is to be located and shall not be for the generation of power for commercial purposes, although this provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit the sale of excess power generated from time to time from a solar energy system designed to meet the energy needs of the principal use.
2.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 133
§ 317. § 318
.
3. For the purposes of this subsection, the sale of excess power shall be limited so
that in no event an energy system is generating more energy for sale than what is
otherwise necessary to power the principal use on the property.
4. Solar energy systems shall only be permitted as an accessory use on the same lot
as the principal use. Applications for a solar energy system shall include
information demonstrating compliance with the provisions of this subsection.
5. All applications for solar energy systems shall require approval of the Zoning
Officer and shall be subject to a building permit.
6. Solar panels shall not be permitted in the Historic Resource Protection Overlay
District.
7. Solar panels shall be permitted as a rooftop installation in any other zoning
district. In Residential Zoning Districts, the solar panels shall not exceed a height
of eight inches (8”) from the rooftop. In no event shall the placement of the solar
panels result in a total height including building and panels exceeding what is
permitted in the Zoning District governing the location of the principal building.
8. Solar panels shall not be permitted as ground arrays.
9. Solar energy systems shall not be used for displaying any advertising except for
reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the system. In no case
shall any identification be visible from a property line.
10. The design of solar energy systems shall, to the extent reasonably possible, use
materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the facility
into the natural setting and existing environment.
SECTION 318 Lighting Standards.
A. Lights shall not shine in an upward direction to create excessive glare.
B. “Dusk to Dawn” lights require Special Exception approval by the Zoning Hearing Board
when in or abutting residential zones. Where such lights presently exist in locations in or
abutting residential zones, they shall not be replaced without Special Exception approval.
Replacement of such lighting with properly installed lighting controlled by motiondetecting
switchgear shall be permitted by right.
C. Lighting Fixture Design.
1. Dedicated fixtures shall be of a type and design appropriate to the lighting
application and aesthetically acceptable to Lititz Borough.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 134
§ 318. § 318
.
2. For lighting horizontal tasks such as roadways, sidewalks, entrances, and parking
areas, fixtures shall meet IESNA Fully Shielded criteria (no light output emitted
above ninety (90) degrees at any lateral angle around the fixture). Individual
fixtures whose aggregate lamp output does not exceed one thousand eight hundred
(1,800) lumens (typical household outdoor lighting) are exempt from this
requirement.
3. The use of floodlighting, spotlighting, wall-mounted fixtures, decorative globes
and spheres, and other fixtures not meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria shall be
permitted only with the approval of Lititz Borough, based upon applicability in
retaining the Urban character of Lititz Borough and achieving acceptable Glare
control.
4. Fixtures shall be equipped with, or be modified to, incorporate light directing
and/or shielding devices such as shields, visors, skirts, or hoods to redirect
offending light distribution and/or reduce direct or reflected Glare. Glare control
shall be achieved primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures,
shields and baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height,
wattage, aiming angle and fixture placement.
D. Control of Nuisance and Disabling Glare.
1. All outdoor lighting shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted, and maintained so as
not to present a hazard to drivers or pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely
travel.
2. Unless for safety, security, or all-night operations, lighting shall be controlled by
automatic switching devices to permit extinguishing between eleven (11) p.m. and
dawn.
3. Lighting proposed for use after eleven (11) p.m., or after the normal hours of
operation, shall be reduced by an average of seventy-five percent (75%) from that
time until dawn.
4. Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the primary means for
controlling Glare.
5. The intensity of illumination projected onto an existing residential use from an
existing property boundary shall not exceed the following vertical Footcandle,
measured at the existing property line at a height of 5 feet;
a. 0.6 Footcandles in the Downtown.
b. 0.2 Footcandles in the Districts immediately adjoining the Downtown.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 135
§ 318. § 318
.
c. 0.1 Footcandle in other Districts.
6. Directional fixtures, e.g., floodlights and spotlights, shall be so shielded, installed and aimed that they do not project their output into the windows of neighboring residences, adjacent uses, past the object being illuminated, skyward or onto a public roadway or pedestrian way.
7. Externally illuminated billboards and signs shall be lighted by fixtures mounted at the top of the billboard or sign and aimed downward. The fixtures shall be designed, shielded and aimed to shield the source from off-site view and to restrict the light output onto and not beyond the sign or billboard. At no point on the face of the sign or billboard shall the illumination exceed 30 initial vertical footcandles with a maximum to minimum uniformity ration not to exceed 6:1.
8. Only the United States and the state flag shall be permitted to be illuminated from dusk till dawn. All other flags shall not be illuminated past 11:00 p.m. Flag lighting sources shall not exceed 7,000 initial lamp lumens per flagpole. The light source shall have a beam spread no greater than necessary to illuminate the flag and shall be fully shielded.
9. Under-canopy lighting, for such applications as gas/service stations, hotel/theater marquees, fast-food/bank/drugstore drive-ups, shall be accomplished using flat- lens full-cutoff fixtures aimed straight down and shielded in such a manner that the lowest opaque edge of the fixture shall be below the light source at all lateral angles. The illumination in the area directly below the canopy shall not exceed 20 average footcandles and the maximum shall not exceed 30 footcandles.
10. The use of white strobe lighting for tall structures such as smokestacks, chimneys and radio/communications/television towers is prohibited during hours of darkness, except as specifically required by FAA.
E. Installation.
1. Electrical feeds to lighting standards shall be run underground, not overhead.
2. Pole mounted fixtures shall not be mounted in excess of 25 feet height.
3. Lighting standards in parking areas shall be placed outside paved areas or on concrete pedestals at least thirty (30) inches high above the pavement, or by other approved protective means.
4. Except for certain recreational lighting covered elsewhere in this Ordinance, fixtures not meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria shall not be mounted in excess of sixteen (16) feet above finished grade and fixtures meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria shall not be mounted in excess of twenty (20) feet above finished grade. For the illumination of greater than 100 contiguous parking spaces, Lititz Borough may permit the use of a mounting height not to exceed twenty-five (25)
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 136
§ 318. § 320
.
5. feet for fixtures meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria when it can be demonstrated
to the satisfaction of Lititz Borough that light trespass and glare control
requirements in this Ordinance have been met.
F. A Lighting Plan shall be submitted to demonstrate compliance with above requirements.
G. Post-Installation Inspection.
1. Lititz Borough reserves the right to conduct a post installation nighttime
inspection to verify compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance and,
if appropriate, to require remedial action at no expense to Lititz Borough.
SECTION 319. Radio Broadcasting/Receiving Antennae. In all districts, the height above
grade of any antennae cannot exceed the distance to the nearest property boundary. A building
permit shall be required for the placement of any such structure.
SECTION 320. Ownership and Maintenance of Common Open Space.
A. A plan for the ownership and maintenance of the common open space shall be
submitted at the time of subdivision and land development. The open space land shall
be owned and maintained by the equitable owner or shall be in accordance with Section
B below.
B. Ownership Options.
1. The following methods may be used, either individually or in combination, to
own Common Open Space. Common Open Space shall not be transferred to
another entity except for transfer to another method of ownership permitted under this
section, and then only when there is no change in the common facilities or in the open
space ratio of the overall development. Ownership methods shall conform to the
following:
a. Fee Simple Dedication to the Borough. The Borough Council may, but
shall not be required to, accept any portion of the Common Open Space,
provided that there is no cost of acquisition to the Borough and the
Council agrees to and has access to maintain such facilities. Furthermore,
the Council may require adherence to conditions or standards set forth to
acceptance of dedication.
b. Condominium Association. Common Open Space may be controlled
through the use of condominium agreements. Such agreements shall be in
accordance with relevant state law. All Common Open Space and
common facilities shall be held as "common element."
c. Homeowners' Association. Common Open Space may be held in common
ownership by a homeowners' association, subject to all of the provisions
for homeowners' associations set forth in State regulations and statutes. In
addition, the following regulations shall be met:
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 137
§ 320. § 320
.
(1) The applicant shall provide the Borough a description of
the organization of the proposed association, including its by-laws,
and all documents governing ownership, maintenance, and use
restrictions for Common Open Space;
(2) The proposed association shall be established by the owner or
applicant and shall be operating (with financial subsidization by
the owner or applicant, if necessary) before the sale of any
dwelling units in the development;
(3) Membership in the association shall be automatic (mandatory) for
all purchasers of dwelling units therein and their successors in title;
(4) The association shall be responsible for maintenance and insurance
of Common Open Space;
(5) The by-laws shall confer legal authority on the association to place
a lien on the real property of any member who falls delinquent is
his dues. Such dues shall be paid with the accrued interest before
the lien may be lifted;
(6) Written notice of any proposed transfer of Common Open Space
by the association or the assumption of maintenance for Common
Open Space shall be given to all members of the association and to
the Borough no less than thirty (30) days prior to such event; and
(7) The association shall have adequate staff to administer, maintain,
and operate such Common Open Space.
(8) Evidence shall be produced as required by the Council to
demonstrate the financial viability of the homeowner’s association.
d. Private Conservation Organization or the County. With permission of the
Council, an owner may transfer either fee simple title of the open space or
easements on the open space to a private non-profit conservation
organization or to the County provided that:
(1) The conservation organization is acceptable to the Council and is a
bona fide conservation organization intended to exist indefinitely;
(2) The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper reverter
or re-transfer in the event that the organization or Lancaster County
becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its functions;
(3) The Common Open Space land is permanently restricted from
future development through a conservation easement and the
Borough is given the ability to enforce these restrictions; and
(4) A maintenance agreement acceptable to the municipality is
established between the owner and the organization or Lancaster
County.
(5) Evidence shall be provided as required by the Council to
demonstrate the financial viability and liability of the private
conservation organization.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 138
§ 320. § 320
.
e. Dedication of Easements to the Borough. The municipality may, but shall
not be required to, accept easements for public use of any portion of the
Common Open Space lands. In such cases, the facility remains in the
ownership of the condominium association, homeowners' association, or
private conservation organization while the easements are held by the
Borough. In addition, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) There shall be no cost of acquisition to the Borough;
(2) Any such easements for public use shall be accessible to the
residents of the Borough; and
(3) A satisfactory maintenance agreement shall be reached between the
owner and the Council.
f. Non-Common Private Ownership. Up to eighty (80%) percent of the
Common Open Space may be included within one or more large
"conservancy lots" of at least ten (10) acres provided the open space is
permanently restricted from future development through a conservation
easement and that the municipality is given the ability to enforce these
restrictions.
C. Maintenance.
1. Unless otherwise agreed to by the Borough Council, the cost and responsibility of
maintaining Common Open Space shall be borne by the property owner,
condominium association, homeowners' association, or conservation organization.
2. The applicant shall, at the time of preliminary plan submission, provide a Plan for
Maintenance of Common Open Space Lands and Operation of Common Facilities
in accordance with the following requirements.
a. The Plan shall define ownership.
b. The Plan shall establish necessary regular and periodic operation and
maintenance responsibilities for the various kinds of open space (i.e.
greens, plazas, pedestrian pockets, lawns, playing fields, meadow, pasture,
woodlands, detention facilities, etc.).
c. The Plan shall estimate staffing needs, insurance requirements, and
associated costs, and define the means for funding the maintenance of the
Common Open Space and operation of any common facilities on an ongoing
basis. Such funding plan shall include the means for funding longterm
capital improvements as well as regular yearly operating and
maintenance costs.
3. In the event that the organization established to maintain the Common Open
Space and the common facilities, or any successor organization thereto, fails to
maintain all or any portion thereof in reasonable order and condition, the Borough
may assume responsibility for maintenance, in which case any escrow funds may
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 139
§ 320. § 322
.
be forfeited and any permits may be revoked or suspended.
4. The Borough personnel may enter the premises and take corrective action,
including extended maintenance. The costs of such corrective action may be
charged to the property owner, condominium association, homeowners
association, conservation organization, or individual property owners who make
up a condominium or homeowners' association and may include administrative
costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on said properties. Notice of
such lien shall be filed by the Borough in the office of the Prothonotary of
Lancaster County.
SECTION 321. Supplementary Form-Based Code Regulations
A. The Form-Based Code Regulations of Article VIII shall apply to Common Open Space,
as applicable.
SECTION 322. Demolition
No structure shall be demolished without a permit obtained under this provision, except for
emergency demolitions (see Section 322.I).
A. Process
An applicant desiring the demolition of an accessory structure that is not listed as Class I or
II by the Historic Resources Survey shall apply directly to the Zoning Officer for a permit.
All other requests for demolition shall be treated as a conditional use request under the PA
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. As such, the Lititz Borough Planning
Commission shall review each demolition request and offer their findings to Borough
Council for consideration. Borough Council shall make a decision whether to grant or deny
the permit.
B. Request Procedure
A request for demolition can be filed with the Borough on any business day. However, the
Planning Commission may review a request at a particular meeting only if the plan was
filed at least twenty-one (21) calendar days prior to the meeting. In the case that the
structure is within the Lititz Historic District (Lititz-Moravian Historic District), the request
shall concurrently be submitted to the Historic Area Advisory Committee (HAAC) as well.
C. Request Requirements
A written request shall be submitted to the Borough with the following materials.
1. A description of the structure in question, with the year it was built and Historic
Resource class designation, if available.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 140
§ 322. § 322
.
2. The reasons for the demolition request
3. A certification from the landowner that the structure cannot be feasibly rehabilitated
to meet a permitted use.
4. Reference to a submitted or approved land development plan, where applicable. In
the case of a request to demolish a principal structure, the request shall not be
considered complete and will not be scheduled for hearing until a sketch plan
depicting the subsequent redevelopment of the site is provided to the Borough.
D. Criteria for Review
The burden of proof is on the property owner to demonstrate that the property owner has
been deprived any profitable use of the relevant parcel as a whole. The recommendation of
the Planning Commission and the decision of Borough Council shall be based upon a
review of the information submitted by the Applicant against all criteria and not any one
criterion. The Purpose and Community Development Objectives of Section 101 and 102
shall also be considered.
1. It is not feasible to continue the current use.
2. Other uses permitted within the underlying zoning district, either as permitted uses,
special exception uses, or conditional uses, have been denied or are not feasible due
to constraints on the building or structure.
3. Adaptive use opportunities do not exist due to constraints related to the building,
structure or property.
4. The building, it’s permitted uses, and adaptive use potential does not provide a
reasonable rate of return, based on a reasonable initial investment. Such reasonable
rate of return shall be calculated with respect to the property taken as a whole.
5. The Applicant has not contributed to the existing conditions, either through neglect
or prior renovation, conversion, alteration or similar physical action.
6. The demolition will not adversely affect the character of the property, streetscape,
neighborhood or community.
7. A proposed new building, structure or use (if applicable) on or of the property will
not adversely affect the character of the streetscape, neighborhood or community.
8. The building is structurally unsound.
9. The denial of demolition would result in unreasonable economic hardship to the
owner.
10. Sale of the building or structure is impossible or impractical.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 141
§ 322. § 322
.
11. Denial of demolition will deprive the property as a whole of all beneficial use
E. Associated Land Development Plan
If the application for a permit for demolition of one or more principal structure is being requested to facilitate future development of the land, the said permit shall not be issued until the following additional requirements have been satisfied.
1. Approval of the land development plan by the Borough Council;
2. Issuance of any necessary zoning approvals; and
3. The recording of the approved subdivision or land development plan for the parcel where the demolition is proposed.
F. Pre-demolition Requirements
In those instances where an application for demolition is approved, the building(s) to be demolished shall be historically and photographically documented. The extent of the documentation shall be determined by the significance of the building(s). When documentation is complete the building shall be dismantled and recycled to the greatest extent possible.
Electronic copies of all documentation shall be submitted to the Borough and a full set of
hard copies shall be forwarded to the Lititz Historical Foundation.
G. Denial of Demolition All appeals from decisions of the Borough Council in the administration of this Section shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code, Article X-A.
H. Enforcement In addition to the enforcement provisions in Section 700, the Zoning Officer, with the authorization of Borough Council, may take other appropriate legal action, which may include equitable and injunctive relief, to enforce the provisions of this Section.
I. Emergency demolitions
Emergency demolitions to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Lititz Borough are regulated under the Borough Property Maintenance Code, Uniform Building Code, or its successors and the provisions of that Code shall take precedence over the provisions contained herein.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 142
§ 322. § 322
.
J. Demolition by Neglect
1. General Requirements: Demolition by Neglect is the absence of routine maintenance and repair which leads to structural weakness, decay and deterioration in a building or structure to the point where the building or structure meets the criteria for condemnation.
a. Codes Violations: If the Zoning Officer cited a property owner of a principal structure for conditions that has or could lead to structural weakness, decay or deterioration and the property owner fails to correct the condition(s) in the time specified, that property owner may be cited by the Zoning Officer also for demolition by neglect under these provisions and be subject to the penalties contained herein.
b. The owner of unoccupied Principal or Accessory Buildings or Structures that have been cited for violations shall develop a written maintenance program for the protection of any and all unoccupied Class I or Class II historic resources. Said maintenance program shall be established in accordance with Lititz Borough Property Maintenance Code. A copy of the maintenance program shall be filed with the Zoning Officer, with Borough Council’s authorization, and implementation begun in accordance with an established timetable.
(1) The maintenance program shall address measures to assure that structural components are protected and reinforced to stabilize and maintain the essential form of the building or structure. Structural features requiring stabilization include, but may not be limited to: roof, chimney(s), cornice, soffit, fascia, spouting, columns, beams, posts, as well as window and door sills, lintels and jambs.
(2) The exterior and interior of the building or structure shall be inspected no less than annually by the Zoning Office with the owner or the owner’s agent to determine code compliance with the established maintenance program. 2. Enforcement a. In addition to the enforcement provisions in Section 700, the Zoning Officer may authorize action to withhold issuance of any and all zoning and building permits for a period of up to two (2) years for any property that at the time of the enactment of these provisions, was occupied by a Building or Structure that was subsequently demolished by neglect. Except that permits may be issued for the abatement of any cited condition governed by Lititz Borough.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 143
§ 322. § 322
.
b. In addition, the Zoning Officer may take other appropriate legal action, which may include equitable and injunctive relief, to enforce the provisions of this Section.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 144
§ 400. § 400.
ARTICLE IV
CRITERIA FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND OTHER SELECTED USES
SECTION 400. General Procedures for Special Exceptions.
It is the intent of this Section to provide special controls and regulations for particular uses which
may, under certain conditions, be conducted within the various Zoning Districts established in
Article II of this Ordinance.
Each Section of this Article has particular controls and/or requirements which shall be satisfied
before the use by Special Exception is permitted; and it is the intent of this Article that these
particular controls and requirements are additional to those imposed by the District Use
Regulations (Article II) and by the Supplementary Regulations (Article III) of this Ordinance.
A. Applicability, Limitations, Compliance.
1. Applicability. The controls imposed by Article IV are applicable where cited
specifically for a use by Special Exception and/or use by right listed in Article II
of this Ordinance.
2. Limitations. Special Exception Uses shall be permitted only where specifically
cited in the district use regulations, Article II, of Ordinance.
3. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof that the proposed use meets all
requirements and objectives of this Ordinance.
4. Compliance. Nothing in this Article shall relieve the Owner or his agent, the
developer, or the applicant for a Special Exception from obtaining Subdivision
and/or Land Development Plan approval in accordance with the Lititz Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
5. Effect of Approval. Any use for which a special exception permit may be granted
shall be deemed to be a conforming use subject to the conditions of approval in
the District in which such use is located provided that such permit shall be
deemed to affect only the lot or portion thereof for which such permit shall have
been granted.
6. Fees and Other Costs. The applicant shall pay all costs related to any required
public hearing including but not limited to: advertising of the hearing, services of
the Borough Solicitor and Engineer and/or Planner, public stenographer,
transcripts of proceedings, and similar costs.
An applicant by filing for a use by special exception shall then be obligated to pay
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 145
§ 400. § 400.
all costs hereinabove provided. Payment of such costs shall be promptly
submitted to the Borough by the applicant upon the submission of bills therefore
from time to time. Payment shall be by check or money order made payable to the
Borough of Lititz.
No building permit or other requisite permit shall be issued by the Borough
Zoning Officer until all such fees and costs have been paid in full by the applicant.
B. General Procedures for Special Exceptions.
Requests for Special Exceptions shall be submitted, together with all required fees, in a written
application setting forth in detail the grounds for the request.
A development plan of the total area to be included in the application, which shall be drawn to
scale, shall accompany and be part of the Special Exception Application and contain the
following:
1. The location, boundaries, dimensions and ownership of the land.
2. In the case of commercial or industrial development, a general description of the
activities to take place as may be appropriate such as maximum employment,
working hours, customer traffic, delivery services, development schedule staging
plan.
3. The location, use, and ground area of such proposed building and other structure.
4. The locations, dimensions, arrangements and proposed use of all open spaces,
yards, streets, alleys, accessways, entrances, exits, off-street parking facilities,
loading and unloading facilities, pedestrian ways and buffer yards.
5. The capacity arrangement and controls for all areas to be used for automobile
access, parking, loading and unloading in sufficient detail to demonstrate that
satisfactory arrangements will be made to facilitate traffic movement from the
street or highway.
6. The character of the buffer area and screening devices to be maintained including
the dimensions and arrangements of all areas devoted to planting, lawns, trees or
similar purposes.
7. A description of the proposed methods of control of development in sufficient
detail to indicate the noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire hazards,
traffic congestion, and other safety hazards to be produced.
8. A description of the methods to be used for water supply treatment and disposal of
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 146
§ 400. § 401.
sewage, wastes, refuse, and storm drainage.
9. The names and addresses of all adjoining property owners.
C. Special Exceptions - Specific Procedures. The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct a
public hearing on each application for a special exception use. Such hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with Section 603 of this Ordinance. The Zoning Hearing Board
shall make its final decision based upon findings of fact and upon the specific factors for
which a special exception application is filed.
SECTION 401. Home Occupations and Home Businesses.
A. Background. The Borough recognizes the need to establish regulations pertaining to
home-based occupations and businesses as a result of the increased need for the diversity
of income to help offset the rising cost of living. Home occupations and home businesses
will particularly benefit individuals with physical disabilities as well as those having to
care for children or the elderly within their home. The Borough also recognizes the
potential benefits to the local community which could be realized by those seeking
services or goods supplied through home occupations. However, these positive aspects
must be weighed against the potential impacts of such uses on the residential character of
the neighborhood.
B. Purpose. It is the intent of this Section to establish regulations which will permit home
occupations and home businesses in a manner which will preserve the peace, quiet, and
tranquility of residential neighborhoods and to ensure the compatibility of such uses with
other uses permitted within the same zoning district.
C. Requirements for Home Occupations. (also defined as No-Impact Home-Based
Businesses.) All businesses shall be allowed as accessory use by right in a residential unit
and shall comply with the following:
1. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the property
and surrounding residential uses.
2. The business shall employ no employees other than family members residing in
the dwelling.
3. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or inventory of
a substantial nature.
4. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including but not limited
to, parking, signs, or lights.
5. The business activity may not use any equipment or process which creates noise,
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 147
§ 401. § 401.
vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic interference, including
interference with radio or television reception , which is detectable in the
neighborhood.
6. The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in
volume or type, which is not normally associated with residential use in the
neighborhood.
7. The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and shall not
occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
8. The business shall not involve any illegal activity.
9. There shall be no increased need for additional off-street parking.
10. Deliveries shall not restrict traffic circulation.
11. Traffic generated by the home occupation(s) shall not exceed volumes normally
expected in a residential neighborhood.
D. Regulations for Home Businesses. The Zoning Hearing Board may approve Home
Businesses as special exceptions according to the procedures and requirements specified
below. All dwellings containing a home business shall comply with the following:
1. The person primarily responsible for the home business shall be a full-time
resident of the premises.
2. No more than one (1) person not in residence in the dwelling shall be employed in
home business(es).
3. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit,
excluding attics, garages, and basements, of the dwelling may be used for the
practice of home business(es).
4. No displays or change in the building facade, including the dwelling and all
accessory buildings, shall indicate from the exterior that the dwelling is being
utilized for purposes other than a dwelling.
5. A home business shall limit any external evidence of a business to one (1) nonilluminated
sign, subject to Section 312 (sign regulations).
6. Adequate off-street parking facilities shall be provided to reasonably
accommodate the normal activity of the home business(es).
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 148
§ 401. § 402.
7. Storage of materials, products, or machinery used for the home business shall be
wholly enclosed by the dwelling or accessory building, within the maximum floor
area previously defined, and shall not be visible from any adjacent lot or street.
8. The home business(es) shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling or
accessory building.
9. Deliveries shall not restrict traffic circulation.
10. Traffic generated by the home business(es) shall not exceed volumes normally
expected in a residential neighborhood.
11. A home business shall not produce noise, obnoxious odors, vibrations, lighting
glare, smoke, or fumes detectable to normal sensory perception on any adjacent
lots or streets, nor shall it produce detectable electrical interference.
12. The disposal of all materials, fluids, and gases shall be in a manner which
complies with all regulations of the Lititz Sewer Authority and all other applicable
government codes.
13. Sales of goods on the premises shall be limited to goods made on the premises
and goods which are incidental to services performed on the premises.
14. Home businesses utilizing, or proposing to utilize, explosive or highly flammable
materials shall require proof of fire department notification and compliance with
the Borough Building Code prior to using such materials.
15. Any other reasonable conditions set forth by the Zoning Hearing Board when
granting approval.
D. Application Procedure for Home Businesses. Home businesses shall be subject to the
following application and approval process:
1. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this
Ordinance and shall request a special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board.
2. The Zoning Officer shall review the application for compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance, and visit the dwelling if deemed necessary.
SECTION 402. Child or Adult Day Care Facilities.
A. Purpose. Recognizing the growing need for child and adult day care facilities, it is the
intent of the Borough to encourage the establishment of such facilities in a manner which
will preserve the character of residential neighborhoods while meeting the operational
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 149
§ 402. § 402.
and physical standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare (DPW). Child and adult day care facilities, operated within a residence, are not subject to the requirements for home occupations contained in Section 401.
B. Application of Regulations. The provisions of this Section shall apply to child or adult day care facilities providing service for all or part of a 24-hour day for children under 16 years of age, or for persons who are otherwise disabled. Day care facilities shall include day care homes and day care centers as defined by this Ordinance, many of which are subject to Chapter II, Sections 8A, 8B, and 8C of DPW Social Services Manual Regulations, as may be amended from time to time. This Section does not apply to babysitting (as defined by this Ordinance) or child day care service furnished in places of worship during religious services.
C. General Provisions. The following general provisions apply to all child or adult day care facilities:
1. All child day care facilities shall present to the Borough a copy of their required state license upon request of the Zoning Officer as well as demonstrating compliance with any other applicable state or local building and fire safety codes.
2. The operator of a day care facility will allow appropriate representatives of the municipality to enter the property to inspect such use for compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
3. No portion of a day care facility shall be located within a 300 foot distance from any potentially hazardous land use or activity which could pose a threat to the safety of the children, staff, or other occupants of the facility.
4. Hours of outside play shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. until sunset.
5. An outdoor play area, as required by DPW regulations, shall be provided for child day care facilities and shall not be located in the front yard.
6. Adequate off-street parking and drop-off areas shall be provided.
7. Fencing shall be provided to restrict children from hazardous areas, such as open drainage ditches, wells, holes, and arterial and major collector roads. Natural or physical barriers may be used in place of fencing so long as such barriers functionally restrict children from these areas.
8. The expansion of a day care home to a day care center shall require a special exception.
9. Child and adult day care facilities shall not provide medical or personal care
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 150
§ 402. § 402.
services which extend beyond assistance with dressing, bathing, diet, and medication prescribed for self administration unless licensed to provide such services.
10. When applying for a special exception, the applicant shall submit a plan showing any existing or proposed outdoor play areas, outdoor play equipment, fencing, access drives, adjacent streets, adjacent hazardous land uses, on-site hazardous areas (as previously defined), merchandise delivery areas, parking spaces, and the child or adult drop-off circulation pattern.
11. Day Care facilities shall give written notice to local police and fire departments as to the scope of their operation, including number of customers, location of sleeping areas and hours of operation.
D. Day Care Homes. In addition to the provisions of Section 402.C., day care homes shall comply with the following:
1. If care is provided to more than three (3) children at any one time, the facility shall have an approved and currently valid DPW registration certificate. Proof of DPW registration renewal must be supplied to the Borough every year.
2. Any external evidence of such use shall be limited to one (1) non-illuminated sign subject to Section 312 (sign regulations).
3. Day care homes shall only be permitted in single-family detached and semi- detached dwellings and shall not be permitted in accessory buildings.
4. The person primarily responsible for the day care home shall be a full-time resident.
5. No more than one (1) person not in residence in the dwelling shall be employed in a day care home.
6. A fence with a minimum height of four (4) feet shall physically contain the children within the outdoor play area. Natural or physical barriers may be used in place of fencing so long as such barriers functionally contain children.
E. Day Care Centers. In addition to the provisions of Section 402.C, day care centers shall comply with the following:
1. The facility shall have an approved and currently valid DPW license. Proof of DPW annual license renewal shall be supplied to the Borough every year.
2. A fence with a minimum height of four (4) feet shall physically contain the
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 151
§ 402. § 403.
children within the outdoor play area. Natural or physical barriers may be used in
place of fencing so long as such barriers functionally contain children.
3. If the facility has access to streets of different classifications, access shall be
provided using the street of lesser functional classification.
4. Play equipment shall be located at least ten (10) feet from an abutting property
line.
5. All pedestrian pathways shall be adequately lit for safety if utilized during nondaylight
hours. Specific areas for lighting are entrance ways, pedestrian access to
the outdoor play areas, sidewalks, drop-off areas, merchandise delivery areas, and
all parking lots. Such lighting shall not produce objectionable glare on adjacent
properties.
6. Day care centers may be permitted as an accessory use to churches, schools,
recreation centers, and similar uses by special exception. Accessory day care
centers shall comply with all other requirements for day care centers. In addition,
evidence must be submitted to document that adequate indoor space, outdoor play
space, and safe vehicular access are provided.
F. Application and Permitting Procedure. Child and adult day care facilities shall be subject
to the following application and approval process:
1. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this
Ordinance and shall request a special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board.
If the day care facility will be subject to DPW requirements, evidence of the
ability to comply with said requirements must be presented as part of the special
exception request.
2. The Zoning Officer shall review the application for compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance, and visit the facility if deemed necessary by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
SECTION 403. Adult-Oriented Businesses.
Adult-oriented businesses may only be permitted in the Commercial District and only by special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board of the Borough of Lititz, provided that the following
requirements are met to the satisfaction of the Board:
A. The lot or property line of such business shall not be located within three hundred (300)
feet of any residential district (R-S, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-A, NSD, and NSD-1) nor be
located within three hundred (300) feet of any property whose use is principally
residential.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 152
§ 403. § 404.
B. The lot or property line of such business shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of the lot or property line of any religious structure, school, child or adult day care facility or public library.
C. The lot or property line of such business shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of the lot or property line of another adult-oriented business.
D. There shall be no display of adult-oriented materials that can be seen from the exterior of the building.
E. The Zoning Hearing Board shall review and approve all exterior signs for compatibility with adjacent uses.
F. Not more than one (1) adult-oriented business or activity shall be permitted within any one (1) building or lot.
G. No unlawful sexual activity or conduct shall be performed or permitted.
H. The Zoning Hearing Board must determine that the adult-oriented business
1. Is in general harmony with the immediate neighborhood;
2. Does not create an atmosphere of enticement for minors; or
3. Will not be detrimental to the public health, public safety or general welfare of the Borough.
SECTION 404. Bed and Breakfast Inns.
Bed and Breakfast Inns in existing structures are permitted by right in the General Business district and may be approved by special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board in the R-1, R- 2, R-2A, NSD, NSD-1 and Commercial districts. In either instance, the following requirements shall apply:
A. Access should be via an arterial or collector street as designated in the Borough Comprehensive Plan.
B. The structure shall contain a minimum of 2,000 square feet of gross floor area.
C. All Bed and Breakfast guest units shall be contained within the principal structure.
D. There shall be no more than one Bed and Breakfast guest unit per 700 square feet of gross floor area in the principal structure.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 153
§ 404. § 407.
E. All area and bulk regulations of the prevailing zoning district shall apply.
F. In addition to the two (2) spaces required for the principal dwelling, there shall be one (1) off-street parking space per Bed and Breakfast guest unit.
G. Dining and other facilities shall not be open to the public but shall be exclusively for the residents and registered Bed and Breakfast guests.
H. Signs shall conform to the standards for home occupations in residential districts.
SECTION 405. Places of Worship.
Area and Bulk Regulations. All area and bulk regulations of the prevailing zoning district shall apply with the following exceptions:
A. The minimum lot size shall be one (1) acre.
B. The maximum building height shall be 3 stories, not to exceed the permitted height in the prevailing district.
SECTION 406. Conversion Apartments.
In any district where permitted, residential structures existing at the date of the adoption of this Ordinance may be converted into apartments, provided there shall be a minimum of four thousand (4,000) square feet of land area per apartment and the habitable floor area is in accordance with the regulations of this Ordinance for the district in which the structure is located.
SECTION 407. Educational Institutions.
A. Area and Bulk Regulations. All area and bulk regulations of the prevailing Zoning District shall apply.
B. Supplemental Regulations.
1. A planted buffer strip shall be required where the site abuts an existing residential use or a residential zoning district.
2. No parking area shall be permitted within the required front, side or rear yards.
3. Each site shall be easily accessible from an improved street or highway with safe ingress and egress for both vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
4. All play areas contiguous to any developed lot shall be fenced.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 154
§ 408. § 409.
SECTION 408. Essential Services.
Essential Service buildings and structures shall be permitted in any district without regard to the lot, yard and height requirements; provided, however, that buildings erected for these utilities shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. Where feasible, front, side and rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations of the district in which the building is located.
B. Height of building or structure shall be as required by the district regulations.
C. Unhoused equipment shall be enclosed with a decorative metal or solid wooden fence, excluding chain-link fence, six (6) feet in height.
D. Housed Equipment - When the equipment is totally enclosed within a building, no fence or screen planting shall be required and the yard shall be maintained in conformity with the district in which the facility is located.
E. Screening in Residential Districts - The required fence for unhoused equipment shall be screened as defined by this Ordinance.
F. Screening in the Downtown District – Essential Service Structures affixed to the front of buildings in the Downtown Overlay District shall be Screened. The Screening material shall consider the materials of the building, its context, and shall respect the Form Based Code.
G. The external design of the building shall be in conformity with the buildings in the district.
H. Storage of Vehicles - In residential districts, the permitted public facilities shall not include the storage of vehicles or equipment used in the maintenance of any utility.
I. No equipment causing excess noise, vibration, smoke, odor, or hazardous effect shall be installed.
SECTION 409. Commercial Kennels, Animal Hospitals and Veterinary Clinics.
Commercial kennels, animal hospitals and veterinary clinics shall be permitted by Special Exception in indicated zoning districts, subject to the following:
A. The minimum lot size shall be two (2) acres.
B. Adequate parking shall be required.
C. Signage shall be permitted which shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area and be
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 155
§ 411. § 414.
D. located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the street right-of-way line.
E. All areas used for exercise shall be securely fenced.
F. All animals shall be kept within a completely enclosed building which shall be a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet from any property line.
G. Animals shall be permitted to exercise daily between the hours of 8 A.M. and 8 P.M. (prevailing time). All outdoor exercise areas shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any property line.
SECTION 410. Park, Playground or Recreation Areas.
A. Public park, playground or recreation areas shall be permitted in any district.
B. The following shall be permitted by special exception in these districts so designated in this Ordinance:
1. Restricted park, playground or recreation area.
2. Commercial park, playground or recreation area.
C. Park, playground or recreation areas shall be permitted without regard to the area regulations of the district in which they are located; provided, however that buildings or structures erected shall be subject to the following regulations:
1. Front, side and rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations of the district in which the building or structure is located.
2. Height of building or structure shall be as required by the district regulations.
3. Buffers and/or fencing may be required to protect adjacent property.
4. Consideration shall be given to parking and traffic problems. If the nature of the park, playground or recreational area is such that it will generate a high volume of vehicular traffic, then access should be via an arterial or collector street as designated by the Borough Comprehensive Plan.
SECTION 411. Social and Fraternal Clubs and Organizations.
A. Area and Bulk Regulations. All area and bulk regulations of the prevailing zoning district shall apply.
B. Supplemental Regulations.
1. Such club is incorporated pursuant to the provisions of a federal charter,
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 156
§ 411. § 414.
2. Membership Corporation or unincorporated associations and catering exclusively to members and their guests.
3. Such use shall not be conducted primarily as a business enterprise.
4. The use of outdoor public address systems for any purpose shall be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board.
5. Exterior lighting, other than that essential for the safety and convenience of the users of the premises shall be prohibited. All exterior lighting shall be shielded from the view of all surrounding streets and lots.
6. A densely planted buffer strip shall be required where the site abuts an existing residential use or a residential zoning district.
SECTION 412. Public/Municipal Buildings and Uses.
Public and municipal buildings and uses shall be permitted by special exception in designated districts, subject to the requirements of the district in which they are located. Consideration shall be given to parking and traffic problems. If the nature of the building or use is such that it will generate a high volume of traffic, then access should be via an arterial or collector street as designated in the Borough Comprehensive Plan.
SECTION 413. Funeral Homes.
Funeral homes may be permitted by special exception in designated districts, subject to the requirements of the district in which they are located. Consideration shall be given to parking and traffic problems. Since the nature of the use is such that it will generate a high volume of traffic at certain times, adequate provisions must be made to provide for parking. Access should be via an arterial or collector street as designated in the Borough Comprehensive Plan.
SECTION 414. Cemeteries.
A. Area and Bulk Regulations.. All area and bulk regulations of the prevailing zoning district shall apply with the following exceptions:
1. The minimum size of a cemetery shall be five (5) acres.
2. The minimum front, side and rear yards shall be fifty (50) feet.
B. Supplemental Regulations.
1. An ornamental fence or densely planted buffer strip shall be required where the lot abuts an existing residential use or a residential zoning district.
2. No grave markers and parking areas shall be located within the required front, side or rear yards.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 157
§ 415. § 416.
SECTION 415. Animals and Animal Shelters.
Animals and animal shelters shall be permitted as accessory uses and accessory structures to residential uses in any zoning district subject to the following standards:
A. In all zoning districts, animals which are maintained as accessory to a residential use shall be maintained only on a noncommercial basis.
B. Any shelter and/or exercise pen which is constructed for the use of the animals shall be located in the rear yard at least ten (10) feet from any lot line and at least thirty (30) feet from the nearest dwelling other than the dwelling of the owner of the animal. Any means of confinement of such animal, including but not limited to chains and tethers, shall be located so that the animal cannot run closer than ten (10) feet to any property line or closer than fifty (50) feet to the nearest dwelling other than the dwelling of the owner.
C. Any shelter and/or exercise pen shall be screened from adjoining properties by the installation of fencing or a landscape screen.
D. In the R-1 district, unless regulated by other provisions in this Ordinance, it is permitted to maintain up to two (2) saddle horses provided no building, corral, or stable is less than one hundred (100) feet from any lot line, and is not closer than two hundred (200) feet to the nearest existing dwelling, other than that of the owner. A pasture fence shall be located a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from the property line. A minimum lot size of one (1) maintained acre per horse shall be provided.
E. No manure storage facility or area shall be established closer than one hundred (100) feet to any property line.
SECTION 416. Accessory Apartments. The Zoning Hearing Board may approve Accessory Apartments as special exceptions in the R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-A, R-S, Commercial, Industrial and Office and Professional districts. The following requirements shall apply:
A. The habitable floor area of the accessory apartment shall not exceed seven-hundred(700) square feet.
B. Only one (1) accessory apartment may be permitted within a single-family dwelling.
C. An accessory apartment may only be permitted and may only continue in use as long as the principal building is occupied by a permitted use or a use allowed by special exception.
D. The lot area for the principal building shall meet the minimum lot area requirement for the applicable district where located. For zones without minimum lot areas, the applicant shall prove adequate space for the creation of the proposed apartment.
E. The exterior architectural character of the principal dwelling shall not be altered in a manner
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 158
§ 417. § 418.
which departs from the primary feature of the building. The exterior architectural character for a freestanding Accessory Apartment shall complement the materials and architecture of the principal building and the district, in accordance with the Form-Based Code.
F. One (1) additional off-street parking space shall be provided for each accessory apartment unit.
SECTION 417. Hospitals, Nursing/Convalescent Homes.
A. Area and Bulk Regulations. All area and bulk regulations of the prevailing zoning district shall apply with the following exception:
1. The minimum lot area shall be two (2) acres or 800 square feet per patient bed whichever is greater.
B. Supplemental Regulations.
1. No parking area shall be located within the yard requirements.
2. Sufficient exterior nighttime illumination of the parking area shall be required to provide convenience and safety. All such illumination shall be shielded from view of all surrounding streets and lots and shall not send any light skyward.
3. All buildings shall be of fire-proof construction.
4. All permitted uses shall be served by public water and sewer systems.
SECTION 418. Business Conversions. Business Conversions are permitted by right in the Commercial, General Business, Industrial, and Office and Professional districts, according to the procedures and requirements specified below:
A. Area and Bulk Regulations. All area and bulk regulations of the prevailing zoning district shall apply.
B. Parking Requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided on said lot for each distinct use located on it, in accordance with Section 307.
C. Supplemental Regulations.
1. If apartment units are proposed, each unit shall be provided with complete kitchen facilities, flush toilet and bathing facilities within the unit.
2. Fire escapes where required shall be located at the rear or an interior side of the building.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 159
§ 419. § 421.
SECTION 419. Greenhouses/Nurseries.
In zoning districts where designated, commercial greenhouses and nurseries shall be permitted subject to the requirements of the district in which they are located, except as herein modified and provided.
A. Access must be on an arterial street or collector street as designated in the Borough Comprehensive Plan.
B. No sale of general hardware, power tools or motorized equipment is permitted. No outdoor display of tools or equipment is permitted.
SECTION 420. Hotels and Motels.
A. A site to be used for a hotel or motel establishment shall include an office and lobby and may include such accessory uses as: restaurants, coffee shops, cafeteria-dining halls providing food and drink; amusement and recreation facilities such as a swimming pool, children's playground, tennis or other game sports; and game or recreation rooms.
B. The minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre; the minimum lot width shall be 150 feet.
C. All principal and accessory buildings and structures shall cover a total of not more than 35% of the site. A freestanding restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria or dining hall shall not cover more than 10% of the site.
D. The maximum length of any building shall not exceed 150 feet. The total interior floor area of each guest room, inclusive of bathroom and closet space, shall not be less than 250 square feet.
SECTION 421. Recycling Centers/Plants. In Zoning Districts where permitted by special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may approve Recycling Centers/Plants. All recycling operations shall be conducted entirely within a wholly-enclosed building, however, the collection of paper, plastics, glass and/or metal products may be conducted in outdoor containers, provided the following additional requirements, are satisfied:
A. All outdoor collection facilities shall be screened from view of adjacent properties from
ground level to a minimum height of six (6) feet. Such screening may consist of a fence, wall, earthen berm and/or evergreen plantings with trees having a minimum size of six
(6) feet in height at the time of planting.
B. Materials shall be stored in enclosed containers and shall not be stored outdoors for a period in excess of 48 hours.
C. Litter control shall be exercised at outdoor collection facilities to prevent the scattering of wind-borne debris.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 160
§ 421. § 422.
D. Fencing and gates shall be erected around all recycling facilities in a manner which prevents the scattering of litter off site. Such fencing and gates shall comply with the requirements of Section 310, but have a minimum height of six (6) feet.
E. The operator of the facility shall limit access to the site to those posted times when an attendant is on duty.
F. Materials used or generated by the operation shall be stored in a leak and vector proof manner.
G. Sufficient stacking lanes into the facility shall be provided to avoid the obstruction of vehicles on public streets.
H. No use shall emit fumes or gases that constitute a health hazard as defined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or other appropriate regulatory agency.
I. Adequate measures shall be provided to mitigate problems with noise, fumes, dust and litter.
J. No use shall utilize lighting in any manner which produces glare onto public streets or adjacent tracts of land.
SECTION 422. Front Porch Additions. The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize the construction of unenclosed front porches as special exceptions in all residential districts subject to sight distance and safety concerns under the following criteria:
A. The porch shall consist of a floor at or above grade with access to the main level of the residence only and may have a roof supported by columns. Those columns may be connected by railings or banisters of purely decorative nature so as not to materially impede the flow of air across the porch.
B. An approved porch may not extend more than eight (8) feet beyond the sides of the building as measured along the front of the building. The porch may extend either eight
(8) feet into the property setback or a distance equal to fifty percent (50%) of the property
setback, whichever is less.
C. Applicants desiring a Special Exception to construct a front porch shall submit plans depicting all appropriate dimensions and an elevation drawing showing the size and location of footers, columns and decorations. Plans shall include adequate information to enable the Zoning Hearing Board to determine if any additional obstructions to sight distances from roadways will be created.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 161
§ 423. § 423.
SECTION 423. Wireless Communications Facilities
1. Purposes and Findings of Fact.
1. The purpose of this section is to establish uniform standards for the siting, design, permitting, maintenance, and use of Wireless Communications Facilities in Lititz Borough (referred to herein as the “Borough”). While the Borough recognizes the importance of Wireless Communications Facilities in providing high quality communications service to its residents and businesses, the Borough also recognizes that it has an obligation to protect public safety and to minimize the adverse visual effects of such facilities through the standards set forth in the following provisions.
2. By enacting these provisions, the Borough intends to:
a. Accommodate the need for Wireless Communications Facilities while regulating their location and number so as to ensure the provision of necessary services;
b. Provide for the managed development of Wireless Communications Facilities in a manner that enhances the benefits of wireless communication and accommodates the needs of both Borough residents and wireless carriers in accordance with federal and state laws and regulations;
c. Establish procedures for the design, siting, construction, installation, maintenance and removal of both Telecommunications Towers and Telecommunications Antennas in the Borough, including facilities both inside and outside the public rights-of-way;
d. Address new wireless technologies, including but not limited to, distributed antenna systems, data collection units, and other Wireless Communications Facilities;
e. Minimize the adverse visual effects and the number of such facilities through proper design, siting, screening, material, color and finish, and by requiring that competing providers of wireless communications services collocate their Telecommunications Antenna and related facilities on existing towers;
f. Promote the health, safety and welfare of the Borough's residents.
B. General and Specific Requirements for Telecommunications Antennas
1. The following regulations shall apply to all Telecommunications Antennas, except those operated by a federally licensed amateur radio status operator and those that fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:
a. Permitted by Special Exception Subject to Regulations. Telecommunications Antennas shall be located on non-decorative light poles, utility poles and non-decorative traffic lights.. If such placement is not possible, Telecommunications
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 162
§ 423. § 423.
Antennas are permitted by Special Exception in all zones subject to the restrictions and conditions prescribed below and subject to applicable permitting by the Borough.
b. Non-conforming Wireless Support Structures. Telecommunications Antennas shall be permitted to collocate upon non-conforming Telecommunications Towers and other non-conforming structures. Co-location of Telecommunications Antennas upon existing Telecommunications Towers is encouraged even if the Telecommunications Towers are non-conforming as to use within a zoning district.
c. Standard of care. All Telecommunications Antennas shall be designed, constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes, including but not limited to the most recent editions of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety Code, and National Electrical Code. Any Telecommunications Antenna shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life of any person or any property in the Borough.
d. Wind. All Telecommunications Antennas structures shall be designed to withstand the effects of wind gusts of at least one hundred (100) miles per hour in addition to the standard designed by the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association, and Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-222, as amended).
e. Aviation safety. Telecommunications Antennas shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
f. Public safety communications and other communications services. Telecommunications Antennas shall not interfere with public safety communications or the reception of broadband, television, radio or other communication services enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
g. Radio frequency emissions. A Telecommunications Antenna shall not, by itself or in conjunction with other Telecommunications Antennas and/or Telecommunications Towers, generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC, including but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled “Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields,” as amended.
h. Removal. In the event that use of a Telecommunications Antennas is discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the Borough of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned Telecommunications Antennas or portions of Telecommunications Antennas shall be removed as follows:
(1) All abandoned or unused Telecommunications Antennas and Related Equipment shall be removed within two (2) months of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the Borough.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 163
§ 423. § 423.
(2) If the Telecommunications Antenna or Related Equipment is not removed within two (2) months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any longer period approved by the Borough, the Telecommunications Antenna and/or Related Equipment may be removed by the Borough. As security, the Borough reserves the right to the salvage value of any removed Telecommunications Antenna and/or Related Equipment, if such Telecommunications Antenna and/or Related Equipment are not removed by the owner within the timeframe enumerated in in this Chapter.
i. Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a Telecommunications Antenna shall provide the Borough with a certificate of insurance, naming the Borough as an additional insured, and evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence covering the Telecommunications Antenna.
j. Financial Security. Prior to the issuance of a special exception authorization, the owner of a Communications Antenna shall, at its own cost and expense, obtain from a surety licensed to do business in Pennsylvania and maintain a bond or other form of security acceptable to the Borough, in an amount of $20,000 to assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this Ordinance, as well as the potential removal of the proposed facility. The bond shall provide that the Borough may recover from the principal and surety any and all compensatory damages incurred by the Borough for violations of this Ordinance, after reasonable notice and opportunity to cure. The owner shall file the bond with the Borough.
k. Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a Telecommunications Antenna shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Borough, its elected and appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers, agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the Telecommunications Antenna. Each person that owns or operates a Telecommunications Antenna shall defend any actions or proceedings against the Borough in which it is claimed that personal injury, including death, or property damage was caused by the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of a Telecommunications Antenna. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys’ fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
l. Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following maintenance requirements shall apply:
(1) The Telecommunications Antenna shall be fully automated and unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or emergency repair.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 164
§ 423. § 423.
(2) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of the facility in order to promote the safety and security of the Borough’s residents.
(3) All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the best available technology for preventing failures and accidents.
m. Removal, Replacement and Modification.
(1) The removal and replacement of Telecommunications Antennas and/or Related Equipment for the purpose of upgrading or repairing the Telecommunications Antenna is permitted, so long as such repair or upgrade does not Substantially Change the overall size of the Telecommunications Antenna or the number of antennas.
(2) To the extent permitted by state law, any material modification to a Telecommunications Antenna shall require notice to be provided to the Borough, and possible supplemental permit approval to the original permit or authorization.
2. The following regulations shall apply to collocated Telecommunications Antennas that fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:
a. Permit required. Telecommunications Antenna Applicants proposing the modification of an existing Telecommunications Tower shall obtain a building permit from the Borough. In order to be considered for such permit, the Applicant must submit a permit application to the Borough in accordance with applicable permit policies and procedures.
b. Timing of approval for applications that fall under the WBCA. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the date that an application for a Telecommunications Antenna is filed with the Borough, the Borough shall notify the Applicant in writing of any information that may be required to complete such application. Within sixty (60) calendar days of receipt of a complete application, the Borough shall make its final decision on whether to approve the application and shall advise the Applicant in writing of such decision.
c. Related Equipment. Ground-mounted Related Equipment greater than three (3) cubic feet shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of a lot in residential use or zoned residential.
d. Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees directly related to the Borough’s actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for approval of a Telecommunications Antenna or $1,000, whichever is less.
C. The following regulations shall apply to Telecommunications Antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 165
§ 423. § 423.
1. Prohibited on Certain Structures. No Telecommunications Antennas shall be located on single-family residences, duplexes, multi-family residences, or townhomes.
2. Special Exception Required. Any Applicant proposing the construction of a new Telecommunications Antenna, or the modification of an existing Telecommunications Antenna, shall first obtain a Special Exception from the Borough. New constructions, modifications, and replacements that fall under the WBCA shall be not be subject to the Special Exception process. The Special Exception application shall demonstrate that the proposed facility complies with all applicable provisions in the Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance.
3. Historic Buildings. No Telecommunications Antenna may be located upon any property, or on a building or structure that is located in the Borough Historic Overlay District.
4. Retention of Experts. The Borough may hire any consultant(s) and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the Borough in reviewing and evaluating the application for approval of the Telecommunications Antenna and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of the terms and conditions of these Telecommunications Antenna provisions. The Applicant and/or owner of the Telecommunications Antenna shall reimburse the Borough for all costs of the Borough’s consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and consultation in connection with these activities.
5. Permit Fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees directly related to the Borough’s actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for approval of a Telecommunications Antenna, as well as related inspection, monitoring and related costs.
6. Development Regulations. Telecommunications Antennas shall be collocated on existing Wireless Support Structures, such as existing buildings or Telecommunications Towers, subject to the following conditions:
a. The total height of any Wireless Support Structure and mounted Telecommunications Antenna shall not exceed the maximum height permitted in the underlying zoning district, unless the Applicant applies for, and subsequently obtains, a variance.
b. In accordance with industry standards, all Telecommunications Antenna Applicants must submit documentation to the Borough justifying the total height of the Telecommunications Antenna. Such documentation shall be analyzed in the context of such justification on an individual basis.
c. If the Applicant proposes to locate the Related Equipment in a separate building, the building shall comply with the minimum requirements for the applicable zoning district, and landscaping shall be required to screen as much of the equipment building as possible. An evergreen screen shall surround the site. The evergreen screen shall be a minimum height of six (6) feet at planting and shall not exceed ten (10) feet on center.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 166
§ 423. § 423.
7. A security fence with a height of eight (8) feet, with openings no greater than four (4) inches shall surround any separate communications equipment building. Vehicular access to the communications equipment building shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular circulations on the site for the principal use.
8. Non-commercial usage exemption. Borough residents utilizing satellite dishes and antennas for the purpose of maintaining television, phone, radio and/or internet connections at their respective residences shall be exempt from the regulations enumerated in this section of the Zoning Ordinance. Amateur radio operators are exempt from the regulations enumerated in this ordinance.
9. Design Regulations. Telecommunications Antennas shall employ Stealth Technology and be treated to match the Wireless Support Structure in order to minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the Stealth Technology chosen by the Applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Zoning Hearing Board.
10. Inspection. The Borough reserves the right to inspect any Telecommunications Antenna to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and any other provisions found within the Borough Code or state or federal law. The Borough and/or its agents shall have the authority to enter the property upon which a Telecommunications Antenna is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
D. Regulations Applicable to all Telecommunications Antennas located in the Public Rights-of-Way.
In addition to the Telecommunications Antenna provisions listed in Section B of Section No. 423 the following regulations shall apply to Telecommunications Antennas located in the public rights-of-way:
1. Co-location. Telecommunications Antennas in the ROW shall be collocated on existing poles, such as existing utility poles or light poles. If co-location is not technologically feasible, the Applicant, with the Borough’s approval, shall locate its Telecommunications Antennas on existing poles or freestanding structures that do not already act as Wireless Support Structures. Telecommunications Antennas shall not be co-located or located on decorative traffic lights or decorative light poles.
2. Design Requirements:
a. Telecommunications Antenna installations located above the surface grade in the public ROW including, but not limited to, those on streetlights and utility poles, shall consist of equipment components that are no more than six (6) feet in height and that are compatible in scale and proportion to the structures upon which they are mounted. All equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly intrusive equipment feasible.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 167
§ 423. § 423.
b. Telecommunications Antennas and Related Equipment shall be treated by the Telecommunications Antenna owner or Applicant to match the Wireless Support Structure and may be required to be painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually compatible with the support structure upon which they are mounted.
3. Time, Place and Manner. The Borough shall determine the time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all Telecommunications Antennas in the ROW based on public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of the Borough and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
4. Equipment Location. Telecommunications Antennas and Related Equipment shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by the Borough. In addition:
a. Ground-mounted Related Equipment shall be located between the sidewalk and the curb. For reasons of safety and aesthetics, such equipment shall neither protrude onto the curb, nor obstruct the sidewalk.
b. Ground-mounted Related Equipment that cannot be placed underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the use of landscaping or other decorative features to the satisfaction of the Borough.
c. Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to blend in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Borough.
d. Any graffiti on any Wireless Support Structures or any Related Equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner.
e. Any proposed underground vault related to Telecommunications Antennas shall be reviewed and approved by the Borough.
5. Relocation or Removal of Facilities. Within two (2) months following written notice from the Borough, or such longer period as the Borough determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the case of an emergency, an owner of a Telecommunications Antenna in the ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any Telecommunications Antenna when the Borough, consistent with its police powers and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
a. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any Borough or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 168
§ 423. § 423.
b. The operations of the Borough or other governmental entity in the Right-of-Way;
c. Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement; or
d. An Emergency as determined by the Borough.
E. General and Specific Requirements for All Telecommunications Towers.
1. The following regulations shall apply to all Telecommunications Towers, excluding any Telecommunications Tower that is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio status operator.
a. Standard of Care. Any Telecommunications Towers shall be designed, constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes, including but not limited to, the most recent editions of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety Code, National Electrical Code, as well as the accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors. Any Telecommunications Towers shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life of any person or any property in the Borough.
b. Notice. Upon submission of an application for a Telecommunications Tower and the scheduling of the mandatory public hearing in front of the Borough Zoning Hearing Board, the Applicant shall mail notice to all owners of every property within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed facility. The Applicant shall provide proof of the notification to the Borough.
c. Special Exception Authorization Required. Telecommunications Towers are permitted by Special Exception in certain districts, at a height necessary to satisfy their function in the Applicant's wireless communications system. No Applicant shall have the right under these regulations to erect a tower to the maximum height specified in this section unless it proves the necessity for such height. The Applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed Telecommunications Tower is the minimum height necessary for the service area.
i. Prior to the Zoning Hearing Board’s approval of a Special Exception authorizing the construction and installation of Telecommunications Tower, shall be incumbent upon the Applicant for such Special Exception approval to prove to the reasonable satisfaction of the Borough Zoning Hearing Board that the Applicant cannot adequately extend or infill its communications system by the use of equipment such as redoes, repeaters, antenna(s) and other similar equipment installed on existing structures, such as utility poles or their appurtenances and other available tall structures. The Applicant shall further demonstrate that the proposed Telecommunications Tower must be located where it is proposed in order to serve the Applicant's service area and that no other viable alternative location exists.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 169
§ 423. § 423.
ii. The Special Exception application shall be accompanied by a propagation study evidencing the need for the proposed tower or other communication facilities and equipment, a description of the type and manufacturer of the proposed transmission/radio equipment, the frequency range (megahertz band) assigned to the Applicant, the power in watts at which the Applicant transmits, and any relevant related tests conducted by the Applicant in determining the need for the proposed site and installation.
iii. The Special Exception application shall be accompanied by documentation demonstrating that the proposed Telecommunications Tower complies with all state and federal laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
iv. Where the Telecommunications Tower is located on a property with another principal use, the Applicant shall present documentation to the Borough Zoning Hearing Board that the owner of the property has granted an easement for the proposed Telecommunications Tower and that vehicular access will be provided to the facility.
v. The Special Exception application shall be accompanied by documentation demonstrating that the proposed Telecommunications Tower complies with all applicable provisions in this section.
d. Engineer Inspection. Prior to the Borough's issuance of a permit authorizing construction and erection of a Telecommunications Tower, a structural engineer registered in Pennsylvania shall issue to the Borough a written certification of the proposed Telecommunications Tower’s ability to meet the structural standards offered by either the Electronic Industries Association or the Telecommunication Industry Association and certify the proper construction of the foundation and the erection of the structure. This certification shall be provided during the special exception proceedings before the Borough Zoning Hearing Board, or at a minimum, be made as a condition attached to any approval given such that the certification be provided prior to issuance of any building permits.
e. Visual Appearance. Telecommunications Towers shall employ Stealth Technology. All Telecommunications Towers and Related Equipment shall be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment and shall maximize the use of a like facade to blend with the existing surroundings and neighboring buildings to the greatest extent possible. The Borough Zoning Hearing Board shall consider whether its decision upon the subject application will promote the harmonious and orderly development of the zoning district involved; encourage compatibility with the character and type of development existing in the area; benefit neighboring properties by preventing a negative impact on the aesthetic character of the community; preserve woodlands and trees existing at the site to the greatest possible extent; and encourage sound engineering and land development design and construction principles, practices and techniques.
f. Co-location and siting. An application for a new Telecommunications Tower shall demonstrate that the proposed Telecommunications Tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved structure or building or on land owned and maintained by Lititz Borough. The Borough Zoning Hearing Board may deny an application to construct a new
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 170
§ 423. § 423.
Telecommunications Tower if the Applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount the Telecommunications Antenna on an existing structure. The Applicant shall demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall structures, buildings, and towers within a one quarter (¼) of a mile radius of the site proposed, sought permission to install a Telecommunications Antenna on those structures, buildings, and towers and was denied for one of the following reasons:
(1) The proposed antenna and Related Equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing building, structure or tower, and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.
(2) The proposed antenna and Related Equipment would cause radio frequency interference with other existing equipment for that existing building, structure, or tower and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(3) Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have adequate location, space, access, or height to accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended function.
(4) A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with the owner of such building, structure, or tower.
g. Permit Required for Modifications. To the extent permissible under applicable state and federal law, any Applicant proposing the modification of an existing Telecommunications Tower, which increases the overall height of such Wireless Support Structure, shall first obtain a building permit from the Borough. Non-routine modifications shall be prohibited without such permit.
h. Gap in Coverage. An Applicant for a Telecommunications Tower must demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage or capacity exists in the applicable area and that the type of Telecommunications Tower being proposed is the least intrusive means by which to fill that gap in wireless coverage. The existence or non-existence of a gap in wireless coverage shall be a factor in the Borough Zoning Hearing Board’s decision on an application for approval of Telecommunications Tower.
i. Additional Antennas. As a condition of approval for all Telecommunications Tower, the WCF Applicant shall provide the Borough with a written commitment that it will allow other service providers to collocate Telecommunications Antennas on Telecommunications Towers where technically and economically feasible. The owner of a Telecommunications Tower shall not install any additional Telecommunications Antennas without obtaining the prior written approval of the Borough.
j. Wind. Any Telecommunications Tower structures shall be designed to withstand the effects of wind gusts of at least one hundred (100) miles per hour in addition to the standard designed by the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association, and Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222), as amended.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 171
§ 423. § 423.
k. Height. Any Telecommunications Tower shall be designed at the minimum functional height. In all Zoning Districts the maximum height of any new Telecommunications Tower shall be one hundred seventy-five (175) feet.
l. Related Equipment. Either a one single-story wireless communications equipment building not exceeding five hundred (500) square feet in area or up to five metal boxes placed on a concrete pad not exceeding ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet in area housing the receiving and transmitting equipment may be located on the site for each unrelated company sharing space on the Telecommunications Tower.
m. Public Safety Communications and Other Communications Services. No Telecommunications Tower shall interfere with public safety communications or the reception of broadband, television, radio or other communication services enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
n. Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
(1) Any Telecommunications Tower shall be fully automated and unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or emergency repair.
(2) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of the Telecommunications Tower in order to promote the safety and security of the Borough’s residents, and utilize the best available technology for preventing failures and accidents.
o. Radio Frequency Emissions. A Telecommunications Tower shall not, by itself or in conjunction with other Telecommunications Towers or Telecommunications Antennas, generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC, including but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled “Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields,” as amended.
p. Historic Buildings or Districts. A Telecommunications Tower shall not be located upon a property, and/or on a building or structure that is located in the Borough Historic Overlay District.
q. Signs. All Telecommunications Towers shall post a sign in a readily visible location identifying the name and phone number of a party to contact in the event of an emergency. The only other signage permitted on the Telecommunications Tower shall be those required by the FCC, or any other federal or state agency.
r. Lighting. No Telecommunications Tower shall be artificially lighted, except as required by law. If lighting is required, the Applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting, demonstrating as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state and federal regulations. Automatic lighting is prohibited and all lighting must be controlled manually by an on-site switch. The Applicant shall promptly report any outage or malfunction of FAA-mandated lighting to the appropriate governmental authorities and to the Borough Manager.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 172
§ 423. § 423.
s. Noise. Telecommunications Towers shall be operated and maintained so as not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under state law and the Borough Code, except in emergency situations requiring the use of a backup generator, where such noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis only.
t. Aviation Safety. Telecommunications Towers shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
u. Retention of Experts. The Borough may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist the Borough in reviewing and evaluating the application for approval of the Telecommunications Tower and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of the terms and conditions of these provisions. The Applicant and/or owner of the Telecommunications Tower shall reimburse the Borough for all costs of the Borough’s consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and consultation in connection with these activities.
v. Timing of Approval. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the date that an application for a Telecommunications Tower is filed with the Borough, the Borough shall notify the Applicant in writing of any information that may be required to complete such application. All applications for Telecommunications Towers shall be acted upon within one hundred fifty (150) days of the receipt of a fully completed application for the approval of such Telecommunications Towers and the Borough shall advise the Applicant in writing of its decision. If additional information was requested by the Borough to complete an application, the time required by the Applicant to provide the information shall not be counted toward the one hundred fifty (150) day review period.
w. Non-conforming Uses. Non-conforming Telecommunications Towers which are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored at their former location, but must otherwise comply with the terms and conditions of this section.
x. Removal. In the event that use of a Telecommunications Tower is planned to be discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the Borough of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned Telecommunications Towers or portions of Telecommunications Towers shall be removed as follows:
(1) All unused or abandoned Telecommunications Towers and Related Equipment shall be removed within two (2) months of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the Borough.
(2) If the Telecommunications Tower and/or Related Equipment is not removed within two (2) months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any longer period approved by the Borough, the Telecommunications Tower and Related Equipment may be removed by the Borough and the cost of removal assessed against the owner of the Telecommunications Tower. As security,
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 173
§ 423. § 423.
the Borough reserves the right to the salvage value of any removed Telecommunications Tower and/or Related Equipment, if such Telecommunications Tower and/or Related Equipment are not removed by the owner within the timeframe enumerated in this Chapter.
(3) Any unused portions of Telecommunications Towers, including antennas, shall be removed within two (2) months of the time of cessation of operations. The Borough must approve all replacements of portions of a Telecommunications Tower previously removed.
y. Permit Fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees directly related to the Borough’s actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for approval of a Telecommunications Tower, as well as related inspection, monitoring, and related costs.
z. FCC License. Each person that owns or operates a Telecommunications Tower over thirty-five (35) feet in height shall submit a copy of its current FCC license, including the name, address, and emergency telephone number for the operator of the facility.
aa. Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a Telecommunications Tower greater than thirty-five (35) feet in height shall provide the Borough with a certificate of insurance naming the Borough as an additional insured, and evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence covering the Telecommunications Tower. Each person that owns or operates a Telecommunications Tower thirty-five (35) feet or less in height shall provide the Borough with a certificate of insurance naming the Borough as an additional insured, and evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering each Telecommunications Tower.
bb. Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a Telecommunications Tower shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Borough, its elected and appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers, agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the Telecommunications Tower. Each person that owns or operates a Telecommunications Tower shall defend any actions or proceedings against the Borough in which it is claimed that personal injury, including death, or property damage was caused by the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the Telecommunications Tower. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys’ fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 174
§ 423. § 423.
cc. Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a Telecommunications Tower shall contain a seal and signature of a professional structural engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
dd. Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the construction or placement of a Telecommunications Tower, the Applicant shall provide to the Borough financial security sufficient to guarantee the construction and maintenance of the Telecommunications Tower. Said financial security shall shall remain in place until the Telecommunications Tower is removed.
F. The following regulations shall apply to Telecommunications Towers located outside the Public Rights-of-Way:
1. Development Regulations.
a. Telecommunications Towers shall not be located in, or within seventy-five (75) feet of an area in which all utilities are located underground.
b. Telecommunications Towers outside the public Rights-of-Way in the Industrial District are subject to the prohibitions in Section 213 of the Lititz Borough Zoning Code.
c. Sole use on a lot. A Telecommunications Tower may be permitted by special exception as a sole use on a lot, provided that the underlying lot meets the minimum size specifications set forth in the Borough Zoning Code and is set back from all adjacent property lines by one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the height of the Telecommunications Tower
d. Combined with another use. A Telecommunications Tower may be permitted by special exception on a property with an existing use, or on a vacant parcel in combination with another use, except residential, subject to the following conditions:
(1) The existing use on the property may be any permitted use in the applicable district, and need not be affiliated with the Telecommunications Tower.
(2) Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall comply with the requirements for the applicable zoning district and shall be the area needed to accommodate the Telecommunications Tower and guy wires, the equipment building, security fence, and buffer planting if the proposed Telecommunications Towers is greater than thirty-five (35) feet in height.
(3) Minimum setbacks. The minimum distance between the base of a Telecommunications Tower and any adjoining property line or street right-of-way line shall be equal to one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the height of the Telecommunications Tower. The underlying lot must be large enough to accommodate Related Equipment, storm water runoff
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 175
§ 423. § 423.
mechanisms, and all other features typically found within the immediate area of a Telecommunications Tower.
2. Design Regulations.
a. The Telecommunications Tower shall employ the most current Stealth Technology available in an effort to appropriately blend into the surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. Application of the Stealth Technology chosen by the Applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Zoning Hearing Board.
b. Height. Any Telecommunications Tower shall be designed at the minimum functional height. In all Zoning Districts the maximum height of any new Telecommunications Tower shall be one hundred seventy-five (175) feet.
c. To the extent permissible by law, any height extensions to an existing Telecommunications Tower shall require prior approval of the Borough.
d. Any proposed Telecommunications Tower shall be designed structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the Applicant's Telecommunications Antennas and comparable Telecommunications Antennas, for the maximum amount of future users based on the size of the proposed Telecommunications Tower.
e. Any Telecommunications Tower over thirty-five (35) feet in height shall be equipped with an anti-climbing device, as approved by the manufacturer.
3. Surrounding Environs.
a. The Applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation, trees and shrubs located within proximity to the Telecommunications Tower shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. If trees are to be removed, they must be replaced at a ratio of 1:1.
b. The Applicant shall submit a soil report to the Borough complying with the standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222, as amended, to document and verify the design specifications of the foundation of the Telecommunications Tower, and anchors for guy wires, if used.
4. Fence/Screen.
a. A security fence with a height of eight (8) feet, with openings no greater than four (4) inches shall completely surround any Telecommunications Tower greater than thirty-five (35) feet in height, as well as guy wires, or any building housing Related Equipment.
b. The Applicant shall comply with the requirements for buffer yards and screening enumerated in the Borough Zoning Code.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 176
§ 423. § 423.
5. Related Equipment.
a. Ground-mounted Related Equipment associated to, or connected with, a Telecommunications Tower shall be placed underground or screened from public view using Stealth Technologies, as described above.
b. All Related Equipment shall be architecturally designed to blend into the environment in which it is situated and shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district.
6. Access Road. An access road, turnaround space and parking shall be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service access to Telecommunications Towers. The access road shall be a dust-free all-weather surface for its entire length. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and minimize soil erosion. Where applicable, the Telecommunications Tower owner shall present documentation to the Borough that the property owner has granted an easement for the proposed facility.
7. Parking. For each Telecommunications Tower greater than thirty-five (35) feet in height, there shall be two off-street parking spaces.
8. Inspection. The Borough reserves the right to inspect any Telecommunications Tower to ensure compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and any other provisions found within the Borough Code or state or federal law. The Borough and/or its agents shall have the authority to enter the property upon which a Telecommunications Tower is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
G. The following regulations shall apply to Telecommunications Towers located in the Public Rights-of-Way.
1. Location and development standards.
a. Telecommunications Towers in the ROW are prohibited in areas in which utilities are located underground.
b. Telecommunications Towers in the ROW shall be constructed at an equivalent height as light poles and/or utility poles located on the same block as the proposed Telecommunications Tower.
c. Telecommunications Towers shall not be located in the front façade area of any structure.
d. Regardless of the underlying zoning district, Telecommunications Towers shall be permitted by Special Exception along all streets and roads other than those contained within, or within seventy-five (75) feet of, the Borough Historic Overlay District. The placement of Telecommunications Towers in
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 177
§ 423. § 423.
the Borough Historic District, or along streets that outline the perimeter of the Borough Historic District, is prohibited.
2. Time, Place and Manner. The Borough shall determine the time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all Telecommunications Towers in the ROW based on public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of the Borough and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
3. Equipment Location. Telecommunications Towers and Related Equipment shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by the Borough. In addition:
a. Ground-mounted Related Equipment shall be located between the sidewalk and the curb. For reasons of safety and aesthetics, such equipment shall neither protrude onto the curb, nor obstruct the sidewalk.
b. Ground-mounted Related Equipment that cannot be placed underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the use of landscaping or other decorative features to the satisfaction of the Borough Zoning Hearing Board.
c. Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to blend in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Borough Zoning Hearing Board.
d. Any graffiti on the tower or on any Related Equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner.
e. Any underground vaults related to Telecommunications Towers shall be reviewed and approved by the Borough Zoning Hearing Board.
4. Design regulations.
a. The Telecommunications Tower shall employ the most current Stealth Technology available in an effort to appropriately blend into the surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the Stealth Technology chosen by the Applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Zoning Hearing Board.
b. Telecommunications Towers in the public ROW shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.
c. To the extent permissible under state and federal law, any height extensions to an existing Telecommunications Tower shall require prior approval of the
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 178
§ 423. § 424.
Borough, and shall not increase the overall height of the Telecommunications Towers to more than thirty-five (35) feet.
d. Any proposed Telecommunications Towers shall be designed structurally, electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the Applicant's Telecommunications Antennas and comparable Telecommunications Antennas the maximum amount of future users based on the size of the proposed Telecommunications Tower.
5. Relocation or Removal of Facilities. Within sixty (60) days following written notice from the Borough, or such longer period as the Borough determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the case of an Emergency, an owner of a Telecommunications Tower in the ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any Telecommunications Tower when the Borough, consistent with its police powers and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall determine that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
a. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any Borough or other public improvement in the Right-of-Way;
b. The operations of the Borough or other governmental entity in the right-of-way;
c. Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement; or
d. An emergency as determined by the Borough.
6. Reimbursement for ROW Use. In addition to permit fees as described in this section, every Telecommunications Tower in the ROW is subject to the Borough’s right to fix annually a fair and reasonable fee to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to the Borough’s actual ROW management costs including, but not limited to, the costs of the administration and performance of all reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and other ROW management activities by the Borough. The owner of each Telecommunications Tower shall pay an annual fee to the Borough to compensate the Borough for the Borough’s costs incurred in connection with the activities described above.
SECTION 424. Transitional Housing
A. Transitional housing may be permitted by Special Exception in the R-A District.
B. At least 250 square feet of housing space shall be provided and maintained for each person in a Transitional housing unit.
C. The Transitional housing unit may provide for temporary housing for unrelated adults for a period not to exceed six (6) months.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 179
§ 425. § 425.
SECTION 425. Wind Energy Systems
The Zoning Hearing Board may approve and Wind Energy Systems may be permitted in Industrial Districts as a special exception according to the procedures and requirements specified below:
A. No more than one windmill or windwheel shall be permitted per property.
B. General Standards for Wind Energy Systems: Where these general standards and specific criteria overlap, the specific criteria shall supersede the general standards. The installation and construction of a wind energy system shall be subject to the following design and development standards:
1. A wind energy system shall provide power for the principal use and/or accessory uses of the property on which the wind energy system is located and shall not be used for the generation of power for the sale of energy to other users, although this provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit the sale of excess power generated from time to time to the local utility company.
2. A wind energy system connected to the utility grid shall provide written authorization from the local utility company acknowledging and approving such connection.
3. The maximum wind energy system height is eighty-five (85) feet. The height
shall be measured from the ground surface of the wind energy system tower to the highest point of the extended blade tip or the highest point of the wind energy system. The permitted height limits are also subject to applicable Federal Aviation Administration regulations regarding objects affecting navigable airspace. The Applicant shall provide acknowledgement from the Federal Aviation Administration or from a representative from the Lancaster Airport Authority authorized to acknowledge such request indicating that the height of the wind energy system does not adversely affect the airspace of the airport.
C. Setbacks from the wind energy system shall be as follows:
1. Setback from property line – The minimum wind energy system setback distance from the nearest property line shall be a distance no less than the distance from the wind energy system tower base to the tip of the blade or the highest point of the wind energy system.
2. Setback from residential dwellings – The minimum wind energy system setback distance from any residential dwelling excluding the dwelling situated on the property where the wind energy system will be located shall be five hundred (500) feet from the property line and one thousand (1,000) feet from the residential dwelling. The distance shall be measured from the nearest point of the extended tip of the blade or nearest point of the wind energy system to the residential dwelling.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 180
§ 425. § 425.
3. The minimum wind energy system setback distance from all above ground utility lines, radio, television or telecommunication towers shall be a distance equal to or greater than the distance from the wind energy system tower base to the tip of the blade or the nearest point from the wind energy system to the above ground utility lines, radio, television or telecommunication towers.
4. The minimum distance from guy wires, accessory structure, and other appurtenances of the wind energy system shall be ten (10) feet from the property lines.
5. Wind energy systems shall not be located within the required front yard setback.
D. The distance between the ground and any part of the rotor or blade system shall be no less than fifteen (15) feet.
E. Wind energy systems shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device to prevent unauthorized access to the wind energy system. Such anti-climbing device shall be installed to a minimum height of fifteen (15) from the ground or roof if the wind energy system is situated on the roof. Access doors to wind energy systems and electrical equipment shall be locked to prevent entry by non-
authorized person.
F. All power transmission lines from the wind energy system to any building or other structure shall be located underground. There shall be no exposed wiring.
G. Wind energy systems shall be a neutral non-obtrusive color such as white, off-white, gray, brown or earth tone shade unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other regulatory agency to be otherwise.
H. Audible sound from a wind energy system shall not exceed sixty (60) decibels, as measured at the exterior of any occupied building on the adjacent parcels.
I. All wind energy systems shall be designed with an automatic brake to prevent over- speeding and excessive pressure on the wind energy system tower structure.
J. Wind energy systems shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable regulatory authority. If the Federal Aviation Administration requires safety lighting, the use of red beacons is preferred to flashing strobe lighting. Illumination of the wind energy system shall be avoided.
K. Wind energy systems shall not be used to display advertising, including signage, streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel, balloons, flags, banners or similar materials. The manufacturer’s or installer’s identification and any appropriate warning signs and placards may be displayed on the wind energy system provided they comply with the prevailing sign regulations.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 181
§ 425. § 425.
L. Mechanical equipment associated with the use of the wind energy system shall comply with the following:
1. Any mechanical equipment associated with and necessary for the operation of the wind energy system that is not enclosed within the wind energy tower or within an accessory structure on the property shall comply with the following:
a. Mechanical equipment shall be screened from any adjacent property that is residentially zoned or used for residential purposes. The screen shall consist of shrubbery, trees, or other plant materials which provides a visual screen. In lieu of a planting screen, a decorative fence meeting the requirements of the Zoning Hearing Board may be used.
b. Mechanical equipment shall not be located within the minimum front yard setback of the underlying zoning district.
c. Mechanical equipment shall be setback at least ten (10) feet from the rear and side property lines.
d. All mechanical equipment and buildings associated with the operation shall conform to all minimum building setbacks and shall be enclosed with a six (6) foot fence. Any tower shall also be enclosed with a six (6) foot fence, unless the base of the tower is not climbable for a distance of twelve
(12) feet.
M. A Site Plan including the following information shall be included:
1. Overall site boundary with sufficient information to show the location of the property in proximity to adjacent properties and existing features located within five hundred feet (500’) of the subject property boundaries.
2. Identification of adjacent property owners.
3. Location, dimensions, and types of existing structures on the property, and proximity to structures on adjacent lots within five hundred feet (500’) of the subject wind energy system.
4. Location and dimension of driveways, roadways and significant features within and adjacent to the subject property within five hundred feet (500’) of the subject property boundaries.
5. Location of the proposed energy system, foundations, guy anchors and associated equipment.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 182
§ 425. § 425.
6. Setback requirements as outlined in this ordinance and proposed setbacks.
7. The location of any rights-of-way, easements, floodplains, or other covenants restricting the use of the property.
8. The location of any overhead utility lines, radio transmission lines, cable lines or other overhead lines within five hundred feet (500’) of the subject property boundaries.
9. The location of any telecommunication towers within 1,000’ of the subject property.
10. Wind energy system specifications, including manufacturer, model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type.
N. A report from a Professional Engineer, licensed in the State of Pennsylvania, documenting the following shall be submitted for review:
1. Description of the wind energy system including overview, project location, the
rated capacity for the on-site user, type and height of facility including generating capacity, dimensions and respective manufacturers and description of the ancillary facilities.
2. Evidence of structural integrity of each tower structure.
3. Structural failure characteristics of the each tower structure and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris.
4. Information demonstrating that the proposed wind energy system is for the sole purpose of generating energy for the user of the property with the exception of the excess energy that may be generated from time to time and sold to the local utility company.
5. The make, model, picture and manufacturer’s specifications shall be provided.
O. Visual Impact – demonstrations including before and after photo-simulations and elevation drawings showing the height, design, color, and proposed location of the facility as viewed from neighboring areas.
1. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the wind energy system.
P. Evidence that the Applicant is the owner of the premises involved or that the applicant if he is a tenant of the property has written permission of the owner to make such application.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 183
§ 425. § 425
.
Q. Permitting – A wind energy system shall not be constructed until a building permit has been approved and issued.
R. Maintenance – All wind energy systems shall be maintained in compliance with Township standards contained in the applicable codes and ordinances so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities.
1. Before any construction can commence on any wind energy systems the property owner must acknowledge that he/she is the responsible party for owning and maintaining the wind energy system. If the wind energy system is abandoned or is in a state of disrepair it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to remove or maintain the wind energy system.
2. Any earth disturbance as a result of the removal of the ground mounted wind energy system shall be graded and reseeded.
3. If the wind energy conversion unit is abandoned from use, any tower and related structures shall be dismantled and removed from the property within ninety (90) days.
S. Abandonment of wind energy system or solar energy system.
1. Such systems that are out of service for a continuous twelve (12) month period will be deemed to have been abandoned.
2. The Zoning Officer or Code Official may issue a notice of abandonment to the owner. The notice shall be sent via regular mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record.
3. Any abandoned system shall be removed at the owner’s sole expense within ninety (90) days after the owner receives the notice of abandonment from the municipality. If the system is not removed within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the Borough notifying the owner of such abandonment, the Borough may remove the system as set forth below.
4. When an owner of such systems has been notified to remove same and has not done so ninety (90) days after receiving said notice, then the Borough may remove such system and place a lien upon the property for the cost of the removal. If removed by the owner, a demolition permit shall be obtained and the facility shall be removed. Upon removal, the site shall be cleaned, restored and revegetated to blend with the existing surrounding vegetation at the time of abandonment.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 184
§ 426. § 426
.
SECTION 426. Historical Overlay District
A. Applicability of Regulation
1. These Historic Overlay District regulations shall apply to the Lititz
Historic District (also see Article VIII).
2. These regulations shall be administered by the Zoning Officer, with
consultation by the Historic Area Advisory Committee (HAAC).
3. Boundaries. The Historic Overlay District shall conform to the boundaries
shown on the Historic Resources Map (noted as the Lititz-Moravian Historic
District). The Overlay District includes each parcel containing one or more
historic resource. An inventory of historic resources has been completed and a
map and list of those resources is maintained and available for public inspection
at Borough Hall and included in Article VIII of this Zoning Ordinance.
a. All of the provisions of the applicable underlying zoning districts shall
continue to apply in addition to the provisions of this Section. In the
eventof a conflict between the provisions of this Overlay District and the
underlying zoning district, the provisions of this Overlay District shall apply.
b. Should the boundaries of the Overlay District be revised as a result of
legislative or administrative actions or judicial decision, the underlying
zoning requirements shall continue to be applicable.
4. Covenants and Easements. It is not intended by this Section to repeal, abrogate or
impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions.
B. Purpose. The Historic Overlay District is intended to promote the general welfare of
Lititz Borough through the following goals:
1. To promote the retention of community character through preservation of the
local heritage by recognition and protection of historic resources.
2. To establish a clear process through which proposed changes affecting historic
resources are reviewed by Lititz Borough Zoning Officer and the Lititz
Borough Historical Area Advisory Committee (HAAC).
3. To mitigate the negative effects of proposed changes affecting historic
resources.
4. To encourage the continued use of historic resources and facilitate their
appropriate reuse and/or adaptive reuse.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 185
§ 426. § 426.
5. To discourage the demolition of historic resources.
6. To implement the following sections of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC):
a. Section 603(b)(5) which states that zoning ordinances may permit, prohibit, regulate, restrict and determine protection and preservation of natural and historic resources;
b. Section 603(g)(2) which states that “zoning ordinances shall provide for protection of natural and historic features and resources”;
c. Section 604(1) which states that “the provisions of zoning ordinances shall be designed to promote, protect and facilitate any or all of the following: …preservation of the natural, scenic and historic values…”; and
d. Section 605(2)(vi) whereby uses and structures at or near places having unique historical, architectural or patriotic interest or value may be regulated.
C. General Provisions
1. Identification. The Inventory of Historic Resources in Lititz Borough
contains a listing of parcels within the overlay district that contain one or more historic resources as shown on the Historic Resources Map that is maintained, with the corresponding Historic Resource List, at Borough Hall.
2. Criteria for Determination.
A building, structure, object, site, or district is depicted on the Historic Resources Map, due to the fact that it:
a. is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our local, state, or national history; or
b. is associated with the lives of people, local, state, or national, who were significant in our past; or
c. it embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction (a neighborhood or village for example); or
d. it has yielded or may be likely to yield, information important in history or prehistory (archaeology).
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 186
§ 426. § 426.
3. Classifications
a. Class I: Buildings, objects, sites, or districts that are
(1) listed on or have received a Determination of Eligibility (DOE) to be listed on the National Register; or
(2) resources within a district that contribute to a National Register listed or eligible district.
b. Class II: Buildings, objects, sites, or districts that are
(1) resources that are deemed by the Borough to substantially
meet one or more of the criteria at the local level.
c. Class III:
These are buildings that are less than 50 years old or, if more than 50 years old, have lost their integrity. These buildings are not subject to the provisions herein.
4. Revisions. The Historic Resource Inventory List and Map may be revised from time to time by a Resolution from Lititz Borough Council with recommendations from the Lititz Borough HAAC at a public meeting where the proposed changes shall be presented.
a. Revisions are defined as additions to, deletions from the Historic Resource Inventory List and Map, or changes in classification. Revisions do not include routine list maintenance to update ownership information or to add information about a change that occurred to the building unless the change alters the historic character of the building.
D. Additions, Alterations, Rehabilitation and Reconstruction
1. General Requirements. No alterations, additions, reconstruction or rehabilitation to a historic resource visible from a public way shall be allowed without approval obtained pursuant to these provisions issued by the Zoning Officer.
Completed applications will be reviewed by the Lititz Borough HAAC. The Applicant will have the opportunity to present the proposed project to the Lititz Borough HAAC. The Lititz Borough HAAC shall review the proposed alterations, additions, reconstruction or rehabilitation, based upon The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties. The Lititz Borough HAAC shall submit written recommendations to the Zoning Officer for
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 187
§ 426. § 426.
his/her review and decision. Challenges to decisions of the Zoning Officer go to the Zoning Hearing Board for review.
Any proposed alteration, addition, reconstruction or rehabilitation within the Historic Overlay District should be in substantial compliance with the standards as stated below:
a. A property should be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and environment.
b. The historic character of a property should be retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property should be avoided.
c. Each property should be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken.
d. Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired
historic significance in their own right should be retained and preserved.
e. Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property should be preserved.
f. Deteriorated historic features may be repaired or replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features will be substantiated by documentary, physical or pictorial evidence.
g. Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible.
h. Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
i. New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment.
j. New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 188
§ 426. § 426.
form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
3. Application Procedures
a. Applications for any proposed alteration, addition, reconstruction or rehabilitation of a historic resource shall comply with the provisions in this section. The completed application shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer and shall include:
(1) a written description of the proposed alteration, addition, reconstruction or rehabilitation; and, where applicable:
(a) A site plan at a scale designated by the Zoning Officer;
(b) Schematic architectural drawings of the proposed construction or alterations;
(c) Materials list, color samples, and disposition of existing materials;
(d) Photographs.
4. Review Procedures.
a. Completed applications shall be received two (2) weeks before the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Lititz Borough HAAC to be placed on the agenda for review at that meeting.
b. Applicant Notification. At the time the completed application is submitted, the Applicant shall be notified of the date, time and place at which the Lititz Borough HAAC will review the application. The Applicant or his representative shall attend to explain the application.
c. Criteria for Deliberation. The Standards for Historic Properties as listed above shall be the criteria considered in the review. Any proposed work requiring approval shall be in substantial compliance with the Standards.
d. The Lititz Borough HAAC recommendations shall include findings of fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth the reasons for the recommendation for approval, with or without conditions, or for denial.
e. Within five (5) business days of the meeting, the Lititz Borough HAAC shall submit their written recommendations to the Zoning Officer for his/her decision to:
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 189
§ 426. § 426.
(1) Approve the application.
(2) Deny the application.
(3) Approve the application subject to specified changes and/or conditions to bring the proposed activity into compliance.
E. New Construction
1. Design Guidelines – Basic Principles. In addition to the Form-Based Code regulations of Article VIII, the following shall apply to New Construction.
New construction in the Historic Overlay District has the potential to add to or detract from the surroundings. To retain community character new construction shall achieve compatibility through appropriate massing shape, size, materials,
orientation, setback and the like:
a. Size, Scale, and Proportion. New construction should relate to the dominant proportions, size and scale of the buildings in the surrounding area.
b. Shape and Massing. New construction should incorporate massing, building shapes, and roof shapes that are present in the surrounding area.
c. Materials. Building materials should be compatible with those of buildings in the surrounding area. Traditional materials that are common to the area, such as brick, wood, and stone are preferred.
d. Patterns and Rhythm. The rhythm of facades along the street and the components thereof should be maintained. Large buildings can be divided into bays to reflect rhythms exhibited by smaller structures.
e. Cornice and Floor-to-Floor Heights. New construction should continue the floor-to-floor and cornice heights that are dominate in the surrounding area, or incorporate detailing to suggest those heights.
f. Windows and Doors. New construction should use window and door openings of design and size typical of those in the surrounding area.
g. Orientation. Principal facades of new construction should face the same direction as other existing buildings on the street or as indicated by predominant patterns in the surrounding area.
h. Location. New construction shall not be placed in a way that adversely affects a historic resource or streetscape in terms of proximity or visually.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 190
§ 427. § 429.
SECTION 427. Continuing Care Retirement Communities (CCRC).
A. A minimum of one and a quarter (1.25) parking spaces per unit shall be provided for independent living dwelling units. A CCRC is permitted to submit a shared parking analysis for review by the Borough. The shared parking analysis will identify the anticipated percentage of parking usage on the campus at different times of day. The shared parking analysis shall be updated each time new facilities, dwelling units, or accessory uses are proposed.
B. CCRCs shall be permitted to have a range of accessory uses that are primarily for the benefit of their residents. Such uses shall include, but are not limited to dining facilities, library, community center, and personal services such as beauty salons or barber shop.
C. The following provisions shall apply to a CCRC in the Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District.
1. A CCRC parcel that is twenty (20) acres or greater in size shall be permitted to have a maximum of seventy percent (70%) of the housing units be one type.
2. On-street parking shall only be required on one side of the street in the Neighborhood Residential Area (NRA).
3. Attached dwelling units (Townhouse or Row) shall be permitted in the Neighborhood Residential Area (NRA).
D. The following provisions shall apply to a CCRC in the R-1 Residential District
1. Every five years a sketch level campus plan shall be submitted detailing future changes of the campus. No subdivision plan shall be considered if it is not consistent with the current sketch plan. A CCRC may update their sketch plan at any time by providing the Planning Commission with an updated copy. A statement of no planned future changes to the campus shall also satisfy this requirement.
2. A CCRC shall consist of a range of housing types and care levels. They include, but are not limited to, single-family detached, single-family attached, apartment, personal care, assisted living and skilled care units.
3. Accessory uses – Accessory uses to the CCRC shall be scaled to serve campus residents and shall be visually and functionally integrated into the campus. Accessory uses open to the public shall not have signage visible off-campus other than at principal gateways to the campus.
4. Total maximum density of the CCRC shall be 14 Dwelling Units per acre (du/ac). For the purpose of this section two skilled care beds shall constitute one dwelling unit.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 191
§ 427. § 429.
5. No more than 30% of the total dwelling units shall consist of skilled care beds.
6. No more than 60% of dwelling units shall be comprised of a single housing/care level type.
7. Maximum coverage of a CCRC campus shall be 60%.
8. Setbacks – A minimum setback of 20 feet shall apply to all sides of the campus, excluding those that front upon a public street. Structures that are permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board to exceed the 35-foot maximum height shall be set back an additional foot for every foot allowed above 35 feet.
9. Buffers – A 15-foot vegetative buffer shall be provided between the campus and off-campus building housing apartments , personal care units, assisted living units, or skilled care units on-campus and single-family residential units off-campus.
10. Building Separation – The minimum separation between buildings shall be determined based on the minimum separation required by applicable building code.
SECTION 428. Theatres
A. The Zoning Hearing Board may permit Theatres in the Lititz Run Revitalization District as a special exception if it meets the requirements specified below
1. The Theatre must be for either live performances or for movie showings.
2. The Theatre shall front a new or existing street and shall encourage pedestrian
access to the greatest extent practicable.
3. Incorporation into a larger building and shared parking is strongly encouraged. No parking shall be placed along the street.
SECTION 429. Stream Restoration
A. Any plan for a Stream Restoration shall demonstrate the following:
1. The Restoration would not increase the height or frequency of floodplain water on adjacent properties or contrary to FEMA standards
2. Any improvements are installed so as to withstand the maximum volume, velocity, and force of floodplain water;
3. Any improvements shall be flood- and floatation-proof;
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 192
§ 429. § 429.
4. The improvements would not create unhealthy or unsanitary conditions;
5. The improvements would not degrade the quality of surface water, or the quality of
groundwater.
Furthermore, prior to any proposed Stream Restoration work, a Water Obstruction &
Encroachment Permit, if required, shall be obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and authorization, if required, shall be gained from the U.S. Army
Corp of Engineers.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 193
§ 500. § 500.
ARTICLE V
NON-CONFORMING USES, NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES AND NON-CONFORMING LOTS
SECTION 500. Non-Conforming Uses.
A. The following provisions shall apply to all buildings and uses existing on the effective date of this Ordinance which do not conform to the requirements set forth in this Ordinance and to all buildings and uses that become non-conforming by reason of any subsequent amendment to this Ordinance.
B. Expansion of Non-conforming Uses. No expansion of a non-conforming use shall hereafter be made unless an appeal has been filed with the Zoning Hearing Board and such expansion has been approved as a special exception by the Board. In addition to the qualifications for a special exception enumerated in Article IV of this Ordinance, the Board shall apply the following criteria:
1. Area. The proposed expansion shall be within the lot limits which existed for the property in question at the effective date of this Ordinance.
2. Changes. The proposed expansion shall include the following changes over existing conditions, wherever possible:
a. Improvement of building exterior.
b. Improvement of landscaping.
c. Elimination or reduction in noise, smoke, dust and/or odors, if present.
3. Parking. Adequate off-street parking facilities shall be provided.
4. Effects. The proposed expansion will not cause an increased detrimental effect on surrounding properties.
C. Continuity of Use. Non-conforming use must be continuous. No non-conforming use may be re-established after it has been discontinued for one (1) year. Vacating the premises or building or non-operative status shall be evidence of a discontinued use.
D. Any structure damaged or destroyed which involves a nonconforming use may be rebuilt and occupied for the same use as before the damage, provided that the reconstructed building shall not be larger than the damaged building and that the reconstruction shall start within one (1) year from the time of damage to the building.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 194
§ 500. § 502.
E. Substitution of Non-conforming Uses. No existing or discontinued non-conforming use may be changed to any other non-conforming use unless approved as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board. In evaluating the application for a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board shall find that the proposed non-conforming use is not more detrimental to the district than the existing or discontinued non-conforming use of the property. The Zoning Hearing Board may specify such appropriate conditions and safeguards as may be required in connection with such change.
F. Residences in Industrial Districts. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to residences existing in any industrial district at the date of adoption of this Ordinance. Such residential uses shall be permitted to continue without restrictions.
SECTION 501. Construction Approved Prior to Ordinance. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a building permit has heretofore been issued and the construction of which shall have been diligently prosecuted within three (3) months of the date of issue of said permit and ground story framework of which, including the second tier of beams, shall have been completed within six
(6) months of the date of the permit and which entire building shall be completed according to such plans as filed within one (1) year from the date of this Ordinance.
SECTION 502. Non-Conforming Buildings and Structures.
A. A non-conforming building or structure is any building or structure which does contain a use permitted in the District in which it is located, but does not conform to the District regulations for: lot area, width or depth; front, side or rear yards; maximum height; lot coverage; or minimum livable floor area per dwelling unit.
B. Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to prevent normal maintenance and repair, structural alteration in, moving, or enlargement of a non-conforming building or structure provided that such action does not increase the degree of or create any new non- conformity with regards to the regulations pertaining to such buildings or structures.
C. If any non-conforming building or structure shall be destroyed by reason of windstorm, fire, explosion or other Act of God or the public enemy to an extent of more than 75 percent of the building or structure, then such destruction shall be deemed complete destruction and the building or structure may not be rebuilt, restored or repaired except in conformity with the regulations of this Ordinance. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any wall, floor or roof which has been declared unsafe by the Building Code Official.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 195
§ 503. § 503.
SECTION 503. Non-Conforming Lots of Record.
Where there is a vacant lot of official record, which lot at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance does not include sufficient land to conform to the yard or other requirements of this Ordinance, an application may be submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board by the owner of said lot for a variance from the terms of this Ordinance in accordance with the provisions of Article VI.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 196
§ 600. § 600.
ARTICLE VI
ZONING HEARING BOARD AND OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS
SECTION 600. Zoning Hearing Board Creation and Appointment.
Pursuant to Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, the Lititz Borough Council does hereby create a Zoning Hearing Board consisting of five members who shall be residents of the Borough. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall hold no other office in the Borough.
A. Terms of Office. The terms of office shall be five years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of no more than one member shall expire each year.
1. The members of the existing board shall continue in office until their term of office would expire under the prior Zoning Ordinance.
2. The Zoning Hearing Board shall promptly notify Borough Council of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term.
B. Alternate Members. Borough Council may appoint by resolution at least one but no more than three residents of the Borough to serve as alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board. The term of office of an alternate member shall be three years. When seated in accordance with Section 601, an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and discussions of the Board to the same and full extent as provided by law for Zoning Hearing Board members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers and duties set forth on this Ordinance and otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other office in the Borough, including membership on the Planning Commission and Zoning Officer. Any alternate may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a member of the board unless designated as a voting alternate member pursuant to Section 601 of this Ordinance.
C. Removal of Members. Any member of the Zoning Hearing Board may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of Borough Council taken after the member has received fifteen days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 197
§ 601. § 603.
SECTION 601. Organization of the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual terms and as such may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall not be less than a majority of all the members of the board, but the board may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf and the parties may waive further action of the Board as provided in Section 603 of this Ordinance.
B. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not reached, the chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed to provide a quorum. Any alternate member of the Board shall continue to serve on the Board in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate was initially appointed until the Board has made a final determination of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate pursuant to this Section shall be made on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates.
C. The Zoning Hearing Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Borough of Lititz and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Zoning Hearing Board shall keep full public records of its business, which records shall be the property of the Borough, and shall submit a report of its activities to Borough Council as requested by Borough Council.
SECTION 602. Expenditures for Services. Within the limits of funds appropriated by Borough Council, the Zoning Hearing Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and clerical services.
SECTION 603. Hearings of the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the following requirements:
A. Public Notice. Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to (1) the applicant, (2) the Borough Zoning Officer and (3) to any person who has made timely request for same. Written notices shall be given at such time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by rules of the Zoning Hearing Board. In addition to the written notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.
B. Fees. Borough Council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings may include compensation for the secretary of the Zoning Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants or expert witness costs.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 198
§ 603. § 603.
C. Conduct of Hearing. The first hearing shall be commenced within sixty (60) days from the date of the applicant’s request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time. Each subsequent hearing shall be held within forty-five (45) days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Any party aggrieved by the schedule or progress of the hearings may apply to the Court of Common Pleas for judicial relief. The hearings shall be completed no later than one hundred (100) days after the completion of the applicant’s case in chief, unless extended for good cause upon application to the Court of Common Pleas. The hearings shall be conducted by the Zoning Hearing Board or the Zoning Hearing Board may appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing officer. The decision, or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Zoning Hearing Board; however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the Borough, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by the Zoning Hearing Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
D. The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough of Lititz, any person affected by the application who has made timely appearance of record before the Zoning Hearing Board, and any other person including civic or community organizations permitted to appear before the Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that purpose.
E. The chairman or acting chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
F. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
G. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
H. The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 199
§ 603. § 603.
I. The Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
J. Decisions. The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within forty-five (45) days after the last hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon together with reasons therefore. Conclusions based on any provisions of this Ordinance or any Borough ordinance, rule or regulation, or the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended, shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found. Where the Zoning Hearing Board fails to render the decision within the period required by this subsection or fails to commence or complete the required hearing as provided in subsection C, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the board to meet or render a decision as herein above provided, the Zoning Hearing Board shall give public notice of said decision within ten (10) days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as provided in subsection A of this section. If the Zoning Hearing Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this Section shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
K. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him no later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have filed their name and address with the Zoning Hearing Board no later than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall provide by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.
L. Effect of Board's Decision.
1. If the variance or special exception is granted or the issuance of a permit is finally approved, or other action by the appellant or applicant is authorized, the necessary permit shall be secured and the authorized action begun within six (6) months after the date when the variance or special exception is finally granted, or the issuance of a permit is finally approved or the other action by the appellant or
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 200
§ 603. § 604.
applicant is authorized and provided further that the building or alteration, as the
case may be, shall be completed within twelve (12) months of authorization by the
Zoning Hearing Board. For good cause, the Board, upon application by the
developer in writing stating the reasons therefore, may grant an extension or
extensions of time for the commencement of the authorized in six (6) month
increments, or may grant an extension or extensions of time for the completion of
the authorized action in six (6) month increments. Where time allowed for the
commencement of the authorized action has been granted an extension, the time
allowed for the completion of the authorized action shall be automatically
extended by an equal amount of time.
2. Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain the necessary permits within the
required period, or having obtained the permit should he fail to commence work
thereunder within such period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the applicant
has withdrawn or abandoned his appeal or his application, and all provisions,
variances, special exceptions and permits granted to him shall be deemed
automatically rescinded by the said Board.
3. Should the appellant or applicant commence construction or alteration within the
required period but fail to complete such construction or alteration within such
period, the Board may, upon ten (10) days' notice in writing, rescind or revoke the
granted variance or special exception, or the issuance of the permit or permits, or
the other action authorized to the appellant or applicant, if the board finds that no
good cause appears for the failure to complete such construction or alteration
within such period, and if the Board further finds that conditions have so altered
or changed in the interval since the granting of the variance, special exception,
permit or action, that revocation or recision of the action is justified.
SECTION 604. Jurisdiction.
A. Zoning Hearing Board's Jurisdiction. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications in the following matters:
1. Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except those
brought before Borough Council pursuant to Sections 707.A. (Procedure for
Landowner Curative Amendments) and 609 (Validity of Ordinance: Substantive
Questions).
2. Challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance raising procedural questions
or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption which challenges shall
be raised by an appeal taken within thirty (30) days after the effective date of said
ordinance.
3. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer including, but not limited
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 201
§ 604. § 604.
to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application
therefore, the issuance of any cease and desist order or the registration or refusal
to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot.
4. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough Engineer in the
administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference to
sedimentation and erosion control and storm water management insofar as the
same relate to development not involving Subdivision/Land Development
Ordinance or Planned Residential Development applications.
5. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough Engineer with
reference to the administration of any flood plain or flood hazard ordinance or
such provisions within a land use ordinance.
6. Applications for variances from the terms of this Ordinance or any flood plain or
flood hazard ordinance, or such provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant
to Section 605.A.
7. Applications for special exceptions under this Ordinance or any flood plain or
flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to
Section 605.B.
B. Borough Council's Jurisdiction. Borough Council shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
hear and render final adjudications in the following matters:
1. All applications for approval of subdivisions or land developments in accordance
with the requirements of the Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
2. Applications for curative amendment to this Ordinance pursuant to Sections 609
and 707.A.
3. All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances, pursuant to the procedures
set forth in Section 707.
4. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough Engineer in the
administration of any provision of any land use ordinance or provisions thereof
with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and storm water management
insofar as the same relate to application for development involving
Subdivision/Land Development Ordinance applications. Where such
determination relates only to development not involving an application for
Subdivision/Land Development or Planned Residential Development, the appeal
from such determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough Engineer shall be to
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to Section 604.A.5.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 202
§ 604. § 605.
C. Applicability of Judicial Remedies. Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed to deny the applicant the right to proceed directly to court where appropriate, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure No. 1091 (relating to action in mandamus).
SECTION 605. Functions.
A. Variances.
1. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The Board may by rule prescribe the form of application and may require preliminary application to the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
a. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located;
b. That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property;
c. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant;
d. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare; and
e. That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.
2. In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the Zoning Ordinance and the Municipalities Planning Code. Once imposed, a violation of those conditions shall be treated as any other violation of the Zoning
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 203
§ 605. § 608.
Ordinance.
B. Special Exceptions. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide requests for special exceptions in accordance with the standards and criteria set forth in Article IV of this Ordinance. In granting a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this Ordinance and of the Municipalities Planning Code. Once imposed, a violation of those conditions shall be treated as any other violation of the Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 606. Parties Appellant before Zoning Hearing Board.
Appeals under Section 604.A. may be filed with the Zoning Hearing Board in writing by the landowner affected, any officer or agency of the Borough, or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance under Section 605.A., and for special exception under Section 605.B. may be filed with the Zoning Hearing Board by any landowner, equitable owner, or tenant with the permission of such landowner.
SECTION 607. Time Limitations.
A. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Zoning Hearing Board later than thirty (30) days after any application for development, preliminary or final, has been approved by an appropriate Borough officer, agency or body if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval in any manner. If such person has succeeded to his interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest. The failure of anyone other than the landowner to appeal from an adverse decision by the Zoning Officer on a challenge to the validity of the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map pursuant to Section 610 shall preclude an appeal from the final approval except in the case where the final submission substantially deviates from the approved preliminary approval.
B. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowners shall be filed by the landowner within thirty (30) days after notice of the determination is issued.
SECTION 608. Stay of Proceedings.
Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in Section 606 and during its pendency before the Zoning Hearing Board, all land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or body, and all official action thereunder shall be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the Zoning Hearing Board facts indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board or by the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice to the Zoning Officer or other appropriate
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 204
§ 608. § 609.
agency or body. When an application for development, preliminary or final, has been duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Zoning Hearing Board by persons other than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as a condition to continuing the proceedings before the Zoning Hearing Board.
SECTION 609. Validity of Ordinance: Substantive Questions.
A landowner who, on substantive grounds, desires to challenge the validity of an ordinance or map or any provision thereof which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest shall submit the challenge either (1) to the Zoning Hearing Board or (2) to Borough Council, in accordance with the requirements of the Municipalities Planning Code.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 205
§ 700. § 701.
ARTICLE VII ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 700. Enforcement. For the administration of this Ordinance, a Zoning Officer, who shall not hold any elective office in the Borough, shall be appointed by Borough Council. The Zoning Officer shall meet qualifications established by Borough Council and shall be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of Borough Council a working knowledge of municipal zoning.
The Zoning Officer shall administer this Ordinance in accordance with its literal terms, and shall not have the power to permit any construction or any use or change of use which does not conform to this Ordinance and other applicable Borough codes and ordinances. The Zoning Officer shall issue all permits required by this Ordinance. The Zoning Officer may be authorized to institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within the scope of his employment by the Borough.
SECTION 701. Certificates and Permits.
A. Building Permits. When required: An application for a permit shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer for the following activities. These activities shall not commence without the issuance of a permit.
1. Construct or alter a structure.
2. Construct, alter or replace a fence.
3. Construct an addition.
4. Demolish or move a structure.
5. Make a change of occupancy.
6. Install or alter any equipment which is regulated by this code.
7. Move a lot line which affects an existing structure.
8. Store material, machinery or equipment on a lot in connection with a construction project or the placement, reconstruction, demolition, extension, replacement, restoration, or change of a structure or land to another use.
B. Repairs: A permit is not required for ordinary repair of structures. Repairs do not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof or with cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support or the removal or change of any required means of egress or rearrangements of parts of the structure affecting egress. Ordinary repairs also do not include the addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 206
§ 701. § 701.
supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
C. Issuance of Building Permit - In applying to the Zoning Officer for a building permit, the applicant shall submit a dimensional sketch or site plan indicating the shape, size, height and location of all buildings to be erected, altered or moved and of any building already existing on the lot. He shall also state the existing and intended use of all such buildings and supply such other information as may be required by the Zoning Officer for determining whether the provisions of the Ordinance are being observed. If the proposed work, as set forth in the application, is in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance and other ordinances of the Borough then in force, the Zoning Officer shall issue a permit for such work. If a building permit is refused, the Zoning Officer shall state such refusal in writing with the cause and shall immediately thereupon mail notice of such refusal to the applicant at the address indicated on the application. The Zoning Officer shall grant or deny the permit as soon as possible and, in no case, shall it be later than fifteen (15) days after the application is submitted. The issuance of a permit shall, in no case, be construed as waiving any provisions of this Ordinance.
1. Expiration of Permit - The building permit shall expire if the work authorized has not commenced within six (6) months after the date of issuance or has not been completed within one (1) year from the date of issuance, provided, however, that the same may be extended every six (6) months for a period not to exceed an additional one (1) year upon written application for such an extension and payment of an administrative fee to the Borough.
2. Building Permit Fees - Application for a building permit shall be accompanied by payment of a minimum non-refundable fee as established by Borough Council.
D. Special Exceptions. Applications for any special exceptions as permitted by this Ordinance shall be made to the Zoning Hearing Board through the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Hearing Board may refer the matter to the Planning Commission for report thereon as to its effect on the comprehensive planning of the Borough. After receipt of such report, the Zoning Hearing Board shall hear the application in the same manner and under the same procedure as it is empowered by law and ordinance to hear cases and make exceptions to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Hearing Board may thereafter direct the Zoning Officer to issue such permit if, in its judgment, any one of such cases will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the Borough and is deemed necessary for its convenience. In approving any such application, the Zoning Hearing Board may impose any conditions that it deems necessary to accomplish the reasonable application of applicable standards as provided in this Ordinance and may deny any such application, but only in accordance with said standards.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 207
§ 701. § 702.
E. Temporary Use Permits. It is recognized that it may be in accordance with the purpose of the Ordinance to permit temporary activities for a limited period of time, which activities may be prohibited by other provisions of this Ordinance. If such uses are of such a nature and are so located that, at the time of petition, they will:
1. In no way exert a detrimental effect upon the uses of land and activities normally permitted in the zone or
2. Contribute materially to the welfare of the Borough, particularly in a state of emergency, under conditions peculiar to the time and place involved; then the Zoning Hearing Board may, subject to all regulations for the issuance of special exception elsewhere specified, direct the Zoning Officer to issue a permit for a period not to exceed six (6) months. Such permits may be extended not more than once for an additional period of six (6) months.
F. Certificate of Occupancy. No land or building or part thereof hereafter erected or altered in its use or structure shall be used until the Zoning Officer shall have issued a Certificate of Occupancy stating that such land, building or part thereof and the proposed use thereof are found to be in conformity with Borough requirements. Within three days after notification by the owner or owner’s agent that a building or premises or part thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to make a final inspection thereof and to issue a Certificate of Occupancy if the land, building or part thereof and the proposed use thereof are found to conform with the provisions of all Borough requirements.; or, if such certification is refused, to state refusal in writing, with the cause, and immediately thereupon mail notice of such refusal to the applicant at the address indicated in the application.
G. Sign Permits.
It shall be unlawful to commence the erection of any permanent sign or to commence the moving or alteration of any permanent sign until the Zoning Officer has issued a sign permit for such work. Applications for permits to erect, alter or modify permanent signs shall be made to the Zoning Officer in accordance with the requirements of Section 311
N. of this Ordinance.
SECTION 702. Records. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to keep a record of all applications for permits, a record of all permits issued and a record of all certificates of occupancy which he countersigns, together with a notation of all special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep copies of all plans submitted and the same shall be available for the use of the Borough Council.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 208
§ 702. § 703.
The Zoning Officer shall prepare a monthly report for the Borough Council summarizing for the period since his last previous report all permits issued and certificates countersigned by him and all complaints or violations and the action taken by him consequent thereon. A copy of each such report shall be filed with the Office of the Chief Assessor of Lancaster County at the same time it is filed with the Borough Council.
SECTION 703. Violations and Penalties.
A. Enforcement Notice.
1. Whenever the Zoning Officer or other authorized Borough representative determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this Ordinance, or of any regulation adopted pursuant there to, the Zoning Officer shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement notice as provided in this Section
2. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record
3. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following
a. The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the Borough intends to take action
b. The location of the property in violation
c. The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of the Ordinance
d. The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced, not to exceed thirty (30) days from receipt of notice, and the date before which the steps must be completed
e. An outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, or any part thereof, and with any regulations adopted pursuant thereto
f. A statement indicating that the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time, in accordance with procedures set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 209
§ 703. § 703.
g. A statement indicating that failure to comply with the notice within the
time specified, unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described
B. Causes of Action.
In case any building, structure, landscaping, or land is, or is proposed to be, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in violation of this
Ordinance or any other Borough ordinances, code or regulation, Borough Council or any
officer of the Borough, or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that
his property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to
other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent, in or about
such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When such
action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon the
Borough at least thirty (30) day prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of
the complaint on Borough Council. No such action may be maintained until such notice
has been give
C. Jurisdiction. District justices shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings brought
under Section 703.D
D. Enforcement Remedies.
1. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the
violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon being found liable
therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a
judgment of not more than five hundred dollars ($500) plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof. No
judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant
to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the district justice determining that there has
been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for the
person, partnership or corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been
only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination
of a violation by the district justice and thereafter each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and
reasonable attorney fee collected for the violation of the Ordinance shall be paid
over to the Borough
2. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 210
§ 703. § 706.
cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication of the violation
and judgment
3. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed or interpreted to grant any
person or entity other than the Borough the right to commence any action for
enforcement pursuant to this Section.
SECTION 704. Appeals to Court.
All appeals from all land use decisions rendered pursuant to Article VI shall be taken in
accordance with the applicable requirements of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
SECTION 705. Power of Amendment.
Borough Council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal this
Ordinance or any part of this Ordinance, including the Zoning Map. When doing so, Borough
Council shall proceed in the manner prescribed in this Article.
SECTION 706. Enactment of Zoning Ordinance Amendments.
Proposals for amendment, supplement, change, modification, or repeal may be initiated by
Borough Council on its own motion, by the Planning Commission, or by petition of one or more
owners of property to be affected by the proposed amendment, subject to the following
provisions:
A. Submission Dates. Proposals for amendment, supplement, change or modification to this
Ordinance, including the Zoning Map, will be accepted for review and recommendation
by the Planning Commission. The regularly scheduled meetings of the Planning
Commission are hereby established as the meetings at which such aforementioned
proposals shall be considered. All proposals for amendment, supplement, change or
modification to this Ordinance shall be submitted to the Borough Secretary for referral to
the Planning Commission not later than fourteen (14) days prior to the regularly
scheduled meetings of the Planning Commission
B. Proposals Originated by Borough Council. Borough Council may on its own motion
prepare proposals for amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal of this
Ordinance.
C. Proposals Originated by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may on
its own motion prepare proposals for amendment, supplement, change, modification or
repeal of this Ordinance.
D. Proposals Originated by Citizen Petition. Owners of property in the Borough may by
petition submit proposals for amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal of
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 211
§ 706. § 706.
this Ordinance.
1. A fee shall be paid at the same time to cover costs, and no part of such fee shall be
returnable to a petitioner. Said fee shall be in accordance with a fee schedule
adopted by Resolution of Borough Council from time to time
2. On receipt of said petition and the requisite fee the Zoning Officer shall transmit a
copy of the petition to the Planning Commission
E. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the Planning Commission's report and
recommendation, Borough Council shall either fix a time for public hearing or notify the
petitioner of its decision not to consider the proposal.
F. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning Commission,
Borough Council shall submit each such amendment to the Planning Commission at least
thirty (30) days prior to the hearing on such amendment to provide the Planning
Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations.
The Planning Commission shall make a report and recommendation to Borough Council
1. The report shall set forth in detail reasons wherein public necessity, convenience,
general welfare, and the objectives of the Lititz Borough Comprehensive Plan do
or do not justify the proposed change, and may include any additions or
modifications to the original proposal
2. At its discretion, the Planning Commission may hold a public hearing before
making such report and recommendation
G. Referral to County Planning Commission. At least thirty (30) days prior to the public
hearing on the amendment by Borough Council, Borough Council shall submit the
proposed amendment to the Lancaster County Planning Commission for
recommendations.
H. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, Borough Council shall hold a public
hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice. Notice shall be given as follows
1. By publication of the notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough.
Said notice shall be published one each week for two successive weeks. The first
publication shall not be more than thirty days nor less than seven days from the
date of the hearing.
a. When such hearing concerns a Zoning Map change, written notice shall be
given to parties in interest, who shall be at least those persons whose
properties adjoin or are across the street from the property in question.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 212
§ 706. § 707.
b. In addition, if the proposed amendment involves a zoning map change,
notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the Borough
at points deemed sufficient by the Borough along the tract to notify
potentially interested citizens. The affected tract or area shall be posted at
least one week prior to the date of the hearing.
(1) In addition to the requirement that notice be posted, where the
proposed amendment involves a zoning map change, notice of the
public hearing shall be mailed by the Borough at least thirty (30)
days prior to the date of the hearing by first class mail to the
addresses to which real estate tax bills are sent for all real property
located within the area being rezoned, as evidenced by tax records
within possession of the Borough. The notice shall include the
location, date and time of the public hearing. A good faith effort
and substantial compliance shall satisfy the requirements of this
subsection.
(2) This clause shall not apply when the rezoning constitutes a
comprehensive rezoning.
I. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed amendment is changed
substantially, or is revised, to include land previously not affected by it, Borough Council
shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on
the amendment.
J. Enactment of Zoning Ordinance Amendment. The vote on the enactment by Borough
Council shall be within ninety (90) days after the last public hearing. Within thirty (30)
days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to the Zoning Ordinance shall be
forwarded to the County Planning Commission.
K. The Borough may offer a mediation option as an aid in completing proceedings
authorized by this Section. In exercising such an option, the Borough and mediating
parties shall meet the stipulations and follow the procedures set forth in Section 611.
SECTION 707. Curative Amendments.
A curative amendment may be initiated by either a landowner or by Borough Council.
A. Procedure for Landowner Curative Amendments. A landowner who desires to challenge
on substantive grounds the validity of a zoning ordinance or map or any provision
thereof, which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an
interest may submit a curative amendment to Borough Council with a written request that
his challenge and proposed amendment be heard and decided as provided in Section 609.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 213
§ 707. § 707.
1. Borough Council shall commence a hearing thereon within sixty (60) days of the
request as provided in Section 609 The curative amendment and challenge shall
be referred to the Borough and County Planning Commissions as provided in
Section 707 and notice of the hearing thereon shall be given as provided in
Section 706.H. and in Section 609.
2. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section 603 and all references
therein to the Zoning Hearing Board shall, for the purposes of this Section be
references to Borough Council provided, however, that the deemed approval
provisions of Section 603 shall not apply and the provisions of Section 609 shall
control. If Borough Council does not accept a landowner's curative amendment
brought in accordance with this subsection and a court subsequently rules that the
challenge has merit, the court's decision shall not result in a declaration of
invalidity for the entire zoning ordinance and map, but only for those provisions
which specifically relate to the landowner's curative amendment and challenge
3. If Borough Council determines that a validity challenge has merit, Borough
Council may accept a landowner's curative amendment, with or without revision,
or may adopt an alternative amendment which will cure the alleged defects.
Borough Council shall consider the curative amendments, plans and explanatory
material submitted by the landowner and shall also consider
a. the impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water supplies,
schools and other public service facilities
b. if the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal upon
regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal in providing
housing units of a type actually available to and affordable by classes of
persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of the
ordinance or map
c. the suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the site's soils,
slopes, woodland, wetlands, flood plains, aquifers, natural resources and
other natural features
d. the impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes, woodlands,
wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural features, the degree to
which these are protected or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to
development and any adverse environmental impacts; an
e. the impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and other land
uses which are essential to public health and welfare
§ 707. § 707.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 214
B. Procedure for Municipal Curative Amendments.
1. If Borough Council determines that this Zoning Ordinance or any portion thereof is substantially invalid, Borough Council shall declare by formal action, this Zoning Ordinance or portions hereof substantively invalid and propose to prepare a curative amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within thirty (30) days following such declaration and proposal Borough Council shall
a. By resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared invalidity of the Zoning Ordinance which may include
(1) references to specific uses which are either not permitted or not permitted in sufficient quantity
(2) reference to a class of use or uses which require revision; or
(3) reference to the entire ordinance which requires revisions
b. Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to the zoning ordinance to correct the declared invalidity
2. Within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the declaration and proposal, Borough Council shall enact a curative amendment to validate, or reaffirm the validity of the zoning ordinance
3. Upon initiation of the procedures, as set forth in Section 707.B.1., Borough Council shall not be required to entertain or consider any landowner's curative amendment filed under Section 707.A. nor shall the Zoning Hearing Board be required to give a report requested under Section 609 subsequent to the declaration and proposal based upon the grounds identical to or substantially similar to those specified in the resolution required by Section 707.B.1.a. Upon completion of the procedures as set forth in 707.B.1. and 2., no rights to a cure shall, from the date of declaration and proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive invalidity of the unamended zoning ordinance for which there has been a curative amendment pursuant to this Section
4. Borough Council having utilized the procedures as set forth in Section 707.B.1. and 2. may not again utilize said procedure for a thirty-six (36) month period following the date of the enactment of a curative amendment, or reaffirmation of the validity of the zoning ordinance, pursuant to Section 707.B.2.; provided, however, if after the date of declaration and proposal there is a substantially new duty or obligation imposed upon the Borough by virtue of a change in statute or by virtue of a Pennsylvania Appellate Court decision, the Borough may utilize the provisions of this Section to prepare a curative amendment to this Ordinance to
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 215
§ 707. § 711.
fulfill said duty or obligation.
SECTION 708. Publication, Advertisement and Availability of Ordinances.
A. Proposed zoning ordinance amendments shall not be enacted unless notice of proposed enactment is given in the manner set forth in this Section, and shall include the time and place of the meeting at which passage will be considered, a reference to a place within the Borough where copies of the proposed amendment may be examined without charge or obtained for charge not greater than the cost thereof. Borough Council shall publish the proposed amendment once in one newspaper of general circulation in the Borough not more than sixty (60) days nor less than seven (7) days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed amendment shall include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary, prepared by the Borough Solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included
1. A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough at the time the public notice is published
2. An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the county law library or other county office designated by the county commissioners, who may impose a fee no greater than that necessary to cover the actual costs of storing said ordinance
B. In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed amendment, before voting upon enactment, Borough Council shall at least ten (10) days prior to enactment re- advertise, in one newspaper of general circulation in the Borough, a brief summary setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail together with a summary of the amendments
C. Zoning ordinances and amendments may be incorporated into official ordinance books by reference with the same force and effect as if duly recorded therein.
SECTION 709. (Reserved)
SECTION 710. Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Zoning Ordinance or inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect.
SECTION 711. Validity. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, clause, provision or portion of this Ordinance which is not in itself invalid or unconstitutional.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 216
§ 712. § 712.
SECTION 712. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force on
, 2010.
Enacted this day of , 2010.
/s/ President of Council
Attest: /s/ Borough Secretary
Approved this day of , 2010.
§ 800. § 801.
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Page 217
ARTICLE VIII
FORM-BASED CODE REGULATIONS
SECTION 800. Purpose.
A. The purpose of the Form-Based Code Regulations is to promote the traditional town and historic village character of Lititz Borough, and to promulgate context-sensitive Redevelopment and new development that emulates the streetscape character of the Borough with such features as blocks, and an interconnected network of streets, alleys, sidewalks, walkways and crosswalks.
SECTION 801. Manual of Written & Graphic Design Standards.
A. The Manual in this Article provides for the following Design Standards:
1. Applicability
2. Overall Goals
3. Building Location and Size
4. Parking Location
5. Streetscape & Street Walls
6. Streets, Alleys, and Blocks
7. Pedestrian Circulation & Connectivity
8. Public/Private Place Typologies Transect
9. Place Design/Enhancement Best Practices
10. Greens
11. Plazas & Squares
12. Pocket Parks
13. Pedestrian Pockets
14. Street Sections Typologies
15. Deck Parking Structure
16. Block Diagrams
17. Single Family Detached
18. Single Family Semi-Attached
19. Single-Family Attached
20. Live/Work Units
21. Multi-Family
22. Multi-Family (with Interior Parking Court)
23. Commercial Store
24. Parking Structure
25. Main Street Environment
26. Anchor Store
27. Mixed-Use & Adaptive Re-Use
28. Historic Resource Protection
Contents
218
219
221
224
225
226
227
228
230
231
232
234
236
236
237
239
240
241
242
243
244
245
246
247
248
249
250
251
253
Overall Goals
Building Location and Size Parking Location Streetscape & Street Walls Streets, Alleys, and Blocks
Streets, Alleys, and Blocks: Close Pedestrian Circulation & Connectivity Public/Private Place Typologies Transect Place Design/Enhancement Best Practices Greens
Plazas & Squares Pocket Parks Pedestrian Pockets
Street Section Typologies Deck Parking Structure Block Diagrams
Lot Diagrams
Single-Family Detached Single-Family Semi-Attached Single-Family Attached Live/Work Units
Multi-Family
Multi-Family (with Interior Parking Court) Commercial Store
Deck Parking Structure Main Street Environment Anchor Store
Mixed-Use & Adaptive Re-Use Historic Resource Protection
Note: These FBC Design Standards are part of the Zoning Ordinance.
217
Overall Goals
802.1 This Manual is intended to comply with Section 708-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code titled: Manual of Written and Graphic Design Guidelines.
802.2 This Manual is intended to help protect and enhance the character of Lititz Borough.
Traditional Lititz Neighborhood to inspire TNDO
802.3 This Manual shall be utilized, in particular, for development in the Downtown, and in the Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO).
802.4 This Manual shall be utilized to plan, design, construct and maintain buildings, structures, streetscapes, and landscapes.
802.5 The places, spaces, buildings, and streetscapes, as shown in this Manual shall be emulated.
Traditional Lititz Neighborhood to inspire TNDO
Traditional Lititz Neighborhood to inspire TNDO
218
Overall Goals
802.6 This Manual is intended to apply to the area of the Downtown as delineated in the Downtown Lititz Master Plan.
802.7 This Manual shall be utilized to plan, design, construct and maintain buildings, structures, streetscapes, landscapes, and hardscapes in the Downtown.
802.8 The applicable places, spaces, buildings, streetscapes, etc. as shown in this Manual shall be emulated in the Downtown.
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
Zum Anker Alley Outdoor Dining Outdoor Dining Along Broad Street
Note: The above images are from Derck & Edson Associates, Downtown Lititz Master Plan, dated September 1, 2008
219
Building Location & Size
803.1 Buildings are intended to be located in general alignment with other buildings on a block, close to sidewalks.
803.2 A diversity of building sizes is intended to be achieved in every new development.
803.3 Buildings shall be placed at a Build-To Line, as
defined in Section 105.
803.4 New Buildings shall be in alignment to help form the traditional Streetscape of the Downtown, and new neighborhoods.
803.5 New buildings shall adjoin sidewalks at street corners, (and parking shall be located behind buildings), unless a Green, Plaza, or Square is provided at a street corner.
803.6 Whenever a Green, Plaza, or Square is provided along a street (such as within a Close, along a curved street, or as a feature that provides a viable pedestrian gathering area), the maximum building setback and build-to line shall be at the edge of a Green, Square, Plaza, or Pocket Park.
Buildings in Alignment, Main Street, Downtown Lititz
Build-To Line
220
Building Location & Size
Small Single-Family Dwelling Medium Single-Family Dwelling
Larger Single-Family Dwelling A variety of building sizes is common throughout the Lititz Borough
Small Medium Large
803.6 Small residential buildings shall be less than 1,500
square feet in ground floor area.
803.7 Medium residential buildings shall be from 1,500 to
2,500 square feet in ground floor area.
803.8 Larger residential buildings shall be 2,500 square feet
and greater in ground floor area.
803.9 New Neighborhoods shall include a variety and diversity of residential building types and sizes.
221
Building Location & Size
Small Commercial Building along Main Street Medium Commercial Building along Broad Street
Larger Commercial Building along Broad Street General Business District, Lititz, PA
803.10 Non-residential buildings are intended to be sized in proportion to blocks and neighborhood location.
803.11 Small commercial buildings shall be less than 2,000 square feet in
ground floor area.
803.12 Medium commercial buildings shall be from 2,000 to 20,000 square
feet in ground floor area.
803.13 Larger commercial buildings shall be 20,000 square feet and greater
in ground floor area.
803.14 Non-residential building sizes shall be located in proportion to lot and block sizes.
222
Parking Location
On-Street Parking is vital in commercial areas
On-Street Parking proximate to stores and shops
Off-Street Parking located to the rear of buildings
Curbside, parallel, On-Street Parking, Downtown Lititz
804.1 On-Street Parking is intended to provide vital parking spaces, as well as to buffer pedestrians from vehicular traffic.
804.2 Off-Street Parking is intended to be located at the rear of buildings.
804.3 On-Street Parking shall be maintained, and shall be increased where feasible.
804.4 Off-Street Parking shall be located at the rear of buildings, except as provided on page 200.1 for a Close, which requires on-street parallel or angled parking and a Green.
804.5 Off-Street Parking lots shall not be located at street corners.
804.6 Off-Street Parking shall be accessed from Alleys, unless it is impossible to access or construct an alley.
223
Streetscape & Street Walls
Street Wall Line along Main Street Streetscape Formed by Buildings in Alignment, Downtown Lititz
Streetscape formed by “Bookend Buildings,” and embellished with Street Trees at Spruce Street
805.1 The Streetscape is intended to be formed by buildings that form Street Walls located close to sidewalks.
805.2 The Streetscape is intended to be enhanced with such features as street trees, street lights, sidewalks, porches, stoops, and like type amenities.
805.3 A Streetscape with buildings located close to sidewalks shall be created and maintained.
805.4 Street Walls, with buildings in alignment, shall be provided, except that a minimum of seventy five percent (75%) of the building facade shall be on the Build-to Line, as defined by the maximum building setback, and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 216.D.9.
805.5 The Streetscape shall be embellished with street trees, street lights, sidewalks, porches, stoops, and other front yard amenities.
224
Streets, Alleys & Blocks
Traditional Network of Streets and Alleys form short blocks in Lititz Borough Alley
806.1 Blocks are intended to be the principal organizing feature of a neighborhood.
806.2 Streets and Alleys, with short distances, are intended to form Blocks.
806.3 Neighborhoods shall be created using a Block pattern formed by Streets and Alleys.
806.4 An interconnected network of Streets and Alleys shall be provided and maintained, except that Alleys shall not be required adjacent to the perimeter of a TNDO. A minimum of seventy percent (70%) of lots and dwellings that are not adjacent to the perimeter of a TNDO shall be serviced by Alleys with rear loaded garages.
806.5 The Block length and Block depth dimensions of page 207 shall apply.
225
Streets, Alleys & Blocks: Close
Close at Wyndcrest, Sandy Spring, MD, with On-Street Parallel Parking
Close at Louella Court, Wayne, PA
Close at Lake Forest, IL, with On-Street Angled Parking
Close at Lake Forest, IL
806.6 The Close is intended as a feature that provides green space in the center.
806.7 The Close is intended to serve as an alternative to a conventional cul-de-sac, and to provide the opportunity for a Pedestrian Gathering Area in the center.
806.8 The Close is intended to be enclosed with buildings on three sides.
806.9 The Close shall be designed for one lane of counter-clockwise vehicular travel, with on-street parking on the building sides of the vehicular travel lane.
806.10 On-Street parking may be angled or parallel with the curb.
806.11 Green space of at least 4,500 square feet shall be created in the center of the Close.
806.12 The average width (shorter dimension) of the green space shall not
be less than 25% of its average length (longer dimension).
806.13 The Close shall be wrapped with buildings on three sides, and the buildings shall be a minimum of two (2) stories or twenty (20) feet in height.
806.14 The Close may be utilized for development of tracts of 10 acres and greater.
806.15 The Close shall be used in lieu of a cul-de-sac, and for no more than
10% of the total area proposed for development.
226
Pedestrian Circulation & Connectivity
Walkway in Lititz Springs Park
Sidewalk along Main Street
Generously proportioned Sidewalk along Main Street
Sidewalk with Outdoor Dining Area
807.1 Sidewalks and walkways are intended to form an interconnected pedestrian network.
807.2 Sidewalks and walkways shall be at least five (5) feet in width.
807.3 Sidewalks and Walkways shall be installed and maintained along both sides of all streets.
807.4 At least four (4) feet of clear pedestrian walkway shall be maintained when there is outdoor dining.
227
Pedestrian Circulation & Connectivity
Crosswalk to Lititz Springs Park
Crosswalk, State Street, Media, PA
Walkway through Landscaped Median Downtown
Pedestrian Crosswalk at Main Street
807.5 Pedestrian Connectivity is intended to help create a
network for walking and wayfinding.
807.6 Sidewalks and Walkways shall be connected using Crosswalks.
807.7 Crosswalks shall be at least six (6) to ten (10) feet in width.
228
Site Design Guidelines
Public & Quasi-Public Spaces - Typologies Transect
808.1
808.2
808 .3
A variety of public spaces are intended to serve diverse community needs for both large and small outdoor gatherings.
Both Downtown redevelopment and newly constructed neighborhoods shall incorporate a variety of public spaces for outdoor gatherings, solitary enjoyment, and passive recreational opportunities.
The design of such spaces shall be responsive to the unique context of each site which could range in size from a small pedestrian pocket located at a street intersection to a large public park surrounded by and connected to various land uses.
Illustration Credit: 1 September 2008 Downtown Lititz Master Plan by Derck & Edson Associates
229
Site Design Guidelines
Public & Quasi-Public Spaces - Design/Enhancement Best Practices
Design Standards
808.4 To celebrate and promote the Borough’s existing public spaces as models, additional outdoor gathering places shall be created to further enhance the community. Suggested model gathering spaces include Lititz Moravian Church Square and Dosie Dough Bakery’s outdoor dining area. While exact replication of such spaces is not encouraged, general space proportions and popular amenities such as moveable site furnishings shall successfully inform future public space designs.
Illustrations Credit: 1 September 2008 Downtown Lititz Master Plan by Derck & Edson Associates
230
Greens
Village Green, Eagleview TND, Exton, PA
Civic Green, Kentlands TND, Gaithersburg, MD
Civic Green, Lantern Hill TND, Doyelstown, PA Green Court, Forbes Terrace, Squirrel Hill, PA
809.1 Greens are intended to provide vital Civic Space around which buildings are grouped.
809.2 Greens 4,000 to 40,000 square feet in area shall be provided and maintained in all new Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO) neighborhoods.
809.3 Greens should not exceed 40,000 square feet in area.
231
Greens
Village Green, Legacy Village, OH
Civic Green, Pittsburgh, PA
Downtown Lititz Master Plan, excerpt showing centrally-located Green Green, Downtown Lititz
809.4 Greens are intended to provide vital Civic Space in the Downtown.
809.5 Greens 2,000 to 10,000 square feet in area shall be provided and maintained in the Downtown.
809.6 Greens should not exceed 10,000 square feet in area in the Downtown.
Note: The above images are from Derck & Edson Associates, Downtown Lititz Master Plan, dated September 1, 2008
232
Plazas & Squares
Lime Street Plaza, Media, PA
Civic Plaza, Cambridge, Massachusetts
Civic Plaza, Kentlands TND, Gaithersburg, MD
Civic Plaza, San Francisco, CA
809.7 Plazas and Squares are intended to provide vital civic spaces in Lititz Borough.
809.8 Plazas of 500 to 4,000 square feet shall be provided in every new Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO) neighborhood, and in the Downtown as shown in the Downtown Lititz Master Plan.
809.9 Squares of 1,000 to 4,000 square feet shall be provided in every new Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO) neighborhood, and in the Downtown as shown in the Downtown Lititz Master Plan.
233
Pocket Parks
Sitting Area, State College, PA
Sitting Area along Broad Street
Sitting Wall, Lititz Springs Park
Sitting Wall and Outdoor Dining Area, Lititz Springs Park
809.10 Pocket Parks are intended to provide small scale public gathering places.
809.11 Pocket Parks are intended to have benches for sitting.
809.12 Pocket Parks, of 200 to 500 square feet, shall be provided and maintained in every new Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO) neighborhood, and in the Downtown as shown in the Downtown Lititz Master Plan.
809.13 At least one (1) bench shall be provided and maintained for every 500 square feet of Pocket Park.
234
Pedestrian Pockets
Bench and Outdoor Dining Area along Broad Street Sitting Area, Media, PA
Sitting Wall, Newport, RI Sitting Wall, San Francisco, California
810.1 Pedestrian Pockets are intended to have sitting opportunities.
810.2 Sitting walls shall be built and maintained in each Pocket Park in excess of 500 square feet.
810.3 Benches shall be provided in pedestrian pockets.
235
Site Design Guidelines
Street Section Typologies
811.1 Where new neighborhoods are created, it is intended that complete streets be constructed to replicate existing Borough streetscapes.
811.2
Proposed streets shall be designed to include travel lanes, on-street parking spaces, sidewalks, and Build-to Lines which resemble existing Borough street sections.
236
Site Design Guidelines
Street Section Typologies
811.3 Where new neighborhoods are created, it is intended that complete streets be constructed to replicate existing Borough streetscapes.
811.4
Proposed streets shall be designed to include travel lanes, on-street parking spaces, sidewalks, and Build-to Lines which resemble existing Borough street sections.
237
Deck Parking Structure
West Chester Deck Parking Structure with an architectural character consistent with nearby buildings
Grocery Store & Deck Parking, Philadelphia, PA
Liner shops of the West Chester Deck Parking Structure
West Chester Deck Parking Structure in Alignment with other buildings on the Block
812.1 Deck parking structures are intended to accommodate the parking demand created by retail businesses, multi- family dwellings, and other high intensity uses.
812.2 Deck parking shall have first floor retail stores, service shops, or offices, as liner shops.
812.3 Deck parking shall be architecturally consistent to emulate the character of the neighborhood.
812.4 The Lot Diagram on page 208.7 shall apply.
238
Block Diagrams
Block Dimensions - 536 ft. x 400 ft. (200 ft. to Alley) Block Dimensions - 435 ft. x 310 ft. (155 ft. to Alley)
Block Dimensions - 445 ft. x 430 ft. (215 ft. to Alley) Block Dimensions - 335 ft. x 210 ft. (210 ft. to Alley)
813.1 Blocks are intended to be short and to emulate those Blocks within and close to the Downtown.
813.2 Blocks are intended to be formed by Streets and Alleys.
813.3 Block length shall be in the range of 400 to 1,200 feet.
813.4 Block depth shall be in the range of 200 to 450 feet.
813 .5 Block depths to Alleys shall be in the range of 100 to 250 feet.
239
814
Lot Occupation
Lot Diagrams
Single-Family Detached
Lot Size 5,000 sf min1 Lot Width 30 ft. min Lot Coverage 65% max
Setbacks - Principal Buildings Front Setback Principal Building 12 ft. min from street R.O.W. Front Porch/Steps Setback 6 ft. min from street R.O.W. Sideyard Setback 5 ft. min, 12 aggregate Corner lot Sideyard Setback 5 ft. min, 10 aggregate
Setbacks - Garage Setbacks Frontloaded Attached Garage 20 ft. from front of house Frontloaded Detached Garage 40 ft. from street R.O.W. Rearloaded Garage for Parking Parallel to Alley 8 ft. minimum from Alley Rearloaded Garage for Parking Perpedicular to Alley 18 ft. minimum from Alley
Street
Note:
1. Up to 20% of Single-Family Detached Lots may be reduced to 3,000
square feet to provide design flexibility.
Street
240
Lot Diagrams
815 Single-Family Semi-Attached
Lot Occupation
Alley
Setbacks - Principal Buildings Front Setback Principal Building 12 ft. min from street R.O.W. Front Porch/Steps Setback 6 ft. min from street R.O.W. Sideyard Setback 5 ft. min, 12 aggregate Corner lot Sideyard Setback 5 ft. min, 10 aggregate
Setbacks - Garage Setbacks Frontloaded Attached Garage 20 ft. from front of house Frontloaded Detached Garage 40 ft. from street R.O.W. Rearloaded Garage for Parking Parallel to Alley 8 ft. minimum from Alley Rearloaded Garage for Parking Perpedicular to Alley 18 ft. minimum from Alley
Street
Note:
1. Up to 20% of Multi-Family Lots may be reduced to 3,000 square feet
to provide design flexibility.
Street
241 Lot Size 4,000 sf min1 Lot Width 30 ft. min Lot Coverage 70% max
Lot Diagrams
816 Single-Family Attached
Lot Occupation Lot Size See Note Below Lot Width 20 ft. min Lot Coverage 85% max
Setbacks Frontyard Setback 12 ft. max from sidewalk Sideyard Setback 5 ft. min Rearyard Principal Building 20 ft. min Rearyard Accessory Building 10 ft. min
Building Height Minimum Height 1.5 Stories Maximum Height 4 stories (50 ft.)
Street
Typical Townhome
Notes:
1. Lot Sizes shall be determined by adding 20% to the land needed for structure, parking, and any other necessary infrastructure. The additional 20% is reserved for buffers and landscaping.
2. This Lot Diagram applies to the Central Residential Area (CRA) of the Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO); and to other Districts where Townhomes are permitted. In other districts, the maximum height for Townhomes shall be 35 feet.
242
Lot Diagrams
817 Live/Work Units
Street
Street
Typical Live/Work Units
Note:
This Lot Diagram applies to: the Neighborhood Storefront Area (NSA); the NSA within a Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO); and to other Districts where Live/Work Units are permitted.
243
Lot Diagrams
818 Multi-Family
Lot Occupation Lot Size 4,000 sf min1 Lot Width 30 ft. min Lot Coverage 70% max
Setbacks - Principal Buildings Front Setback Principal Building 10 ft. min. from sidewalk Front Porch/Steps Setback 6 ft. min. from sidewalk Sideyard Setback 5 ft. min, 12 aggregate Corner lot Sideyard Setback 5 ft. min, 10 aggregate
Setbacks - Garage Setbacks Frontloaded Attached Garage 20 ft. from front of house Frontloaded Detached Garage 40 ft. from street R.O.W. Rearloaded Attached Garage 5 ft. min, 12 aggregate sideyards Rearloaded Detached Garage 18 ft. from alleyway
Alley
Street
Notes:
1. Up to 20% of Multi-Family Lots may be reduced to 3,000 square feet to provide design flexibility.
2. This Lot Diagram applies to: the Central Residential Area (CRA) of the Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO); and may apply to the Downtown.
244
Lot Diagrams
819 Multi-Family
Multi-Family Residential Block With Interior Parking Court
Note:
This Lot Diagram applies to both the Central Residential Area (CRA) of the Traditional Neighborhood Development
Overlay District (TNDO), as well as to infill development or redevelopment in the Downtown.
245
Lot Diagrams
820 Commercial Store
Lot Occupation Lot Size See Note Below Lot Width 20 ft. min Lot Coverage 85% max
Setbacks Front Setback 10 ft. max from sidewalk Sideyard Setback 5 ft. min Setback 20 ft. minimum Rearyard Structure Setback 10 ft. minimum
Building Height Minimum Height 1.5 Stories Maximum Height 4 stories (50 ft.)
Building Size 1 Story Building 1,500 square feet 2 or More Story Building 4,000 square feet
Notes:
1. Lot Sizes shall be determined by adding 20% to the land needed for structure, parking, and any other necessary infrastructure. The additional 20% is reserved for buffers and landscaping.
2. This Lot Diagram applies, in particular, to the Neighborhood Storefront Area (NSA) of the Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO), and may apply to other Districts where applicable.
246
Lot Diagrams
821 Deck Parking Structure with First Floor Commercial
Liner Shops and/or Office Uses
Top Level Parking
Ground Level Entrance/Exit
Access Ramp
Deck Parking Structure, With First Floor Commercial Liner Shops or Office Uses, in Neighborhood Storefront Area (NSA) of Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO)
Note:
This Lot Diagram applies, in particular, to the Neighborhood Storefront Area (NSA) of a Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO). However, it shall also apply to the Downtown.
247
Frontage Street
Lot Diagrams
822 Main Street Environment
Alley
Alley
Main Street Environment of a Neighborhood Storefront Area (NSA) of Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO)
Note:
This Lot Diagram applies, in particular, to the Neighborhood Storefront Area (NSA) of Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO). However, it shall also apply to the Downtown.
248
Lot Diagrams
823 Anchor Store
Anchor Store of a Neighborhood Storefront Area (NSA)
of Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO)
Note:
This Lot Diagram applies, in particular, to the Neighborhood Storefront Area (NSA) of a Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO). However, it shall also apply to the Downtown.
249
Mixed-Use & Adaptive Re-Use
Ground Floor Commercial, with Apartments above
Former Lititz Train Station
Mixed-Use Commercial on Ground Floor, with second/third floor Apart- ments
Lititz Welcome Center
824.1 Mixed-Uses are intended to diversify the land uses of the Downtown and Neighborhoods.
824.2 Adaptive Re-Use is intended to protect historic buildings, and serve as an alternative to demolition.
824.3 Mixed-Uses shall be provided and maintained in the Downtown.
824.4 Vertical Mixed-Uses in the form of Live-Work Units, and Apartments Above Ground Floor Commercial Use shall be provided and maintained in new Traditional Neighborhoods.
824.5 Existing buildings shall be adaptively reused in the Downtown.
250
Mixed-Use & Adaptive Re-Use
Former Lititz Movie Theater Shops along Main Street
Former Lititz Paper Box and Printing Company Susquehanna Bank Building
824.6 Adaptive Re-Use projects are intended to be consistent with The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Historic Properties.
824.7 Adaptive Re-Use projects shall comply with Section 214., the regulations for Historical Areas and Historic Resource Protection.
251
Historic Resource Protection
825.1 Buildings in Lititz Borough identified in the “Historic Resources Survey Report,” dated December 2008, by Rettew Associates, Inc., are intended to be protected, not demolished.
Adaptive Re-Use of Historic Hotel
825.2 Buildings in Lititz Borough that are identified in the “Historic Resources Survey Report” shall not be demolished.
825.3 Property owners shall provide an alternative to demolition through Adaptive Re-use of buildings identified in the “Historic Resources Survey Report.”
Historic Shops of Litiz Borough
Building in Lititz Borough Being Adaptively Re-Used
Entrance to Susquehanna Bank Building (former Lititz Paper Box and Printing Company)
252
Historic Resource Protection
825.4 New construction is intended to be consistent with the character of existing historic resources in Lititz Borough.
New Construction utilizing traditional building materials and proportions
825.5 New construction in a neighborhood of historic buildings, or in an area near historic buildings, shall retain community character and acheive compatibility through context-sensitive form, massing, shape, size, proportion, materials, orientation, setbacks, fenestration, roof lines, recesses, projections, and the like.
Historic buildings with similar form, scale, massing, and setbacks, Downtown
Traditional character of Lititz Borough
Traditional building character
253
Historic Resource Protection
825.6 Any Rehabilitation, Restoration, or Re- Construction of buildings in Lititz Borough that are identified in the “Historic Resources Survey Report,” dated December 2008, by Rettew Assosciates, Inc., are intended to comply with the Historic Overlay District Regulations of Section 214 and 426.
Re-constructed Lititz Train Station (now Welcome Center)
825.7 Any proposed Rehabilitation, Restoration or Re- Construction of a Class I or Class II resource shall be in compliance with the standards of Section 426.
825.8 Rehabilitation shall include repair, alterations, and additions while preserving those features which convey the historical, cultural, and architectural values of the building.
825 .9 Alterations shall include a change in the appearance of a building, structure, site, or object that is on a lot that is identified as a Class I or Class II Historic Resource on the map titled Proposed Lititz Borough Historic District, dated December 2008.
The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Treatment of Historic Properties http://www.nps.gov/history/HPS/tps/standards/index.htm
Rehabilitation of Historic Building, Downtown
254
Historic Resource Protection
Proposed, Expanded, Lititz Borough Historic District
255
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Index
INDEX
Accessory Apartments ................................................................................§416 pg.157
Accessory Buildings and Structures ...........................................................§301 pg.104
Adaptive Re-Use of Buildings ....................................................................§824 pg.249
Detached Accessory Buildings ...................................................................§301 pg.104
In Nonresidential Districts ..............................................................§301 pg.105
In Residential Districts....................................................................§301 pg.104
Adult-Oriented Businesses .........................................................................§403 pg.151
Anchor Store ...............................................................................................§823 pg.249
Animal Hospitals ........................................................................................§409 pg.154
Animals and Animal Shelters .....................................................................§415 pg.157
Antennae:
Wireless Communication Facilities................................................§423 pg.161
Radio Broadcasting/Receiving....................................................§319 pg.136 Satellite ...........................................................................................§316 pg.132
Appeals to Court .........................................................................................§704 pg.209
Application and Permitting Procedure (Child/Adult Daycare)...................§402 pg.148 Application of District Regulations ............................................................§204 pg. 46
Application Procedure (Home Business)....................................................§401 pg.146 Archaeology................................................................................................§426 pg.184
Bed and Breakfast Inns ...............................................................................§404 pg.152
Block ...........................................................................................................§806 pg.225
Block Diagrams ..........................................................................................§813 pg.238
Borough Council’s Jurisdiction ..................................................................§604 pg.199
Borough Ordinances ...................................................................................§103 pg. 2
Building Location and Size.........................................................................§803 pg.220
Build-To Line..............................................................................................§803 pg.220
Business Conversions .................................................................................§418 pg.158
Cartway .......................................................................................................§307 pg.108
Cell Sites .....................................................................................................§423 pg.161
Cemeteries...................................................................................................§414 pg.156
Central Business District.............................................................................§211 pg. 58
Certificates and Permits ..............................................................................§701 pg.204
Building Permits .............................................................................§701 pg.204
Building Permits (Issuance of)........................................................§701 pg.205
Certificate of Occupancy ................................................................§701 pg.206
Sign Permits ....................................................................................§701 pg.206
Special Exceptions ..........................................................................§701 pg.205
Temporary Use Permits ..................................................................§701 pg.206
Certificate of Occupancy ............................................................................§701 pg.206
Commercial District....................................................................................§211 pg. 58
Commercial Store .......................................................................................§820 pg.246
Community Development Objectives.........................................................§102 pg. 1
Construction Approved Prior to Ordinance ................................................§501 pg.193 Conversion Apartments ..............................................................................§406 pg.153
Curative Amendments ................................................................................§707 pg.211
Curb Cut......................................................................................................§307 pg.108
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Index
Day Care Facilities (Child or Adult)...........................................................§402 pg.148
Day Care Centers ............................................................................§402 pg.148
Day Care Homes .............................................................................§402 pg.148
Deck Parking Structures .............................................................................§812 pg.237
Demolition …………….............................................................................§322 pg.139
Demolition by Neglect................................................................................§426 pg.184
District Regulations ....................................................................................§200 pg. 45
Commercial District........................................................................§211 pg. 58
Downtown Overlay District............................................................§218 pg. 99
Floodplain District ..........................................................................§215 pg. 71
General Business District................................................................§212 pg. 67
Historic District...............................................................................§214 pg. 71
Industrial District ............................................................................§213 pg. 69
Neighborhood Storefront District (NSD)........................................§211.1 pg. 60
Neighborhood Storefront District-1 (NSD-1) ..................................§211.2 pg. 64
Office & Professional District ........................................................§210 pg. 57
R-A Residential District..................................................................§209 pg. 55
R-S Residential District ..................................................................§206 pg. 48
R-1 Residential District...................................................................§207 pg. 49
R-2 Residential District...................................................................§208 pg. 51
R-2A Residential District................................................................§208.1 pg. 52
Domestic Pets..............................................................................................§415 pg.157
Downtown...................................................................................................§218 pg.99 Downtown Lititz Master Plan.....................................................................§101 pg. 1
Downtown Overlay District........................................................................§218 pg.99
Educational Institutions ..............................................................................§407 pg.153
Effective Date .............................................................................................§712 pg.215
Enactment of Zoning Ordinance Amendments...........................................§706 pg.209 Enforcement................................................................................................§700 pg.204
Environmental Performance Standards.......................................................§314 pg.132 Essential Services........................................................................................§408 pg.154
Establishment of Districts ...........................................................................§200 pg. 45
Exceptions...................................................................................................§304 pg.106
Height Limitations ..........................................................................§304 pg.106
Public Utility Corporations .............................................................§304 pg.106 Fences and Walls ........................................................................................§310 pg.116
Floodplain District ......................................................................................§215 pg. 71
Form-Base Code Regulations .....................................................................§800 pg.216
Anchor Store ...................................................................................§823 pg.249
Block Diagrams ..............................................................................§813 pg.238
Building Location and Size.............................................................§803 pg.220
Commercial Store ...........................................................................§820 pg.246
Deck Parking Structures .................................................................§812 pg.237
Greens .............................................................................................§809 pg.230 Historic Resource Protection ..........................................................§825 pg.252
Live/Work Units .............................................................................§817 pg.243
Main Street Environment................................................................§822 pg.248
Mixed-Use & Adaptive Re-Use......................................................§824 pg.249
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Index
Multi-Family ...................................................................................§818 pg.243
Multi-Family (with Interior Parking Court)....................................§819 pg.244 Parking Location.............................................................................§804 pg.222
Parking Structure ............................................................................§821 pg.247
Pedestrian Circulation & Connectivity ...........................................§807 pg.226 Pedestrian Pockets ..........................................................................§810 pg.234
Place Design/Enhancement Best Practices .....................................§808 pg.229 Plazas & Squares.............................................................................§809 pg.232
Pocket Parks....................................................................................§809 pg.233
Public/Private Place Typologies Transect ......................................§808 pg.229 Single-Family Attached ..................................................................§816 pg.241
Single-Family Detached..................................................................§814 pg.239
Single-Family Semi-Attached.........................................................§815 pg.240
Street Sections Typologies..............................................................§811 pg.235
Streets, Alleys, and Blocks .............................................................§806 pg.224
Streetscape & Street Walls..............................................................§805 pg.223
Form-Based Code Regulations for Districts ...............................................§217 pg.99 Front Porch Additions.................................................................................§422 pg.160
Funeral Homes ...........................................................................................§413 pg.156
Garage Sale .................................................................................................§311 pg.117
General Business District............................................................................§212 pg. 67
General Procedures for Special Exceptions................................................§400 pg.144 General Provisions ......................................................................................§100 pg. 1
Green Infrastructure ....................................................................................§809 pg.233
Greenhouses/Nurseries ...............................................................................§419 pg.159
Greens .........................................................................................................§809 pg.230
Herbicide.....................................................................................................§215 pg. 71 Historic Area Advisory Committee ............................................................§426 pg.184
Historical Areas and Historic Resource Protection ....................................§214 pg. 71 Historic Property.........................................................................................§426 pg.184
Historic Resources Survey..........................................................................§825 pg.252
Home Occupations and Home Businesses..................................................§401 pg.146
Home Businesses (Regulations for)................................................§401 pg.146 Hospitals .....................................................................................................§417 pg.158
Hotels .........................................................................................................§420 pg.159
Industrial Districts ......................................................................................§213 pg. 69
Integrity.......................................................................................................§426 pg.184
Interpretation of District Boundaries .........................................................§202 pg. 46 Junk .............................................................................................................§215 pg. 71
Jurisdiction .................................................................................................§604 pg.199
Kennels .......................................................................................................§409 pg.154
Landscaping, & Screening and Buffering...................................................§313 pg.130 Lighting Standards ......................................................................................§318 pg.133
Live/Work Units .........................................................................................§817 pg.243
Lots .........................................................................................................§306 pg.107
Corner Lots .....................................................................................§306 pg.107 Projections Into Required Yards.....................................................§306 pg.107
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Index
Through Lots...................................................................................§306 pg.107
Main Street Environment............................................................................§822 pg.248
Mixed-Use & Adaptive Re-Use..................................................................§824 pg.249
Mixed-Use Building....................................................................................§824 pg.249
Mixed-Use Neighborhood ..........................................................................§824 pg.249
Motels .........................................................................................................§420 pg.159
Multi-Family ...............................................................................................§818 pg.243
Multi-Family (with Interior Parking Court)................................................§819 pg.244
National Register of Historic Places ...........................................................§215 pg. 71
Neighborhood Storefront District (NSD)....................................................§211.1 pg. 60
Neighborhood Storefront District-1 (NSD-1) .............................................§211.2 pg. 64
Non-Conforming Buildings & Structures...................................................§502 pg.193
Non-Conforming Lots of Record................................................................§503 pg.194
Non-Conforming Uses ................................................................................§500 pg.192
Expansion of ...................................................................................§500 pg.192
Continuity of Use............................................................................§500 pg.192
Residences in Industrial District .....................................................§500 pg.192 Substitution of.................................................................................§500 pg.192
Nursing/Convalescent Homes.....................................................................§417 pg.158
Off-Street and On-Street Parking Requirements ........................................§307 pg.108 Adequate Access.............................................................................§307 pg.108
All Other Uses.................................................................................§307 pg.112
Areas Computed as Parking Spaces................................................§307 pg.108 Combined Spaces............................................................................§307 pg.112
Commercial District Regs...............................................................§307 pg.113
Commercial Uses ............................................................................§307 pg.109
Drainage and Surfacing...................................................................§307 pg.108
Handicapped Parking ......................................................................§307 pg.113
Industrial Uses ................................................................................§307 pg.111
Joint Facilities .................................................................................§307 pg.108
Large Parking Lots..........................................................................§307 pg.108
Location and Ownership .................................................................§307 pg.113
Location of Parking Areas ..............................................................§307 pg.108
Lots Divided by District Boundaries ..............................................§307 pg.113
Public and Quasi-Public Uses.........................................................§307 pg.111
Residential District Regs (lots adjacent to).....................................§307 pg.114 Residential Uses..............................................................................§307 pg.109
Size of Spaces .................................................................................§307 pg.108 Spaces Required (Min. Number) ....................................................§307 pg.108
Off-Street Loading Requirements...............................................................§308 pg.114
Joint Facilities .................................................................................§308 pg.115
Location and Access .......................................................................§308 pg.115
On Lots Divided by District Boundaries ........................................§308 pg.115 Size of Spaces .................................................................................§308 pg.115
Uses for Which Required................................................................§308 pg.114
Office and Professional Districts ................................................................§210 pg. 57
On-Street Parking........................................................................................§307 pg.108
Outdoor Storage ..........................................................................................§309 pg.115
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Index
Ownership & Maintenance of Common Open Space Lands/Facilities ......§320 pg.136 Park, Playground or Recreation Areas .......................................................§410 pg.155
Parking (see: Off-Street Parking Requirements) .......................................§307 pg.108 Parking Location.........................................................................................§804 pg.222
Parking Structure ........................................................................................§821 pg.247
Pedestrian Circulation & Connectivity .......................................................§807 pg.226 Pedestrian Pockets ......................................................................................§810 pg.234
Performance Standards (Environmental)....................................................§314 pg.132
Place Design/Enhancement Best Practices .................................................§808 pg.229 Places of Worship .......................................................................................§405 pg.153
Playground ..................................................................................................§410 pg.155
Plazas & Squares.........................................................................................§809 pg.233
Pocket Parks................................................................................................§809 pg.234
Preservation.................................................................................................§426 pg.184
Power of Amendment .................................................................................§705 pg.209
Public/Municipal Buildings and Uses .......................................................§412 pg.156
Public/Private Place Typologies Transect ..................................................§808 pg.228 Publication, Advertisement and Availability of Ordinances ......................§708 pg.214 Purpose........................................................................................................§101 pg. 1
Radio Broadcasting/Receiving Antennae ...................................................§319 pg.136 Records .......................................................................................................§702 pg.206
Recreation Areas .........................................................................................§410 pg.155
Recycling Centers/Plants ............................................................................§421 pg.159
Redevelopment ...........................................................................................§217 pg.99
Rehabilitation..............................................................................................§426 pg.184
Repealer ......................................................................................................§710 pg.214
Required Street Access ...............................................................................§305 pg.107
Rules of Interpretation ................................................................................§104 pg. 2
R-1 Residential Districts ............................................................................§207 pg. 49
R-2 Residential Districts .............................................................................§208 pg . 51
R-2A Residential Districts ..........................................................................§208.1 pg . 52
R-A Residential Districts ............................................................................§209 pg. 55
R-S Residential District ..............................................................................§206 pg. 48
Satellite Antennas .......................................................................................§316 pg.132
Schools (Educational Institutions) ..............................................................§407 pg.153
Screening (Landscape)................................................................................§313 pg.130
Short Title ...................................................................................................§100 pg. 1
Sign Regulations .........................................................................................§311 pg.117
Allowable in all districts .................................................................§311 pg.118
Allowable by permit .......................................................................§311 pg.122
Applicability – Effect......................................................................§311 pg.117
Applications and Permits ................................................................§311 pg.129
Commercial District........................................................................§311 pg.123
Computations ..................................................................................§311 pg.118
Design, Construction, Maintenance................................................§311 pg.118 Freestanding Signs ..........................................................................§311 pg.127
General Business District................................................................§311 pg.124
Height Limits ..................................................................................§311 pg.121
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Index
Historical Area ................................................................................§311 pg.122
Industrial District ............................................................................§311 pg.124
Non-Conforming.............................................................................§311 pg.128
Non-Permanent ...............................................................................§311 pg.125
Office & Professional District ........................................................§311 pg.122 Pole Signs........................................................................................§311 pg.127
Prohibited in all districts .................................................................§311 pg.120
Projecting Signs ..............................................................................§311 pg.126
Public Rights-of-Way (signs in) .....................................................§311 pg.121 Purpose ...........................................................................................§311 pg.117
Removal ..........................................................................................§311 pg.129
Residential Districts ........................................................................§311 pg.122
Roof Signs.......................................................................................§311 pg.128
Violations........................................................................................§311 pg.129
Wall Signs.......................................................................................§311 pg.126
Single-Family Attached ..............................................................................§816 pg.241
Single-Family Detached..............................................................................§814 pg.239
Single-Family Semi-Attached.....................................................................§815 pg.240
Social and Fraternal Clubs and Organizations............................................§411 pg.155 Solar Energy Systems .................................................................................§317 pg.132
Special Exceptions (General Procedures for) .............................................§400 pg.144
Applicability, Limitations, Compliance..........................................§400 pg.144 Fees .................................................................................................§400 pg.144
General Procedures for Special Exceptions (detailed)....................§400 pg.145 Street Sections Typologies..........................................................................§811 pg.235
Streets, Alleys, and Blocks .........................................................................§806 pg.225
Streetscape & Street Walls..........................................................................§805 pg.223
Supplementary Form-Based Code Regulations ..........................................§321 pg.139 Supplementary Regulations ........................................................................§300 pg.104
Swimming Pools .........................................................................................§312 pg.129
Temporary Structures for Dwelling Purposes.............................................§302 pg.105 Temporary Use............................................................................................§701 pg.204
Tennis Courts .............................................................................................§315 pg.132
Terms Defined ............................................................................................§105 pg. 3
Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District (TNDO) ..........§216 pg. 87 Transitional Housing...................................................................................§424 pg.179
Use Adjustment on District Boundaries .....................................................§203 pg. 46 Uses Not Provided For................................................................................§205 pg. 47
Validity of Ordinance .................................................................................§711 pg.214
Veterinary Clinics .......................................................................................§409 pg.154
Violations and Penalties..............................................................................§703 pg.207
Walking Path...............................................................................................§211.1 pg. 60
Water Supply and Sewage Facilities Required ...........................................§303 pg.106 Wind Energy Systems.................................................................................§425 pg. 179
Windmill .....................................................................................................§425 pg.179
Yard and Lot Requirements ........................................................................§306 pg.107
Corner Lots .....................................................................................§306 pg.107
Through Lots...................................................................................§306 pg.107
Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance Index
Projections Into Required Yards..................................................§306 pg.107
Zoning Hearing Board.............................................................................§600 pg.195
Alternate Members........................................................................§600 pg.195
Creation and Appointment ...........................................................§600 pg.195
Decisions......................................................................................§603 pg.196
Expenditures for Services ..............................................................§602 pg.196
Functions........................................................................................§605 pg.201
Hearings of.....................................................................................§603 pg.196
Jurisdiction.....................................................................................§604 pg.199
Organization of ............................................................................§601 pg.196
Parties Appellant before Board....................................................§606 pg.202
Stay of Proceedings........................................................................§608 pg.202
Terms of Office..............................................................................§600 pg.195
Time Limitations............................................................................§607 pg.202
Validity of Ordinance ....................................................................§609 pg.203
Zoning Map ................................................................................................§201 pg. 45

SUBDIVISION AND
LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE
Founded 1756 - Incorporated 1888
Final Revisions: February 11, 2010
Adopted: April 27, 2010
Amended: June 19, 2013
Amended: July 29, 2014
Amended: November 29, 2016
Amended: March 27, 2018
Borough of Lititz
7 south broad street Lititz, pa 17543 PHONE (717) 626-2044 FAX (717) 626-1329
LANCASTER COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development O rdinance Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I
TITLE - AUTHORITY §101 page 1
SECTION 101. Short Title §101 page 1
SECTION 102. Purpose §102 page 1
SECTION 103. Authority and Jurisdiction §103 page 2
ARTICLE II
INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS §201 page 3
SECTION 201. General Interpretations §201 page 3
SECTION 202. Definitions §202 page 3
ARTICLE III
PLAN PROCESSING PROCEDURES §301 page 16
SECTION 301. General §301 page 16
SECTION 302. Pre-Application Review (Sketch Plan) §302 page 16
SECTION 303. Formal Application §303 page 16
SECTION 304. Acceptance for Filing §304 page 16
SECTION 305. Preliminary Plan Application §305 page 17
SECTION 306. Final Plan Application §306 page 19 SECTION 307. Plans Exempted from Standard Procedures §307 page 23 SECTION 308. Procedure for Requesting Consideration of a
Modification of Provisions of This Ordinance §308 page 25
ARTICLE IV
INFORMATION TO BE SHOWN ON OR SUBMITTED WITH
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT PLANS §401 page 27
SECTION 401. Sketch Plans §401 page 27
SECTION 402. Preliminary Plans §402 page 28
SECTION 403. Final Plans §403 page 33
SECTION 404. Lot Add-On Plans §404 page 39
SECTION 405. Traffic Impact Study §405 page 40
SECTION 406. Wetlands Study §406 page 44
Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development O rdinance Table of Contents
ARTICLE V
IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION ASSURANCES §501 page 47
SECTION 501. Completion of Improvements or Guarantee Thereof
Prerequisite to Final Plan Approval §501 page 47 SECTION 502. Effect of Plan Recording on Dedication and Reservations §502 page 48 SECTION 503. Release from Financial Security §503 page 49 SECTION 504. Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements §504 page 50 SECTION 505. Inspection During Construction §505 page 50
SECTION 506. Maintenance of Streets §506 page 51
SECTION 507. Construction In Accordance With Plans §507 page 51
SECTION 508. As-Built Plan §508 page 52
SECTION 509. Dedication §509 page 53
SECTION 510. Development Agreement §510 page 53
ARTICLE VI
DESIGN STANDARDS §601 page 54
SECTION 601. General §601 page 54
SECTION 602. Streets, Private Streets, and Driveways §602 page 54 SECTION 603. Vehicular Parking Facilities, Sidewalks and Curbs §603 page 64 SECTION 604. Blocks and Lots §604 page 67 SECTION 605. Building Setback Lines and Building Separation §605 page 68 SECTION 606. Easements and Right-of-Ways §606 page 69
SECTION 607. Survey Monuments and Markers §607 page 70 SECTION 608. Stormwater Management and Floodplain Controls §608 page 70 SECTION 609. Landscaping §609 page 71
SECTION 610. Sanitary Sewage Disposal and Water Supply §610 page 74 SECTION 611. Public Dedication of Park and Recreation Land §611 page 75 SECTION 612. Refuse Collection (Dumpster) Stations §612 page 77 SECTION 613. Stripping, Piling, Replacement, or Removal of Topsoil §613 page 77 SECTION 614. Lighting and Lighting Plans §614 page 77 SECTION 615. Supplemental Design Standards for Traditional
Neighborhood Developments §615 page 83
SECTION 616. Form-Based Code Regulations §616 page 85 and Refer to Appendix 20
ARTICLE VII
MOBILE HOME PARKS §701 page 86
SECTION 701. General §701 page 86
SECTION 702. Lot Size and/or Density §702 page 86
SECTION 703. Water Supply §703 page 86
SECTION 704. Sewage Disposal §704 page 86
Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development O rdinance Table of Contents
SECTION 705. Storm Drainage, Erosion and Sedimentation
and Floodplain Controls §705 page 86 SECTION 706. Interior Streets §706 page 87
SECTION 707. Vehicular Parking Facilities §707 page 87
SECTION 708. Sidewalks §708 page 87
SECTION 709. Lighting §709 page 87
SECTION 710. Landscaping §710 page 87
SECTION 711. Building Setbacks and Separations §711 page 87
SECTION 712. Solid Waste Disposal §712 page 87
ARTICLE VIII
ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES §801 page 88
SECTION 801. Fees §801 page 88
SECTION 802. Waivers §802 page 88
SECTION 803. Application Requirements §803 page 89
SECTION 804. Action on Waiver Applications §804 page 89
SECTION 805. Enforcement §805 page 89
SECTION 806. Penalties and Preventive Remedies §806 page 89
ARTICLE IX
APPEALS, INTERPRETATION AND EFFECTIVE DATE §901 page 91
SECTION 901. Appeals §901 page 91
SECTION 902. Interpretation and Application of Provisions §902 page 91 SECTION 903. Application of Ordinance §903 page 91
SECTION 904. Construction §904 page 92
SECTION 905. Severability §905 page 92
SECTION 906. Effective Date §906 page 92
APPENDICES Page 93
1
Certificate of Accuracy (Plan)
Page
94
2
Certification of Accuracy (Survey)
Page
94
3
Storm Water Management Certification
Page
95
4
Certificate of Ownership, Acknowledgement of Plan Offer and Dedication
Page
96
5
Lititz Borough Preliminary Plan Approval Certificate
Page
99
6
Lititz Borough Final Plan Approval
Page
100
7
Lititz Borough Approval Certificate for a Lot Add-On Plan
Page
100
8
Lititz Borough Planning Commission Review Certificate
Page
101
Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development O rdinance Table of Contents
9
Lancaster County Planning Commission Review Certificate
Page 102
10
Removed by Ordinance C-550 – November 29, 2016
11
Application for Consideration of a Subdivision and/or Land
Development Plan
Page 103
12
Notice of Acceptance of an Improvement Guarantee
Page 106
13
Required Improvements Listing (form)
Page 107
14
Application for Consideration of a Modification (Waiver)
Page 109
15
Standard Street Section Detail
Page 111
16
Standard Curb and Sidewalk Details
Page 112
17
Standard Parking Compound Details
Page 113
18
Safe Stopping Sight Distance Chart
Page 114
19
Sample Legal Documents
Page 115
20
Form-Based Code Regulations
Page 20
Applicability Overall Goals
Page 20.1
Page 20.2
Site Design Standards
Street Sections Typologies
Page 20.4
Benches
Page 20.6
Moveable Tables and Chairs
Page 20.7
Bollards and Litter Receptacles
Page 20.8
Bike Racks
Page 20.9
Sidewalk Paving Materials
Page 20.10
Crosswalks
Page 20.11
Street Lights
Page 20.12
Pole-Mounted Signs & Signals
Page 20.13
Streetscape Edge
Page 20.14
Streetscape Best Practices
Page 20.15
Street Tree Guidelines
Street Tree Use and Selection Page 20.16 Recommended Street Tree & Buffer Plant Selections Page 20.17 Street Tree Placement and Spacing Page 20.18
Street Tree Planting Details Page 20.19
Street Tree Best Practices Page 20.20 Front Yards for Residential Neighborhoods Page 20.21 Streetscape Edge Treatments for Off-Street
Parking Areas Page 20.22
Stormwater Infiltration
Stormwater Infiltration at Off-Street Parking
Area Edges
Page
20.23
Interior Plantings for Off-Street Parking Areas
Page
20.24
Stormwater Infiltration within Off-Street
Parking Areas
Page
20.25
Off-Street Parking Area Best Practices
Page
20.26
Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development O rdinance Table of Contents
Buffer Design Guidelines
Planted Buffers Selection & Application
Page
20.27
Planted Buffers for Downtown Areas
Page
20.28
Planted Buffers for Non-Downtown Areas
Page
20.29
Planted Buffer Examples
Page
20.30
Buffer Design/Enhancement
Page
20.31
Civic Art
Page
20.32
Green Urbanism
Page
20.33
Architectural Design
Page
20.35
Maintenance of Improvements
Page
20.43
21
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
Page
21
LITITZ BOROUGH
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
November 29, 2005
Ordinance #C-444
Final Revisions: February 11, 2010
Adopted: April 27, 2010
Amended: June 19, 2013
Amended: July 29, 2014
Amended: November 29, 2016
7 South Broad Street Lititz, PA 17543
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE SETTING FORTH RULES, REGULATIONS, AND STANDARDS REGULATING SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE BOROUGH OF LITITZ, LANCASTER COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, PURSUANT TO THE AUTHORITY GRANTED IN ARTICLE V OF THE PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE, ACT 247 OF 1968, AS AMENDED; THE PENNSYLVANIA CLEAN STREAMS LAW, ACT OF JUNE 22, 1937, P.L. 1987, AS AMENDED, 35 P.S. SECTION
691.1 ET SEQ.; THE PENNSYLVANIA STORM WATER MANAGEMENT ACT, ACT OF OCTOBER 4, 1978, P.L. 864, NO. 167, AS AMENDED, 32 P.S. SECTION 680.1 ET SEQ.; THE PENNSYLVANIA SCENIC RIVERS ACT, ACT OF DECEMBER 5, 1972, P.L. 1277, NO. 283, 32 P.S. SECTION 820.21 ET SEQ.; AND THE FEDERAL WATER POLLUTION CONTROL ACT, COMMONLY KNOWN AS THE CLEAN WATER ACT, 33 U.S.C. SECTION 1251 ET SEQ. AND ESTABLISHING THE PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED BY THE LITITZ BOROUGH PLANNING COMMISSION AND THE LITITZ BOROUGH COUNCIL IN THE APPLICATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF SAID RULES, REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES AND REMEDIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF.
BE AND IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Borough Council of Lititz Borough, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, as follows:
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 1
§ 101. § 102.
ARTICLE I TITLE - AUTHORITY
SECTION 101. Short Title. This Ordinance shall be known as "The Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2003."
SECTION 102. Purpose. This Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, and welfare.
B. To promote orderly, efficient, integrated, and harmonious development in the Borough.
C. To require sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation in keeping with the standards of quality existing in the Borough and to alleviate peril from fire, flood, soil erosion, excessive noise, smoke, or other menace.
D. To coordinate proposed streets, alleys and other improvements with existing or proposed streets, alleys, parks or other features of the Comprehensive Plan and to provide for drainage, water supply, sewage disposal, and other appropriate utility services.
E. To encourage preservation of adequate open spaces for recreation, light and air and maintenance of the natural amenities characteristic of the Borough and its residential, commercial, agricultural, industrial, and public areas.
F. To ensure conformance of subdivision and land development plans with the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, Downtown Lititz Master Plan and public improvement plans and to ensure coordination of intergovernmental improvement plans and programs.
G. To secure equitable treatment of all subdivision and land development plans by providing uniform procedures and standards.
H. To ensure that developments are environmentally sound by requiring preservation of the natural features of the areas to be developed to maintain the economic well-being of the Borough and to prevent unnecessary or undesirable blight, runoff and pollution.
I. To secure the protection of water resources and drainageways.
J. To establish provisions governing the standards by which streets and alleys shall be granted and improved, and walkways, curbs, gutters, street lights, fire hydrants, water and sewage facilities, and other improvements shall be installed as a condition precedent to final approval of plans.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 2
§ 102. § 103.
K. To regulate the modification of the natural terrain and alternations of existing drainage from new subdivisions, and new land developments in order to control soil erosion and sedimentation of soils and preserve stream channels and water quality; and provide design, construction and maintenance, and storm drainage facilities for controlling storm water, soil erosion, and sedimentation and maintaining the quality of the watersheds within the Borough.
SECTION 103. Authority and Jurisdiction. No land development or subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be made and no street, alley, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main, or other improvements in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened, or dedicated for public use or travel, or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
A. The authority for the control and regulation of subdivision and land development within the Borough shall be as follows:
1. Approval by the Lititz Borough Council. The Lititz Borough Council shall be vested with the authority to approve or disapprove all subdivision and land development plans.
2. Review by the Lititz Borough Planning Commission. Plans for subdivision and land development shall be submitted to the Lititz Borough Planning Commission for review and report. Said submission shall take place before approval of any plans by the Borough Council.
3. Review by the County Planning Commission. Plans for subdivision and land development located within Lititz Borough shall be submitted to the Lancaster County Planning Commission for review and report. Said submission shall take place before approval of any plans by Borough Council.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 3
§ 201. § 202.
ARTICLE II INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION 201. General Interpretations: In this Ordinance the following rules of interpretation shall be used:
A. The word "lot" includes the word "plat" or "parcel".
B. Words in the present tense may imply the future tense.
C. Words used as singular imply the plural.
D. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
E. The word "person" includes a partnership, corporation, association, trust, estate, or any other legally recognized entity as well as an individual.
F. The word "shall" is to be interpreted as mandatory.
SECTION 202. Definitions. Unless otherwise stated, the following words and phrases shall be construed throughout this Ordinance to have the meanings indicated in this Section:
ACT. The Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. (1965) 1535, No. 537, as amended, 35 P.S. Section 750.1 et seq.
Agent. Any person, other than a landowner or developer, who, acting for the landowner or developer, submits to the Planning Commission and Borough Council subdivision or land development plans for the purpose of obtaining approval thereof.
Agriculture. The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, fish culture, animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or storing the produce, provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the principal agricultural activities.
Applicant. A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an application for development including his heirs, successors and assigns.
Application for Development. Every application, whether preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of construction or development, including but not limited to, an application (1) for a building permit, (2) for the approval of a subdivision, plat or plan (3) for the approval of a development plan, or (4) for the approval of an improvements construction plan.
Application Form. A form supplied by Lititz Borough for an Application for Development.
Block. An area of land surrounded by streets, or surrounded by streets and alleys.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 4
§ 202. § 202.
Borough. Lititz Borough, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, as represented by the Lititz Borough Council, or its duly authorized agents.
Borough Council. The Lititz Borough Council.
Building. A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation.
Building Envelope. The building envelope is that area of the lot which has no building restrictions. The building envelope shall not include the area of any required setbacks (except for driveways which cross yards), buffer yards or floodplains.
Building Setback Line. The line within a property usually parallel to the right-of-way or property line), defining the required minimum distance between any enclosed structure and the adjacent street right-of-way or property line.
Front set-back line: The line across and nearest the front of a lot establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the front façade of buildings and the front line of structures, and the front lot line.
Side set-back line: The line nearest and across the side of a lot establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the side line of buildings and structures and the side lot line.
Rear set-back line: The line nearest and across the rear of a lot establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the rear line of buildings and structures and the rear lot line.
Cartway. The portion of a street or alley intended for vehicular use, including travel lanes and parking lanes but excluding shoulders, curbs and sidewalks.
Clear Sight Triangle. An area of unobstructed vision at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, access drives or alleys. It is defined by lines of sight between points at a specific distance from the intersection of the centerlines of both streets depending on speed limits. No obstructions lower than seven (7) feet nor higher than four (4) feet as measured from the nearest street shall be permitted.
Close. An accessway for counterclockwise vehicular travel, within which a green is centered, and around which buildings are located on three sides, and on-street parking is located either parallel to the curb line or in an angled parking arrangement.
COE. United States Army Corps of Engineers.
Common Driveway. A private driveway utilized by two (2) or more separate lots or dwellings for access to a public or private street.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 5
§ 202. § 202.
Common Open Space. A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set aside for public facilities.
Compensatory Mitigation. A form of mitigating for wetlands lost due to construction by planning, excavating and planting a new wetland area.
Comprehensive Plan. The Comprehensive Plan adopted by Borough Council pursuant to Article III of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code which indicates the general locations recommended for the various functional classes of public works, places and structures and for the general physical development of the Borough, and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or part thereof.
County Planning Commission. The Lancaster County Planning Commission.
Cul-de-sac. A street intersecting another street at one end, and terminating at the other end with a vehicular turnaround. Cul-de-sac streets which extend to property limits and are designed for future street extension shall be known as ‘temporary. cul-de-sacs’. Cul-de-sac streets which do not extend to property limits and which are not intended for future extension shall be known as ‘permanent cul-de-sacs’.
Curb. The raised edge of a pavement to confine surface water to the pavement and to protect the abutting land from vehicular traffic; all curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications in this Ordinance or any other Ordinance enacted by the Borough Council setting requirements for the construction of roads, curbs and sidewalks.
Culvert. A structure with appurtenant works which carries a watercourse under or through an embankment or fill.
Dedication. The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for general public use.
Density. A measure of the number of dwelling units which occupy, or may occupy, an area of land, typically expressed as dwelling units per acre.
Density, Net Residential. The number of dwelling units in relation to the land area actually in use or proposed to be used for residential purposes, exclusive of public rights-of-way, streets, sidewalks, parks, playgrounds and common open spaces.
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). The Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any agency successor thereto.
Department of Transportation (PennDOT). The Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any agency successor thereto.
Design Speed. The speed for streets designed in accordance with this Ordinance shall
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 6
§ 202. § 202.
equal the proposed posted speed plus five (5) miles per hour.
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
Drainage Easement. A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing the use of private land for storm water management purposes.
Developer. Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or a land development.
Development Plan. The provisions for development, including a planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density or development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space, and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the development plan" when used in this Ordinance shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
Double Frontage Lot. A lot, other than a corner lot, fronting on two (2) streets.
Downtown Lititz Master Plan. The plan prepared by Derck & Edson, dated September 2008. (See Appendix 21.)
Drainage Facility. Any ditch, gutter, pipe, culvert, storm sewer, or other structure designed, intended or constructed for the purpose of carrying surface waters off streets, public
rights-of-way, parks, recreational areas, or any part of any subdivision or contiguous land areas.
Driveway. A private drive on a residential lot providing access between a public or private street or service lane, and a permitted use, building or structure.
Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms providing living and sanitary facilities for one family, including equipment for cooking or provisions for same.
Easement. The authorization by a property owner of a right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of private land for a public or quasi-public purpose, within which the owner of the property shall not erect any permanent structures, but shall have the right to make any other use of the land which is not inconsistent with the rights of the grantee of the easement.
Easement of Access. Any driveway or other entrance from a public or private road. A field road providing access to agriculturally used fields and not providing access to any residential, commercial or industrial structure is not considered an easement of access.
Engineer. A Professional Engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 7
§ 202. § 202.
Engineered, Structural Soil. See “Structural Soil”.
Financial Security. A letter of credit or other form of guarantee in accordance with the requirements of Article V of the Municipalities Planning Code posted by a developer to secure the completion of improvements indicated on an approved plan.
Footcandle. Unit of light density incident on a plane (assumed to be horizontal unless otherwise specified), measurable with an illuminance meter, a.k.a. light meter.
Frontage. The horizontal or curvilinear distance along the street line upon which a lot abuts.
Full Cutoff. Attribute of a lighting fixture from which no light is emitted at or above a horizontal plane drawn through the bottom of the fixture and no more than 10% of the lamp’s output is emitted at or above an angle 100 below that horizontal plane, at all lateral angles around the fixture.
Fully Shielded. Attribute of a lighting fixture provided with internal and/or external shields and louvers to prevent brightness from lamps, reflectors, refractors and lenses from causing glare at normal viewing angles.
Future Right-of-Way. (1) The right-of-way width required for the expansion of existing streets to accommodate anticipated future traffic loads. (2) A right-of-way established to provide future access to or through undeveloped land.
Glare. Excessive brightness in the field of view that is sufficiently greater than that to which the eyes are adapted to cause loss in visual performance or annoyance, so as to jeopardize health, safety or welfare.
Grade. The slope expressed in a percent which indicates the rate of change of elevation in feet per hundred feet.
Gutter. That portion of a right-of-way carrying surface drainage.
Hardship. A non-economic condition not caused by the applicant or developer for which a Modification may be requested.
Holding Pond. A retention or detention pond.
Homeowners' Association. An unincorporated association or not-for-profit corporation whose membership consists of the lot owners of a residential development. A homeowners' association shall also include a condominium unit owners' association. All such associations shall comply with the requirements for unit owners' associations contained in the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa. C.S. Section 3101 et seq.
Illumnance. Quantity of light, measured in footcandles.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 8
§ 202. § 202.
Impervious Surface. Any surface that has been compacted or covered over with a building, structure, swimming pool, pond, or layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. It includes surfaces such as compacted sand, rock, or clay, as well as driveways and parking areas and most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots and other similar structures and paved areas.
Improvements. The construction of any type of structure or pavement excluding driveways.
Lancaster County Wide Communications. The Lancaster County agency responsible for 911 emergency system service, and the dispatching of emergency services agencies within Lancaster County.
Land Development. A land development as defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. Generally states as follows: any of the following activities:
A. The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
1. a group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
2. the division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
B. A subdivision of land.
Landowner. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other person having a proprietary interest in land.
Landscape Architect. A professional Landscape Architect licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Light Trespass. Light emitted by a lighting fixture or installation, which is cast beyond the boundaries of the property on which the lighting installation is sited.
Location Map. A map showing the site with relation to adjoining areas.
Lot. A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, and having frontage on a dedicated street or road.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 9
§ 202. § 202.
Corner lot: A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection does not exceed 135 degrees. A lot abutting a curved street shall be deemed a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street lines intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
Flag lot: A lot or parcel that has been approved with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor. Said lot has less frontage on a public street than is normally required.
Interior lot: Any lot other than a corner lot.
Through lot: A lot extending between and having frontage on two streets.
Lot Area. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot following exclusion of:
A. Areas within an existing or proposed, public or private, easement or right-of-way the terms or conditions of which restrict or limit the nature, dimensional characteristics, or intensity of development or development activities within the said easement or
right-of-way; and
B. In the case of an interior lot, any right-of-way, easement or accessway connecting such interior lot to a road or street.
Lot Corner. A lot bounded on at least two (2) sides by intersecting streets, or by two (2) parts of the same street where extended lines of such streets form an interior angle of 135 degrees or less.
Lumen. As used in the context of this Ordinance, the light-output rating of a lamp (light bulb).
Manufactured Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation and attachments to the required utilities. The term includes manufactured home park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days. Substitute the term manufactured home for the term mobile home.
Manufactured Home Park. A parcel of land under single ownership, which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more manufactured homes for non-transient use.
Substitute the term manufactured home park for mobile home park.
Manufactured Home Space. A parcel of land in a manufactured home park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single manufactured home.
Modification. The granting of an exception to these regulations which in the opinion of the Borough Council will not be detrimental to the general welfare, impair the intent of these
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 10
§ 202. § 202.
regulations, conflict with the Comprehensive Plan, or conflict with the Downtown Lititz Master Plan.
Multiple Dwelling Building. A building providing separate living quarters for two (2) or more families.
Municipalities Planning Code. The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted, December 21, 1988, P.L. 1329, No. 170 et seq., as amended from time to time.
Natural Watercourse. A natural watercourse or channel (non man-made) with a definite bed and banks which confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water.
Non-Residential. Any use other than single or multi-family dwellings. An institutional use in which persons may reside, such as a dormitory, prison, nursing home, or hospital, shall be considered a non-residential use.
NWI. National Wetland Inventory.
Owner. The owner of record of a parcel of land.
Parking Area. An area on a lot utilized for the parking of vehicles for a single unit of occupancy.
Parking Lot. An area on a lot containing any use other than agricultural or one (1) single-family detached dwelling for the parking of three (3) or more vehicles.
Parking Space. An off-street space available for the parking of a motor vehicle and which, in this Ordinance, is held to be an area 18 feet in length and at least one hundred-sixty-two (162) square feet, exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto and giving access thereto; and an on-street parking space that is typically parallel to a curb line and 7 feet wide by 22 feet long.
Pier. A vertical architectural element, like a column or pillar, that is used in combination with fence and plantings as shown in the Site Design Standards of the Article VI Form Based Code provisions for Streetscape Edge Treatments, or is a freestanding structure used to enunciate an entrance, intersection, or gateway.
Plan.
A. As-Built Plan. A plan prepared by a Surveyor or Professional Engineer depicting dimensions and locations of all improvements as actually constructed.
B. Final Plan. A complete and exact subdivision and/or land development plan, including all supplementary data specified in Section 403 of this Ordinance.
C. Improvement Construction Plan. A complete and exact subdivision and/or land
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 11
§ 202. § 202.
development plan, prepared in accordance with Article V of this Ordinance, the sole purpose of which is to permit the construction of only those improvements required by this Ordinance, as an alternative to guaranteeing the completion of those improvements by a corporate bond or other surety.
D. Lot Add-On Plan. A complete and exact subdivision plan including all supplementary data specified in Section 404 of this Ordinance.
E. Preliminary Plan. A subdivision and/or land development plan including all required supplementary data specified in Section 402 of this Ordinance, showing approximate locations.
F. Record Plan. A final plan which contains the original endorsement of the local municipality and the Planning Commission which is intended to be recorded with the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
G. Sketch Plan. An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale, indicating salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings, with the general layout of a proposal prepared in accordance with Section 401 of this Ordinance.
Planning Commission. The Lititz Borough Planning Commission.
Planning Module for Land Development. A revision to the Borough Official Plan submitted in connection with the request for approval of a subdivision or land development in accordance with DER regulations.
Professional Engineer. See Engineer.
Public Sewer System. A municipal sanitary sewer system approved and permitted by DER and owned by the Sewer Authority or Borough.
Public Water System. A municipal water supply facility approved and permitted by DER and owned by the Borough or a water supply facility owned by a public utility and operated in accordance with a certificate of public convenience granted by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.
Quadrat. A circular or square plot of a given area used, for wetlands delineation purposes, to determine the dominant plant species within a site.
Record Drawings. Set of prints of the original facilities showing those changes made during the construction process.
Recorder of Deeds. The Recorder of Deeds in and for Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 12
§ 202. § 202.
Redevelopment. The re-use, alteration, enlargement or extension of a building by 20% or more of the gross floor area of the building, or the alteration, enlargement or extension by 20% or more of any other site characteristics, i.e. parking, pavements or other structures.
Re-subdivision. Any subdivision or transfer of land laid out on a plan and approved by the Borough which changes or proposes to change property lines and/or public rights-of-way in a manner which deviates from the originally approved plan.
Retention Pond. A pond containing a permanent pool of water and designed to store runoff for a given storm event before releasing it at a predetermined rate.
Reverse Frontage Lot. A lot extending between and having frontage on a major street and a minor street with vehicular access solely from the latter.
Right-of-Way. The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a street, road, or other public or semi-public purposes.
Service Lane. A type of thoroughfare servicing non-residential development, typically in the form of a drive.
Sidewalk. A pedestrian thoroughfare that is built and maintained in accordance with the Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance, and Section 603 of this Ordinance.
Sight Distance. The length of street, measured along the centerline, which is continuously visible from any point three and one half (3 1/2) feet above the centerline.
Soil Erosion. The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice, or other geological agents.
Storm Sewer. A system of pipes, conduits, swales, or other similar structures including appurtenant works which carries intercepted runoff, and other drainage, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
Storm Water. Drainage runoff from the land’s surface resulting from precipitation, or from the melting of snow or ice.
Storm Water Management. A program of controls and measures designed to regulate the quantity and quality of storm water runoff from a development while promoting the protection and conservation of groundwaters and groundwater recharge.
Storm Water Management Facilities. Those controls and measures used to affect a storm water management program.
Street. Any public or private right-of-way, set aside for public travel. The word "street" shall include, but not be limited to, the words "road", "highway”, "thoroughfare," “alley,” or "drive". The word "street" includes the entire right-of-way and is not limited to the cartway area. Unless
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 13
§ 202. § 202.
existing streets within the Borough are officially classified, the following general classifications will prevail:
A. Access Drive. A private drive providing access between a street and a parking compound.
B. Alley. A minor right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, primarily for service access to the back or side of properties.
C. Arterial Street; Highway. A street or road which is used primarily for fast or heavy traffic including all roads classified as main and secondary highways by the Department of Transportation. Arterial streets include all streets listed as such in the Borough Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
D. Close. An accessway for counterclockwise vehicular travel, within which a green is centered, and around which buildings are located on three sides, and on-street parking is located either parallel to the curb line or in an angled parking arrangement.
E. Collector Street. A street which carries traffic from minor streets to the major system or arterial streets, including the principal entrance or circulation streets of a residential development and all streets within industrial and/or commercial subdivisions or developments. Collector streets include all streets listed as such in the Borough Comprehensive Plan, as amended. Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
F. Driveway. A private drive providing access between a street and a parking area for up to three (3) single units of occupancy.
G. Local Street. A street which is used primarily for access to the abutting properties. Local streets include all streets listed as such in the Borough Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
H. Lane. A private drive providing access between a street and off-street parking facilities for at least three (3) dwelling units, but no more than seventy-six (76) units. Lanes shall provide a secondary means of access to lots, are similar to local access streets, may be designed as one-lane streets, and are generally provided where narrow lot frontages prevent development of other street types. No parking shall be permitted in such areas, and lanes should be designed to discourage through-traffic.
I. Service Lane. A private drive servicing non-residential development.
Street Line. The street line is that line determining the limit of the street or highway right of the public, either existing or contemplated. Where a definite right-of-way width has not been established, the street line shall be assumed to be at a point twenty-five (25) feet from the centerline of the existing street.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 14
§ 202. § 202.
Street Wall. The wall of a building adjoining a sidewalk near the street right-of-way; or architectural elements such as walls, piers, pillars, and colonnades, in lieu of a building wall where an existing building is set back from the Street Wall line.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground including, but not limited to buildings, sheds, manufactured homes, and other similar items. This term includes any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
Structural Soil(s). Soils as described and depicted in the FBC Regulations of Appendix 20.
Subdivider. A developer.
Subdivision. A subdivision of land as defined by the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. Generally as follows: the division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development: Provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
Surveyor. A Professional Land Surveyor licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Tract. One or more lots assembled for the purpose of development under provisions of this ordinance, and the Zoning Ordinance.
Transect. A line along which quadrats are placed at intervals for purposes of identifying and delineating wetlands.
Undeveloped Land. Parcels of land sufficiently sized for future subdivision, and presently in agricultural use, woodland, or a fallow state.
Waiver. (See Modification).
Wastewater Treatment Facility. A system of piping and appurtenances (not including septic tanks or sub-surface disposal systems), whether municipally or privately owned, designed for the collection and transmission of liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions to a central wastewater treatment plant for treatment and discharge.
Water Supply Facility. A system of piping and appurtenances, whether municipally or privately owned, designed for the transmission and distribution of potable water from a centralized water supply or source to residences, commercial building, industrial plants, or institutions (not including individual on-lot wells).
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 15
§ 202. § 202.
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands include, but are not limited to, swamps, bogs, marshes, and wet meadows. Wetlands shall be delineated on all plans in accordance with Section 406 of this Ordinance.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 16
§ 301. § 304.
ARTICLE III
PLAN PROCESSING PROCEDURES
SECTION 301. General. This article sets forth the application requirements for obtaining approval of subdivision and land developments. The form of the various plans referred to in this Article and information required to be forwarded with such plans shall be as specified in Article IV.
SECTION 302. Pre-Application Review (Sketch Plan). Applicants are urged to discuss possible development sites and plans with the Borough Planning Commission prior to formal submission of any plan. The purpose of the pre-application meeting or sketch plan review is to afford the Applicant an opportunity to receive the advice and assistance of the Borough Planning Commission. Submission of a sketch plan is optional and shall not constitute formal filing of a plan with the Borough.
Prospective Applicants submitting a pre-application plan for review by the Planning Commission should generally include those items listed in Section 401 of this Ordinance. Although all the plan information outlined by Section 401 is not required to be shown on the sketch plan, the amount of information actually provided should be proportional to the size and intensity of the proposed activity. Plans shall be considered for informal review and discussion and shall not constitute formal filing of the plan with the Borough. The Applicant shall attempt to follow any comments or concerns of the Planning Commission and staff and attempt to address these items in the preliminary plans.
SECTION 303. Formal Application. All applications for approval of a subdivision plan, land development plan, or improvement construction plan shall be made with the Borough by the Developer filing an Application Form, together with the appropriate plans, studies, reports, supporting data, and required filing fee.
SECTION 304. Acceptance for Filing.
A. Initial Application. All applications shall be submitted to the Borough Secretary at least twenty-one calendar days (21) prior to the next regular meeting of the Borough Planning Commission. Within said twenty-one (21) days the Borough staff shall check the plans and documents to determine if on their face they are in proper form and contain all information required by this Ordinance and report their findings at the next regular meeting of the Borough Planning Commission. At their regular meeting the Borough Planning Commission shall accept the application for filing or reject the application as defective. If defective, the application shall be returned to the Applicant with a statement of rejection. Acceptance for filing shall not, however, constitute a waiver of any deficiencies or irregularities.
B. Amendments or Corrections to an Application. The Borough shall examine amended or corrected applications filed to determine whether such amended or corrected application results in a substantial amendment to the plan or in the filing of a plan so changed as to be considered a new plan. If the Borough determines that the amended or corrected
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 17
§ 304. § 305.
application constitutes a substantial amendment, he shall so inform the Applicant that the Borough shall consider the ninety (90) day review procedure to have been restarted as
of the date of the filing of the substantial amendment. If the Borough determines that the amended or corrected application constitutes a new plan, he shall so inform the Applicant that a new application and new fees are required.
SECTION 305. Preliminary Plan Application.
A. Preliminary Plan Application. With the exceptions noted in Section 308 of this Ordinance, a Preliminary Plan is required for applications which propose new streets, alleys, all land development plans, and subdivision plans of three (3) or more lots. All other plans may be submitted as Final Plans in accordance with Section 306.
1. Preliminary Plans may be filed with the Borough on any business day. However, the Planning Commission may review a plan at a particular meeting only if the plan was filed at least twenty-one (21) calendar days prior to that meeting.
2. In addition to submitting the required material in accordance with Section 305.B, the Applicant shall file with the Borough the required number of copies of plans, supporting information and all filing fees as required by the Borough.
B. Application Requirements. All Preliminary Plan applications shall include the following:
1. Seven (7) complete copies of the Preliminary Plan, plus ten (10) 11’ X 17” copies of all sheets of the Preliminary Plan. One (1) complete copy of the plan shall be submitted to the Borough Engineer prior to or on the same day the submission is delivered to the Borough office. All copies of the plans shall be paper prints. An electronic copy of the submission shall also be provided to the Borough office.
2. Seven (7) copies of all notifications and certifications.
3. Seven (7) copies of the Application Form (see Appendix No. 12).
4. Seven (7) copies of all reports required by Section 402.E, including Architectural Elevations and renderings.
5. One (1) set of the required seven (7) copies of all supporting documents shall be submitted directly to the Borough Engineer as provided for in Section 305.B.1.
6. Three (3) additional copies of the Landscape Plan shall be forwarded to the Lititz Borough Shade Tree Commission for review and comment.
7. One (1) additional copy of the Cover Sheet, Site Plan, Utility Plan, and Turning Movement Diagram shall be forwarded to the Warwick Emergency Services Commission for review and comment.
8. Two (2) additional copies of the Cover Sheet, Utility Plan, and Water & Sewer Details shall be forwarded to the Borough’s Facility Manager for review and comment.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 18
§ 305. § 305.
9. All filing fees required by the Borough.
C. Planning Commission Review Process. At the first meeting of the Planning Commission no action will be taken for most applications. The plan shall be considered for general comments and introduction by the Borough staff. The Planning Commission may elect to take action on any subdivision or land development if deemed to be in order and all review comments from the Borough staff, Borough Engineer, and County Planning Commission are available.
The Planning Commission may discuss the Preliminary Plan application with the developer or his agent at the next regular meeting and will review the application to determine if it meets the requirements set forth in this Ordinance. The Preliminary Plan shall then be submitted by the Planning Commission to the Borough Council together with its analysis and recommendations, including those of the Borough staff and Engineer and the County Planning Commission.
D. Review by the Borough Staff.
1. The Borough Zoning Officer and/or any Borough personnel as directed by the Borough Council shall review the application documents to determine if they are in compliance with this Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance, the Comprehensive Plan, the Downtown Lititz Master Plan and the Borough planning objectives and accepted planning standards. These personnel shall provide comments and recommendations, including written findings when directed by the Borough Council.
2. The Borough Engineer (and the Borough’s Form-Based Codes Reviewing Consultant if Form-Based Code Regulations apply) shall review the application documents to determine compliance with this Ordinance, the Borough Storm Water Management Ordinance, and any other applicable Borough Ordinances, Borough standards and good engineering practices. They shall prepare a written report of their findings and recommendations.
E. Borough Council Review Process. All applications for approval of a plan shall be acted upon by the Borough Council. The Borough Council shall render its decision and communicate it to the applicant not later than the greater of the period of time required by the Municipalities Planning Code or ninety (90) days following the date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission next following the date of application; provided, however, should the said next regular meeting occur more than thirty (30) days following the filing of the application, the said ninety (90) day period shall be measured from the thirtieth (30th) day following the day the application has been filed.
Plans shall be presented by the Borough staff at the regular meeting of the Planning Commission, following acceptance of the plans by the Borough Council. Following complete review of the Planning Commission, including its recommendations, the Borough Council shall place the plan on its agenda for review and action.
F. Notification of Borough Council Action. The decision of the Borough Council shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the Applicant personally or mailed to him at his
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 19
§ 305. § 306.
last known address not later than fifteen (15) days following the decision, or such later date as may be required by the Municipalities Planning Code.
1. When the Application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision shall specify the defects found in the Application and describe the requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of the Ordinance relied upon.
2. Failure of the Borough Council to render a decision and communicate it to the Applicant within the time and in the manner required herein, shall be deemed an approval of the application in terms as presented, unless the Applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in the prescribed manner or presentation of communication of the decision; in which case, failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of presentation of communication shall have like effect.
G. Compliance with the Borough Council Action. If the Borough Council conditions its Preliminary Plan approval upon receipt of additional information, changes and/or notifications, such data shall be submitted and/or alterations noted on two (2) copies of the plan to be submitted to the Borough for approval. Such data shall be submitted, and approved by to the Borough Council within ninety (90) days of their conditional approval, unless the Borough Council grants a waiver by extending the effective time period. If the applicant finds the conditions unacceptable and/or fails to submit revised data within the specified time period, the plan shall be automatically disapproved for the deficiencies outlined by the conditions of approval.
H. Borough Council Approval and Certification. The Borough Council shall acknowledge the satisfactory compliance with all conditions, if any, of the preliminary plan approval at a regularly scheduled public meeting. In addition, at the option of the Applicant, after receipt of Preliminary Plan approval and compliance with all conditions of approval, a Preliminary Plan may be presented to the Borough for acknowledgment through a formal statement on the plan (See Appendix No. 5).
1. Approval of a Preliminary Plan application shall constitute approval of the proposed subdivision and/or land development as to the character and intensity of development and the general arrangement of streets, alleys, lots, structures, and other planned facilities, but shall not constitute Final Plan approval. The Preliminary Plan shall not be recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds.
SECTION 306. Final Plan Application.
A. Prerequisites to Filing Final Plan Application. An application for Final Plan approval may be submitted only after the following, when required as noted, have been completed:
1. The receipt of an unconditional Preliminary Plan approval in accordance with Section 305 of this Ordinance, when a Preliminary Plan approval is required.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 20
§ 306. § 306.
2. The completion of the improvements required by this Ordinance in accordance with the improvement construction plan procedure stated in Section 307 of the Ordinance, when the improvements are not assured by the posting of financial security as provided in Article V of this Ordinance.
B. Final Plan Applications.
1. Final Plans may be filed with the Borough on any business day. However, the Planning Commission will review a plan at a particular meeting only if the plan was filed at least twenty-one (21) days prior to that meeting.
2. In addition to submitting the required material in accordance with Subsection 306. C of this Section, the Applicant shall file with the Borough the required number of copies of plans, supporting information and all filing fees required by the Borough.
3. The Final Plan may be submitted in phases, each section covering a reasonable portion of the entire proposed subdivision as shown on the approved Preliminary Plan; provided that each section, except for the last section, shall contain a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of units of occupancy or the total square footage of non-residential occupancy as depicted on the approved Preliminary Plan.
4. The Borough Council may accept a Final Plan modified to reflect a change to the site or its surroundings which occurs after the Preliminary Plan review. The Borough Council shall determine whether a modified Final Plan will be accepted or whether a new Preliminary Plan shall be submitted.
C. Application Requirements. All Final Plan applications shall include the following:
1. Seven (7) complete copies of the Final Plan, plus ten (10) 11” X 17” copies of all sheets of the Final Plan. One (1) complete copy of the plan shall be submitted to the Borough Engineer prior to or on the same day the submission is delivered to the Borough office. All copies of the plans shall be paper prints. An electronic copy of the submission shall also be provided to the Borough office.
2. Seven (7) copies of all notifications and certifications.
3. Seven (7) copies of the Application Form (see Appendix No. 12).
4. Seven (7) copies of all reports required by Section 405.E.4, including Architectural Elevations and renderings.
5. One (1) set of the required seven (7) copies of all supporting documents shall be submitted directly to the Borough Engineer as provided for in Section 306.C.1.
6. Three (3) additional copies of the Landscape Plan shall be forwarded to the Lititz Borough Shade Tree Commission for review and comment.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 21
§ 306. § 306.
7. One (1) additional copy of the Cover Sheet, Site Plan, Utility Plan, and Turning Movement Diagram shall be forwarded to the Warwick Emergency Services Commission for review and comment.
8. Two (2) additional copies of the Cover Sheet, Utility Plan, and Water & Sewer Details shall be forwarded to the Borough’s Facility Manager for review and comment.
9. All filing fees required by the Borough.
D. Plan Requirements. All Final Plans shall be prepared in conformance with the provisions of Section 403 of this Ordinance.
E. Borough Action.
1. In general, the Planning Commission may review a plan at a particular meeting only if the plan was filed at least twenty-one (21) calendar days prior to that meeting. The Planning Commission shall discuss the Final Plan application with the developer or his agent at a regular meeting and will review the application to determine if it meets the requirements set forth in this Ordinance. The Final Plan application shall be submitted by the Planning Commission, together with their analysis and recommendations, to the Borough Council for consideration.
2. All applications for approval of a Final Plan shall be acted upon by the Borough Council who shall render its decision and communicate it to the Applicant not later than ninety (90) days following the date of the regular meeting of the Borough Council next following the date the application is filed, provided that should the said next regular meeting occur more than thirty (30) days following the filing of the application, the said ninety (90) day period shall be measured from the thirtieth (30th) day following the day the application has been filed.
3. Final Plan approval shall be effective for ninety (90) days from the date of the Borough Council's action on the Final Plan, unless the Borough Council grants a waiver by extending the effective time period of the approval. Within this time period, the Applicant shall meet all conditions of approval, if any; certify plans as specified in Section 306.H of this Ordinance; and record plans as specified in Section 306.I of this Ordinance.
F. Notification of Borough Council Action. The decision of the Borough Council shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the Applicant personally or mailed to him at his last known address not later than fifteen (15) days following the decision. When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of the Ordinance relied upon. Failure of the Borough Council to render a decision and communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in terms as presented, unless the Applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the decision; in which case,
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 22
§ 306. § 306.
failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of presentation of communication shall have like effect.
G. Compliance with Borough Council Action. If the Borough Council conditions its Final Plan approval upon receipt of additional information, changes and/or notifications, such data shall be submitted and/or alterations noted on two (2) copies of the plan to be submitted to the Borough for approval. Such data shall be submitted, and approved by to the Borough Council within ninety (90) days of their conditional approval, unless the Borough Council grants a waiver by extending the effective time period. If the Applicant finds the conditions unacceptable and/or fails to submit revised data within the specified time period, the plan will be automatically disapproved for the deficiencies outlined by the conditions of approval.
H. Final Plan Certification. After the Borough Council's approval of the Final Plan and the required changes, if any, are made, the Applicant shall proceed to prepare two (2) sets of final plans which shall be either (a) mylar or (b) transparent reproductions of the original plan with black line on cloth or stable plastic base film and one (1) set of final plans which shall be a paper copy for the Borough's files. The two (2) transparent copies of the Final Plan shall be certified in the following manner: both final plans shall be presented to the Borough Council for their signatures (See Appendix No. 7). Final plans will not be signed by the Borough Council if submitted more than ninety (90) days from the Borough Council's final approval action, unless the Borough Council grants a waiver by extending the effective time period of the approval.
I. Final Plan Recordation. Upon approval and certification of a final plan, the Applicant shall record the plan in the office of the Recorder of Deeds. Should the Applicant fail to record the Final Plan within ninety (90) days of the Borough Council's Final Plan approval, the Borough Council's action on the plan shall be null and void, unless the Borough Council grants a waiver by extending the effective time period of the approval.
1. The Final Plan shall be filed with the Recorder of Deeds before proceeding with the sale of lots.
2. The Final Plan shall be filed with the Recorder of Deeds before proceeding with the construction of any improvement except as provided for in Section 307 of this Ordinance.
3. No subdivision or land development plan shall be recorded unless it bears the endorsement of the Borough Council.
4. Proof that the Final Plan has been recorded, in a format acceptable to the Borough, shall be submitted to the Borough prior to the sale of lots. The Borough shall issue no permits until this verification is provided. Verification may include the recording receipt from the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds along with the date recorded and the plan book and page number that the plans were recorded in.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 23
§ 306. § 307.
5. An electronic copy of the recorded Final Plan shall be submitted to the Borough. The Borough shall be obliged to protect all proprietary markings and symbols on the Final Plan.
J. Effect of Recording of Final Plan. Recording the Final Plan, after approval of the Borough Council, shall have the effect of an irrevocable offer to dedicate all streets, alleys, and other areas designated for public use, unless reserved by the landowner as provided in Section 403.E.2.e of this Ordinance. However, the approval of the Borough Council shall not impose any duty upon the Commonwealth, County or Borough concerning acceptance, maintenance or improvement of any such dedicated areas or portion of same until the proper authorities of the Commonwealth, County or Borough actually accept same by ordinance or resolution, or by entry, use or improvement.
1. The landowner may place a notation on the Final Plan to the effect that there is no offer of dedication to the public of certain designated areas, in which event the title to such area shall remain with the owner, and neither the Commonwealth, County, Borough, nor any applicable authorities shall assume any right to accept ownership of such land or right-of-way.
SECTION 307. Plans Exempted from Standard Procedures.
A. Procedure for Processing Revised Subdivision and/or Land Development Plans. Any replatting or resubdivision of recorded or unrecorded plans, excluding lot grading plans in subdivisions, shall be considered as a new application and shall comply with all requirements of this Ordinance, except that plans may be changed, provided that in making such changes:
1. No lot or tract of land shall be created that does not meet the minimum design standards required by this Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance, and other applicable Borough regulations.
2. No structure shall be relocated which does not meet the minimum design standards and requirements required by this Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance, and other Borough regulations.
3. No increase is made in the overall density or intensity.
4. The stormwater management facilities are not altered in a manner which affects the discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property or significantly relocates a major stormwater management facility within the project.
5. Street and alley locations and block sizes shall not be changed.
6. The character and land use of the original application shall be maintained.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 24
§ 307. § 307.
B. In every case where a plan alteration conforms to the above, the Applicant shall:
1. Submit to the Borough Council five (5) paper copies of the revised Final Plan, five (5) copies of the application form (See 308.B.1. 308.B.1. Appendix No. 12), plus nine (9) 11" X 17"copies of all sheets of the revised Final Plan. Upon review of the revision, the Borough Council shall, in writing, advise the applicant whether or not the revision complies with the above.
2. If the revision complies, the Applicant shall prepare two (2) plans, which shall be either (a) mylar or (b) a transparent reproduction of the original plan with black line on cloth or stable plastic base film, and which shall specifically identify the alteration(s) to the previously recorded plan.
3. The Applicant shall then submit the plan to the Borough Council for signature as specified in Section 306.H of this Ordinance (See Appendix No. 7).
4. The plans shall then be recorded as specified in Section 306.I of this Ordinance.
C. In addition to submitting the required material, in accordance with Subsection 308.B of this section, the Applicant shall file with the Borough all filing fees.
D. Preliminary/Final Plans. In case of a subdivision plan of not more than three (3) lots, which does not require provisions for a new street, the Applicant may at his discretion concurrently submit Preliminary Plans and Final Plans for action at the Borough Council meeting. All other plans shall be submitted in accordance with Section 305 of this Ordinance. For the purpose of interpreting this Section of the Ordinance, any remaining land shall be considered a lot.
E. Procedure for Processing a Lot Add-On. The lease, conveyance, sale, or transfer of land for the sole purpose of increasing the lot size of an adjacent contiguous lot shall comply with the following lot add-on procedure, provided that the lot add-on does not create additional lots, or result in a nonconformity with the design standards found in Article VI of this Ordinance. In every case where a lot add-on conforms to the above, the application shall comply with the following procedures:
1. The Applicant shall submit to the Borough three (3) paper copies of a lot add-on plan prepared to the standards specified in Section 404 of this Ordinance, five (5) application forms (See Appendix No. 12), and nine (9) 11" X 17"copies of
all sheets of the Lot Add-On Plan. In addition to submitting the required material, the Applicant shall provide all filing fees. Upon review of the revision, the Borough Council shall, in writing, advise the Applicant whether or not
the proposal qualifies as a lot add-on.
2. If the plan qualifies, the Applicant shall prepare two (2) plans for recording, which shall be either (a) mylar or (b) a transparent reproduction of the original plan with black line on cloth or stable plastic base film, and an electronic copy of
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 25
§ 307. § 308.
the recorded plan along with one (1) set of paper copies of the plan for the Borough Council's files. The two (2) transparent copies of the plan shall be certified by the Borough Council (See Appendix No. 8). The Applicant shall record the plans with the Recorder of Deeds. These plans shall be filed with the Recorder of Deeds prior to the execution of a deed for the land.
SECTION 308. Procedure for Requesting Consideration of a Modification of Provisions of This Ordinance.
A. Application Requirements. All requests for modifications shall only be submitted in conjunction with applications for Preliminary Plan or Final Plan approval. All requests shall be in writing (See Appendix No. 14) and shall identify:
1. The specific section of this Ordinance which is requested to be modified.
2. Provisions proposed as an alternate to the requirements.
3. Justification for the modification. The request shall state in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based.
4. The minimum modification of an ordinance requirement that is necessary.
B. Borough Action.
1. The Planning Commission shall schedule a request for a modification for action at a regular meeting which is at least twenty-one (21) calendar days following the filing of the application by the applicant. The Planning Commission will review the request to determine (1) if compliance with the provisions of the Ordinance creates an undue hardship or appears to be unreasonable as it applies to the particular property or (2) if the Applicant demonstrates that an alternative proposal will allow for equal or better results, and take such action as it shall deem necessary or advisable in the public interest.
2. The request for a modification and accompanying documentation shall be submitted by the Planning Commission, together with its analysis and recommendations, to the Borough Council for consideration. All applications for approval of a modification shall be acted upon by the Borough Council who shall render its decision and communicate it to the Applicant, in accordance with the requirements of the Municipalities Planning Code.
C. Notification of Action of Borough Council. After the meeting at which the modification is reviewed, the Borough Council shall send a written notice of the Borough Council's action to the Applicant at his last known address not later than fifteen (15) days following the decision. If the Borough Council denies the request, the Borough Council shall notify the Applicant, in writing, of the justification for denial. If the Borough Council grants the
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 26
§ 308. § 308.
requests, the final plan shall include a note which identifies the specific modification as granted.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 27
§ 401. § 401.
ARTICLE IV
INFORMATION TO BE SHOWN ON OR SUBMITTED WITH SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT PLANS
SECTION 401. Sketch Plans. These plans should include features of the Borough's Comprehensive Plan, such as the future land use plan, thoroughfares plan, community facilities plan, or of any plans of the Borough, including but not limited to, proposed streets, recreation areas, drainage reservation, future schools sites and public areas. A site analysis shall be provided which highlights man-made and natural features. The analysis should including general information pertaining to soil types and stability, wetlands, scenic vistas, water courses, drainage patterns, slope, and transportation patterns and systems including deficiencies of existing roadways, public utilities, recreational facilities, and any other features of the site and nearby areas which may be impacted by the proposed development and land use. The sketch plan shall also include the following specific information:
A. Name and address of the developer (if applicable), landowner, and Applicant.
B. Name of the individual and/or the firm that prepared the plan.
C. Location map with sufficient information to enable the Borough to locate the property.
D. North arrow.
E. Approximate tract boundaries.
F. Name of the municipality or municipalities in which the project is located, including the location of any municipal boundaries if located within 200 feet of the tract.
G. Existing buildings and existing utilities on the lot.
H. Proposed land use; if several land uses are proposed, the location of each land use shall be indicated.
I. Statement explaining the methods of water supply and sewage disposal to be used.
J. Streets on and adjacent to the tract.
K. The proposed street and lot layout.
L. In the case of a land development plan, the proposed location and size of all buildings, parking lots, and other planned features.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 28
§ 402. § 402.
SECTION 402. Preliminary Plans. Preliminary subdivision plans and/or land development plans shall be prepared by an Engineer, Surveyor, or Landscape Architect licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Preliminary Plan shall show, be accompanied by, or be prepared in accordance with the following:
A. Drafting Standards.
1. The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of 10 feet, 20 feet, 30 feet, 40 feet, or 50 feet to the inch.
2. Dimensions shall be in feet and decimals; bearings shall be in degrees, minutes and seconds. Lot line descriptions shall read in a clockwise direction.
3. The survey shall not have an error of closure greater than one (1) foot in ten thousand (10,000) feet.
4. The sheet size shall be no smaller than eighteen by twenty-two (18 x 22) inches and no larger than thirty six by forty eight (36 x 48) inches. If the plan is prepared in two (2) or more sections, a key map showing the location of the sections shall be placed on each sheet. If more than one (1) sheet is necessary, each sheet shall be the same size and numbered to show the relationship to the total number of sheets in the plan (e.g. Sheet 1 of 5). Additionally, provide nine (9) 11" X 17" copies of all sheets of the Preliminary Plan shall be provided.
5. Plans shall be legible in every detail.
6. Plans shall be accurate in every detail. All plan requirements within this section shall be accurately represented in reports, drawings, etc. Failure to provide accurate plans shall result in disapproval of the application.
B. Location and Identification.
1. The proposed project name or identifying title. The plan title must clearly state if it is a Preliminary Plan or Final Plan.
2. Name of the municipality or municipalities in which the project is located, including the location of any municipal boundaries if located within 200 feet of the tract.
3. The name and address of the Applicant, the landowner of the tract (or his authorized agent), the developer/subdivider, and the firm that prepared the plans.
4. The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared the plan, the plan date and the date(s) of all plan revisions.
5. A north arrow, graphic scale and written scale.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 29
§ 402. § 402.
6. The entire existing tract boundary with bearing and distances. (If it is the intention of the landowner to retain a single lot with a lot area in excess of ten (10) acres, the boundary of that lot may be identified as a deed-plotting and may be drawn at any legible scale; if the retained lot has a lot area of ten (10) or less acres, shall be described to the accuracy of the requirements of this Ordinance). In the case of lot add-on plans, the boundary of the receiving lot shall also be identified as a deed plotting and may be drawn at any legible scale.
7. The total acreage of the entire existing tract.
8. The location of existing lot line markers along the perimeter of the entire existing tract.
9. The district, lot size and/or density requirements of the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
10. A location map, drawn to scale, relating the subdivision or land development to at least two (2) intersections of street centerlines, including the approximate distance to the intersection of centerlines of the nearest improved street intersection.
11. Source of title, deed, book, page, plan book (if applicable), and tax map number.
C. Existing Features.
1. Existing contours shall be shown at a minimum vertical interval of one (1) foot for land with average natural slope of three (3) percent or less, two (2) feet for land with average natural slope of three (3) percent and greater Contours shall be accompanied by the location of the bench mark and a notation indicating the datum used. Contours plotted by interpolation of the United States Geological Survey 7.5' mapping shall not be accepted.
2. The names of all adjacent landowners; both adjoining and across existing
rights-of-way along with the plan book record numbers of all previously recorded plans for adjacent properties.
3. The following items when located within two hundred (200) feet of the subject tract:
a. The location and name of existing rights-of-way and cartways for private or public streets, alleys and driveways.
b. The location of the following features and any related right-of-way: sanitary sewer mains, water supply mains, fire hydrants, buildings, and storm water collection, conveyance and management facilities.
c. The location of existing rights-of-way and easements for electric, gas and
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 30
§ 402. § 402.
oil transmission lines, and railroads.
d. Significant environmental or topographic features such as floodplains, wetlands, quarry sites, solid waste disposal areas, historic resources, cemetery or burial sites, archaeologic sites, highly erosive soils, and wooded areas.
4. The following items when located within the subject tract:
a. The location, name and dimensions of existing rights-of-way and cartways for streets, alleys, lanes, service lanes and driveways.
b. The location and size of the following features and related rights-of-way: sanitary sewer mains, water supply mains, fire hydrants, buildings, and storm water management facilities.
c. The location of existing rights-of-way for electric, gas and oil transmission lines, and railroads.
d. The size, capacity and condition of the existing storm water management system and any other facility that may be used to convey storm flows.
e. The location and size of existing on-lot sewage systems and wells.
f. Significant environmental or topographic features such as quarry sites, solid waste disposal areas, historic structures, cemetery or burial sites, archaeologic sites, highly erosive soils, and wooded areas.
g. The location of wetlands and subsequent data or information required by Section 406 of this Ordinance.
h. The location of all floodplains as outlined by the Zoning Ordinance.
i. Any features shown on the Official Map of Lititz Borough.
D. Plan Information.
1. The layout of streets, alleys, lanes, service drives and sidewalks, including cartway and right-of-way widths.
2. The layout of lots with approximate dimensions.
3. Block and lot numbers in consecutive order (e.g. Block "A", Lots 1 through 10; Block "B", Lots 11 through 22).
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 31
§ 402. § 402.
4. The location and configuration of proposed buildings, parking lots, streets, alleys, service lanes, driveways, common open space, recreational areas, and all other significant planned facilities.
5. Total number of lots, units of occupancy, density, and proposed land use. If a mixed use is proposed, the location of each land use.
6. Easements and rights-of-way.
7. Building setback line and building envelope.
8. Identification of buildings proposed to be demolished.
9. Typical street cross-section for each proposed public or private street and typical cross-section for any existing street which will be improved as part of the application. Each cross-section shall include the entire right-of-way width.
10. Street centerline profile for each proposed public or private street shown on the Preliminary Plan including corresponding centerline stationing.
11. The preliminary design of the proposed sanitary sewer mains and water supply mains and facilities. This information shall include the approximate size, vertical location and horizontal location.
12. Storm water management data and plans designed in accordance with the Borough Storm Water Management Ordinance, as amended. This information may be provided on a sheet with other data or on separate sheets and need not necessarily be recorded with the final plan. In the case of any dispute in the methodology used in the design of any storm water management plan and/or in the presentation of such information, the Borough Council shall make the final determination on the design criteria, methodology and form of presentation.
13. A statement on the plan indicating any zoning amendment, special exception, variance, or conditional use approvals, if applicable.
14. A statement on the plan indicating any existing or proposed waivers modifications granted by the Borough Council.
15. Proposed street names.
16. A table indicating the existing zoning district, total tract area, required lot size, required setbacks, required maximum and/or minimum development density, maximum building height and number of lots in the proposed subdivision along with the proposals for each of these parameters.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 32
§ 402. § 402.
17. Where the proposed subdivision or land development is located partially or wholly within an area prone to frequent flooding (either by impoundment or conveyance) as indicated by the flood insurance rate map profiles and supporting data, soil type or local historical record; the developer shall supply the location and elevation of all proposed roads, fills, utilities, buildings, storm water management, and soil erosion control facilities;
18. Location of all percolation test holes, deep probe holes and proposed well locations, if applicable.
19. Clear sight triangles and stopping sight distances for all intersections as described in Section 602.E of this Ordinance.
20. The location of all deciduous trees larger than three (3) inches in caliper and evergreen trees six (6) feet or larger in height, and/or woodlands on the site and location of trees and/or woodland to be removed.
21. Where the Preliminary Plan covers only a part of an intended larger development, a sketch plan of the future development, in a form suitable to the execution of the feasibility report on sewer and water facilities for the unsubmitted part shall be furnished. The street system of the plan under consideration may be subject to review, and the submitted part will be considered in light of adjustments and connections with future streets in the part not submitted.
22. In case of a Preliminary Plan calling for the installation of improvements beyond a five (5) year period, a schedule delineating all proposed phases as well as deadlines within which applications for Final Plan approval of each phase are intended to be filed shall be provided. Each phase in any residential subdivision or land development, except for the last phase, shall contain a minimum of twenty- five (25) percent of the total number of dwelling units as depicted on the Preliminary Plan.
23. An exhibit depicting turning movements of the largest vehicle expected to traverse the site.
24. Proposed lighting.
E. Certificates, Notifications and Reports.
1. Certificates. The following certificates shall be provided on Sheet 1 of the submitted plans:
a. Certificate of Review by the Borough Planning Commission (See Appendix No. 8).
b. Certificate for approval by the Borough Council (See Appendix No. 5).
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 33
§ 402. § 403.
c. Certificate, signature and seal of the Surveyor to the effect that the survey is correct (See Appendix No. 2).
d. Certificate, signature and seal of a Professional Engineer or Landscape Architect, to the effect that the plan is correct (See Appendix No. 1).
e. Certificate, signature and seal of a Professional Engineer or Landscape Architect, indicating compliance with the storm water management provisions of the Borough Storm Water Management Ordinance, as amended (See Appendix No. 3).
2. Notifications.
a. Where the tract described in the application includes any public utility, electric transmission line, gas pipeline, or petroleum product transmission line located within the tract, the Applicant or lessee of such right-of-way shall notify the owner of the right-of-way of his intentions. A note stating any conditions regarding the use of the land, minimum building setback or right-of-way lines shall be included on the plan. This requirement may also be satisfied by submitting a copy of the recorded agreement.
b. Where the land included in the subject application has an agricultural, woodland or other natural resource easement located within the tract, the application shall be accompanied by a letter from the party holding the easement stating any conditions on the use of the land. This requirement may also be satisfied by submitting a copy of the recorded easement.
3. Reports.
a. A hydrologic report as described by Section 402.D.12 and 608 of this Ordinance.
b. A traffic impact report as described in Section 405 of this Ordinance.
c. A wetland report as described in Section 406 of this Ordinance.
d. Copies of all decisions rendered by the Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, as applicable, when the proposed use is permitted by special exception or conditional use, or where a variance has been granted.
F. Filing Fee. The Preliminary Plan shall be accompanied by a check or money order drawn to the order of the Borough in an amount specified on the Fee Schedule adopted by the Borough Council.
SECTION 403. Final Plans. Final subdivision and/or final land development plans shall be prepared by an Engineer, Surveyor, or Landscape Architect licensed to practice in the
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 34
§ 403. § 403.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Final Plan shall be accompanied by, or prepared in accordance with the following:
A. Drafting Standards. The same standards shall be required for a Final Plan as specified for a Preliminary Plan in Section 402.A of this Ordinance. The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of 10 feet, 20 feet, 30 feet, 40 feet, or 50 feet to the inch. Additionally, all plan submissions shall be accompanied by nine (9) 11" X 17"copies of all sheets of the Final Plan.
B. Location and Identification. The same standards shall be required for a Final Plan as specified for a Preliminary Plan in Section 402.B of this Ordinance.
C. Existing Features. The same standards shall be required for a Final Plan as specified for a Preliminary Plan in Section 402.C of this Ordinance.
D. Plan Information.
1. Complete description of the centerline and right-of-way line for all new streets, whether public or private, and alleys. This description shall include distances and bearings with curve segments comprised of radius, tangent, arc, and chord.
2. Lot lines with accurate bearings and distances and lot areas for all parcels. Curve segments shall be comprised of arc, chord, bearings, and distances. Along existing street rights-of-way the description may utilize the existing deed lines or street centerlines; along all proposed street rights-of-way, the description shall be prepared to the right-of-way lines.
3. Block and lot numbers in consecutive order (e.g. Block "A", Lots 1 through 10; Block "B" Lots 11 through 22).
4. The location and configuration of proposed buildings, parking lots, streets, alleys, lanes, service lanes, driveways, recreational areas, and all other significant planned facilities.
5. Total number of lots, units of occupancy, density, and proposed land use. If a mixed use is proposed, the location of each land use.
6. Easements and rights-of-way.
7. Building setback line and building envelope.
8. Identification of buildings proposed to be demolished.
9. Typical street cross-section for proposed public or private streets and alleys and a typical cross-section for any existing street which will be improved as part of the application. Each cross-section shall include the entire right-of-way width.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 35
§ 403. § 403.
10. Final vertical and horizontal alignment for proposed public or private streets and alleys, sanitary sewer, and water distribution systems. All street profiles shall show at least the existing (natural) profile along the centerline, proposed grade at the centerline and the length of all proposed vertical curves for streets. All water distribution and sanitary sewer systems shall provide manhole locations and size and type of material. This information may be provided on separate sheets and is not subject to recording with the final plans.
11. Final street names.
12. Location and material of all permanent monuments and lot line markers, including a note that all monuments and lot markers are set or indicating when they will be set.
13. A detailed grading plan. The grading plan shall include finished grades and ground floor elevations. This information may be provided on separate sheets and is not subject to recording with the final plans.
14. Identification of any lands to be dedicated or reserved for public, semi-public or community use, and any features shown on the Official Map of Lititz Borough.
15. A table indicating the existing zoning district, total tract area, required lot size, required setbacks, required maximum and/or minimum development density, maximum building height, and number of lots and units in the proposed subdivision or land development along with the proposals for each of these parameters.
16. Where the proposed subdivision or land development is located partially or wholly within an area prone to frequent flooding (either by impoundment or conveyance) as indicated by the flood insurance rate map (profiles), soil type or local historical record; the applicant shall supply the location and elevation of all proposed roads, fills, utilities, buildings, storm water management, and soil erosion control facilities.
17. In the case of a plan which requires access to a highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of Transportation, the inclusion of the following plan note:
"A Highway Occupancy Permit is required pursuant to Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the 'State Highway Law', before access to a state highway is permitted. Access to the state highway shall be as authorized by a Highway Occupancy Permit, and the Borough Council' approval of this plan in no way implies that such a permit can be acquired."
18. A statement on the plan indicating the granting of zoning amendment, special exception or variance, if applicable, along with waivers or conditional use approvals granted by the Borough Council.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 36
§ 403. § 403.
19. Storm water management data and plans designed in accordance with the Lititz Borough Storm Water Management Ordinance, as amended. This information may be provided on a sheet with other data or on separate sheets and need not necessarily be recorded with the final plan. In the case of any dispute in the methodology used in the design of any storm water management plan and/or in the presentation of such information, the Borough Council shall make the final determination on the design criteria, methodology and form of presentation.
20. A complete Landscape Plan, prepared by a Landscape Architect, showing the location, size and type of all plant material required by provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or any other applicable Borough regulations, including but not limited to, screening, buffer planting, parking lot landscaping, replacement trees, and street trees. The Landscape Plan shall be provided on a separate sheet or sheets and shall include all plans, narratives, notes, sketches, diagrams, plant lists, details, etc. required by this Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance, and other applicable ordinances.
21. Clear sight triangles and stopping sight distances for all intersections as described in Section 602.F of this Ordinance.
22. The location of all deciduous trees larger than three (3) inches in caliper and evergreen trees six (6) feet or larger in height, and/or woodlands on the site and location of trees and/or woodland to be removed.
23. A detailed schedule of inspections, as generally outlined by Section 505 of this Ordinance, which is tailored for the site under consideration.
24. A tabulation of the number of parking spaces provided indicating that the number provided complies with the Zoning Ordinance.
25. An exhibit depicting turning movements of the largest vehicle expected to traverse the site.
26. Proposed lighting.
E. Certificates, Notifications and Reports.
1. Certificates. The following certificates shall be provided on Sheet 1 of the submitted plans:
a. Certificate, signature and seal of a Professional Engineer or Landscape Architect, to the effect that the plan is correct (See Appendix No. 1).
b. Certificate, signature and seal of the Surveyor to the effect that the survey is correct. (See Appendix No. 2).
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 37
§ 403. § 403.
c. Certificate, signature and seal of a Professional Engineer, indicating compliance with the provisions of the Borough Storm Water Management Ordinance (See Appendix No. 3).
d. Certificate of review by the Planning Commission (See Appendix No. 8).
e. Certificate for approval by the Borough Council (See Appendix No. 6).
f. A statement duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the landowner, certifying that the subdivision or land development shown on the plan is the act and the deed of the owner; that all those signing are all the owners of the property shown on the survey and plan; that they desire the same to be recorded as such, and that all streets and other property identified as proposed public property are dedicated for public use. (See Appendix No. 4). This shall be dated following the last change or revision to said plan.
g. Certification of review by the County Planning Commission (See Appendix No. 9).
2. Notifications.
a. Notification from DEP that approval of the sewer facility plan revision (plan revision module for land development) or supplement has been granted or notice from DEP that such approval is not required.
b. Where the tract described in the subject application includes any public utility, electric transmission line, gas pipeline, or petroleum product transmission line located within the tract, the applicant or lessee of such right-of-way shall notify the owner of the right-of-way of his intentions. A note stating any condition regarding the use of the land, minimum building setback or right-of-way lines shall be included on the plan. This requirement may also be satisfied by submitting a copy of the recorded agreement.
c. Where the land included in the subject application has an agricultural, woodland or other natural resource easement located within the tract, the application shall be accompanied by a letter from the party holding the easement stating any conditions on the use of the land. This requirement may also be satisfied by submitting a copy of the recorded easement.
d. Notification from the Borough, Postmaster, and County-Wide
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 38
§ 403. § 403.
Communications that the proposed street names are acceptable.
e. A note placed on the plan indicating any area that is not to be offered for dedication, if applicable.
f. Written notice from the Borough Engineer that all proposed improvements have been designed to the standards of the Borough and that financial guarantees in a form suitable to the Borough Council have been received. (See Appendices No. 12 and 13 and Article V). When the Applicant
posts financial guarantee in lieu of completion of the improvements, the Final Plan shall be accompanied by a completed improvement guarantee agreement. General examples of these agreements are provided in Appendix No. 19.
g. Such written notices of approval as required by this Ordinance, including written notices approving the water supply systems, sanitary sewage systems and storm water runoff to adjacent properties.
h. The submission of a controlling agreement in accordance with Section
602.I when an application proposes to establish a street which is not offered for dedication to public use.
i. Notification from the appropriate state and federal agencies that permits have been issued, or are not required, for any proposed activities within streams, wetlands or any other state or federally regulated body of water. These permits include, but are not limited to, Floodplain Encroachment Permits, Dam Safety Permits, Earth Disturbance Permits, Stream Encroachment Permits, and General Permits. When the Final Plan is submitted in sections, the above notifications for all applicable activities on the entire site, shown on the approved Preliminary Plan shall be provided upon submittal of the first final phase of the project.
j. A Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Highway Occupancy Permit for any storm water management facility proposed within the right- of-way of a state road.
k. Receipt of approvals or permits from the appropriate agency for the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan.
3. Reports.
a. A final hydrologic report as described by the Borough Storm Water Management ordinance, as amended.
b. A traffic evaluation report as described in Section 405 of this Ordinance.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 39
§ 403. § 404.
c. A wetland report as described in Section 406 of this Ordinance.
d. Copies of all decisions rendered by the Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, as applicable, when the proposed use is permitted by special exception or conditional use, or where a variance has been granted.
4. Additional information required for Traditional Neighborhood Development.
a. As per Chapters 51-54, Title 68 (Real and Personal Property) of the Unconsolidated Pennsylvania Statutes, persons owning an interest in a Planned Community, including Traditional Neighborhood Development, which includes subdivisions that have common and/or controlled facilities and/or real estate (e.g., private streets – service lanes, stormwater facilities, open space – recreational lands and facilities, etc.) are required to pay an annual assessment for the administration, improvement, insurance, maintenance, repair, taxes, and use of common and/or controlled facilities and/or real estate. In these Planned Communities, persons may also be subject to such other covenants, easements, or restrictions. In these situations, the developer, Declarant, and person(s) holding an interest in the affected lands need to record a formal Declaration and By-law, consistent with the requirements of the applicable statutes, for the administration and management of the Homeowners Association. The municipality and Applicant shall ensure that the applicable generic draft agreements, by-law, covenants, Declaration, and deeds are prepared and recorded in keeping with the applicable statutes.
b. Open Space Lands Ownership and Management Plan for all subdivisions and land developments which include open space lands. Using the final plan as a base map, the boundaries, acreage and proposed ownership of all proposed greenway areas shall be shown. In addition, the Applicant shall also submit an Open Space Ownership and Management Plan detailing the entities responsible for maintaining various elements of the property, and describing management.
F. Filing Fee. The final plan shall be accompanied by a check or money order drawn to the order of the Borough in an amount specified on the fee schedule adopted by the Borough Council.
SECTION 404. Lot Add-On Plans. Lot add-on plans shall be prepared by a qualified person and shall include the following information:
A. Drafting Standards. The same standards shall be required for a lot add-on plan as specified for a Preliminary Plan in Section 402.A of this Ordinance.
B. Location and Identification. The same standards shall be required for a lot add-on plan as specified for a Preliminary Plan in Section 402.B of this Ordinance.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 40
§ 404. § 405.
C. Existing Features. The same standards shall be required for a lot add-on plan as specified for a Preliminary Plan in Section 402.C of this Ordinance.
D. Plan Information. The same standards shall be required for a lot add-on plan as specified for a Final Plan in Section 403.D of this Ordinance.
E. Certificates. The following certificates shall be provided on Sheet 1 of the submitted plans.
1. Certificate, signature and seal of a Surveyor to the effect that the survey is correct (See Appendix 2).
2. Certificate for approval by the Borough Council (See Appendix No. 8).
3. A statement, duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the landowner, to the effect that the subdivision or land development shown on the plan is the act and the deed of the owner, that all those signing are all the owners of the property shown on the survey and plan, and that they desire the same to be recorded as such (See Appendix No. 4).
4. Certification of review by the County Planning Commission (See Appendix No. 10).
F. Filing Fee. The plan shall also be accompanied by a check or money order drawn to the Borough in an amount specified on the Fee Schedule adopted by the Borough Council.
SECTION 405. Traffic Impact Study. All residential developments or subdivisions containing twenty (20) or more dwelling units and all non-residential subdivisions or land developments (with the exception of agricultural development) with buildings containing in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of space shall provide studies and reports in accordance with the requirements of this Section. All applicants with developments which do not meet the above stated criteria shall submit the information required in Section 405.B.
A. The Applicant shall be responsible for assessing the traffic impacts associated with a proposed land development which meets any condition set forth above. The Borough will review the Applicant's assessment and supply available data upon request to aid the Applicant in preparing the study. The Applicant shall be responsible for all data collection efforts required in preparing a traffic impact study including peak period turning movement counts. In addition, the Applicant shall be responsible for ensuring that any submitted land development plans meet the minimum state and local standards for geometric design. The study shall be conducted only by a Professional Engineer that has verifiable experience in traffic engineering. Upon submission of a draft study, the
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 41
§ 405. § 405.
Borough may review the data sources, methods and findings and provide comments in written form. The Applicant will then have the opportunity to incorporate necessary revisions prior to submitting a final study.
B. Traffic Impact Study Contents. A traffic impact study prepared for a specific land development proposal shall follow the basic format shown below. Additions or modifications should be made for a specific site, when appropriate. This basic format allows for a comprehensive understanding of the existing site, future conditions without the proposed use and the impacts associated with the proposed land development plan. Following is a brief narrative for each section of a traffic impact study.
1. Introduction. This section shall identify the land use and transportation setting for the site and its surrounding area.
a. Site and study area boundaries. A brief description of the size of the land parcel, general terrain features, legal right-of-way lines of the highway, and the location within the jurisdiction and the region should be included in this section. In addition, the roadways that afford access to the site and are included in the study area shall be identified. The exact limits of the study area shall be based on engineering judgment and an understanding of existing traffic conditions at the site. In all instances, however, the study limits shall be mutually agreed upon by the developer, its engineer and the Borough.
b. Site description. This section should contain a brief narrative which describes the proposed land development in terms of its function, size and near and long term growth potential. This description should be supplemented by a sketch which clearly shows the proposed land development within the site boundaries, its internal traffic circulation pattern and the location and orientation of its proposed access points.
c. Existing and proposed site uses. The existing and proposed uses of the site shall be identified in terms of the various zoning categories in the jurisdiction. In addition, identify the specific use on which the request is made since a number of uses may be permitted under the existing ordinances.
d. Existing and proposed nearby uses. A complete description of the existing land uses in the vicinity of the site as well as their current zoning shall be included. The Applicant should also state the proposed uses for adjacent land, if known. This latter item is especially important where large tracts of underdeveloped land are in the vicinity of the site and within the prescribed study area.
e. Existing and proposed roadways and intersections. Within the study area, describe existing roadways and intersections (geometrics and traffic signal
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 42
§ 405. § 405.
control) as well as improvements contemplated by government agencies.
2. Analysis of Existing Conditions. This section shall describe the results of the volume/capacity analysis to be completed for the roadways and intersections in the vicinity of the site under existing conditions as well as any data collection efforts that are required.
a. Daily and peak hour(s) traffic volumes. Provide schematic diagrams depicting daily and peak hour(s) traffic volumes for roadways within the study area. Turning movement and mainline volumes are to be presented for the three (3) peak hour conditions (AM, PM and site generated) while only mainline volumes are required to reflect daily traffic volumes. Include the source and/or method of computation for all traffic volumes.
b. Volume/capacity analyses. Utilizing techniques described in the Highway Capacity Manual or derivative nomographs, include an assessment of the relative balance between roadway volumes and capacity. Perform the analysis for existing conditions (roadway geometry and traffic signal control) for the appropriate peak hours.
c. Level of service. Based on the results obtained in the previous section, levels of service (A through F) are to be computed and presented. This section should also include a description of typical operating conditions at each level of service.
3. Analysis of Future Conditions Without Development. This section shall describes the anticipated traffic volumes in the future and the ability of the roadway network to accommodate this traffic without the proposed zoning, subdivision, or land development request. The future year(s) for which projections are made will be specified by the Borough and will be dependent on the timing of the proposed development.
a. Daily and peak hour(s) traffic volume. Clearly indicate the method and assumptions used to forecast future traffic volumes in order that the Borough can duplicate these calculations. The schematic diagrams depicting future traffic volumes will be similar to those described in Section 2.a. in terms of locations and times (daily and peak hours).
b. Volume/capacity analyses. Describe the ability of the existing roadway system to accommodate future traffic (without site development). If roadway improvements or modifications are committed for implementation, present the volume/capacity analysis for these conditions.
c. Levels of service. Based on the results obtained in the previous section, determine levels of service (A through F).
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 43
§ 405. § 405.
4. Trip Generation. Identify the amount of traffic generated by the site for daily and the three (3) peak conditions. Trip generation shall be based on published trip rates in the latest edition of Trip Generation, Institute of Transportation Engineers.
5. Trip Distribution. Identify the direction of approach for site generated traffic for the appropriate time periods. As with all technical analysis steps, the basic method and assumptions used in this work shall be clearly stated in order that the Borough can replicate these results.
6. Traffic Assignment. Describe the utilization of study area roadways by site generated traffic. The proposed traffic volumes shall then be combined with anticipated traffic volumes from Section 3 to describe mainline and turning movement volumes for future conditions with the site developed as the Applicant proposes.
7. Analysis of Future Conditions With Development. This section shall describes the adequacy of the roadway system to accommodate future traffic with development of the site.
a. Daily and peak hour(s) traffic volumes. Provide mainline and turning movement volumes for the highway network in the study area as well as driveways and internal circulation roadways for the appropriate time periods.
b. Volume/capacity analyses. Perform a volume/capacity analysis for the appropriate peak hours for future conditions with the site developed as proposed, similar to Sections 2.b. and 3.b.
c. Levels of service. As a result of the volume/capacity analysis, compute and describe the level of service on the study area roadway system.
d. Final design must address both traffic flow and traffic safety considerations to provide safe operational characteristics.
8. Recommended Improvements. In the event that the analysis indicates unsatisfactory levels of service will occur on study area roadways, a description of proposed improvements to remedy deficiencies should be included in this section. These proposals would not include committed projects by the state and local jurisdictions which were described in Section 1 and reflected in the analysis contained in Sections 2 and 3.
a. Proposed recommended improvements. Describe the location, nature and extent of proposed improvements to assure sufficient roadway capacity. Accompanying this list of improvements are preliminary cost estimates, sources of funding, timing, and likelihood of implementation.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 44
§ 405. § 406.
b. Volume/capacity analyses. Another iteration of the volume/capacity analysis will be described which demonstrates the anticipated results of making these improvements.
c. Levels of service. As a result of the revised volume/capacity analysis presented in the previous section, present levels of service for the highway system with improvements.
9. Conclusion. The last section of the report shall be a clear concise description of the study findings. This concluding section shall serve as an executive summary.
SECTION 406. Wetlands Study.
A. The Applicant shall submit five (5) copies of a wetland study with the submittal of all subdivision and land development plans. The purpose of the study shall be to determine the presence and extent of wetlands on the site.
B. The study shall be performed by a qualified wetland scientist. Qualified individuals should possess a minimum of a bachelor's degree in hydrology, geology, biology, botany, zoology, ecology, or environmental sciences. The Borough reserves the right, in as much as no recognized certification program exists for wetland scientists, to determine the qualification of those preparing wetland delineations. Should a state or federal wetland scientist certification program be established, the Borough shall consider only those certified individuals qualified to perform delineations.
C. Requirements for Wetland Studies:
1. Delineations should follow the procedures outlined in the 1989 Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, and any subsequent amendments.
2. Delineations shall be supported by reports. The report shall contain the following sections:
a. Introduction. Description of the physical features of the site, its location and the proposed plans for the site.
b. Methods. Description of the methods used for the wetlands survey, with particular emphasis on any deviation from the outlined federal method. Relevant information includes the date of the field studies, the number of transects and plots used, the size of vegetation quadrants employed, the size of soil pits used, taxonomic references used, and the disposition of any voucher specimens.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 45
§ 406. § 406.
c. Results and Discussion. Description of the findings of the study. Soils, vegetation and hydrology for wetland and upland areas of the site shall be discussed. Any problem areas shall be thoroughly treated.
d. Conclusions. The extent of wetlands on the site shall be discussed. The impact of the proposed project on these wetlands shall also be considered.
3. Appendices or tables that shall be included in the report include:
a. Site location map (USGS 7.5' Quadrangle shall suffice).
b. NWI map.
c. Soil survey map with soil descriptions.
d. Data sheets for each plot.
e. Wetland boundary map. Wetland boundaries shall be surveyed by a Surveyor and shown on a plan of appropriate scale. The limits of the wetland study shall be clearly shown. The plan shall also show the location of all plots and/or transects used in the study, the date of the delineation, a statement of the method used for the study, the name of the consulting firm which performed the delineation, the name of the Surveyor, and a disclaimer statement indicating no wetland boundary is considered jurisdictional until approved by DEP and COE.
f. Color photos of wetlands areas on the site, with locations and directions of view keyed to the wetland boundary map.
g. Resumes of the wetland scientist(s) who performed the delineation.
D. For sites on which no wetlands occur, an abbreviated report may be submitted. The abbreviated report shall contain the introductory material, the methods section and a discussion of the result of the study. Site location, NWI and soil maps shall also be provided.
E. All subdivision plans shall contain notes for future lot owners. The wetland boundary on each lot shall be clearly marked. Each lot which contains wetlands, or to which access may be restricted by wetlands, shall have a note which states state and federal laws require permits for all activities which result in a deposition of fill into delineated wetlands. The note shall also state that refusal of such a permit may restrict some uses of all or portions of the lot.
F. Compensatory mitigation projects required as part of state or federal permits shall be
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 46
§ 406. § 406.
shown on the subdivision plans. Future lot owners whose property encompasses all or part of a mitigation area shall be notified that the portion of their property which includes the mitigation area may not be altered, and is considered a jurisdictional wetland by the state and federal governments. Lot owners may be responsible for maintenance of mitigation areas. In order to help ensure the long-term viability of wetland mitigation efforts, the Borough discourages multiple ownership of mitigation areas. Ownership by one individual or a Homeowners Association is encouraged. Owners of the wetland mitigation areas shall be clearly identified to the Borough.
G. The Borough reserves the right to reject any submitted wetland delineations. Should the Borough feel the actual wetland area differs from that shown on the subdivision or land development plan, the Borough has the right to secure, at the developer's expense, qualified personnel to check the delineation and redraw the boundary as necessary. Should the developer subsequently disagree with the Borough's delineation, a jurisdictional delineation by DEP and COE shall be requested. Any charges for the jurisdictional delineation shall be the responsibility of the developer.
H. Where the study shows the existence of wetland areas, the delineated boundary shall be properly fenced off to prevent encroachment. Snow fence or other acceptable material shall be used (the use of silt fence is not acceptable). The fence shall be properly installed, at a minimum distance of five (5) feet outside the delineated boundary, prior to any construction or issuance of building permits. The fence shall be properly maintained until all occupancy permits have been issued and/or for the extent of all construction. The applicant shall obtain any necessary Zoning Hearing Board approvals for fence within the floodplain.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 47
§ 501. § 501.
ARTICLE V
IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION ASSURANCES
SECTION 501. Completion of Improvements or Guarantee Thereof Prerequisite to Final Plan Approval.
A. No plan shall be finally approved unless the streets and alleys shown on such plan have been improved as may be required by this Ordinance, and any walkways, curbs, gutters, street lights, fire hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, storm water management facilities, or other improvements as may be required by this Ordinance have been installed in accordance with this Ordinance, except that the surface course of streets and alleys shall not be completed until such time as ninety (90) percent of the lots in the subdivision or land development have been improved by the construction of a residential dwelling, commercial structure, industrial structure, or other non-residential structure. For the purpose of this article, an improved lot shall be considered completed when all building construction and site improvements are finished to the point that in the opinion of the Borough, a Certificate of Occupancy could be issued. In lieu of completion of the surface course of streets and alleys as well as in lieu of completion of other improvements required as a condition for Final Plan approval of a plan, at the discretion of the developer, such developer may deposit with the Borough a letter of credit, or other financial security authorized by the Municipalities Planning Code and acceptable to the Borough Council in an amount equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the estimated cost of the required improvements at a time ninety (90) days following the date scheduled for completion of the respective improvements by the developer. The estimated cost of the surface course shall be computed separately from the estimated cost of completing the other improvements and shall be based upon the developer's projected timetable for completion of the development.
B. The amount of financial security required by the Borough shall be based upon an estimate of the cost of the improvements, submitted by a developer and prepared by a Professional Engineer and certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The Borough, upon the recommendation of the Borough Engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the developer and the Borough are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer licensed as such in this Commonwealth and chosen mutually by the Borough and the developer. The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the Borough and the developer.
C. Annually the Borough may adjust the amount of required financial security by redetermining the estimated cost for completion of the uncompleted improvements as of the expiration of the ninetieth (90th) day after either date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the Borough may require
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 48
§ 501. § 502.
the developer to post additional security in order to insure that the financial security equals one hundred ten (110) percent of the estimated cost of the Borough completing the improvements at a time ninety (90) days following the date scheduled for completion or alternatively reduce the required security so that it equals such amount. Any additional security shall be posted by the developer within thirty (30) days after being notified of the same. The amount of financial security required by the Authority shall be computed in accordance with the Authority's rules and regulations.
D. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the party posting the financial security may request the Borough to release or authorize the release from time to time, such portions of the financial security necessary for the payment to the contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such request shall be in writing addressed to the Borough Council, and the Borough Council shall have forty-five (45) days from the receipt of such request to allow the Borough Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Borough Council that such portion of the work has been completed in accordance with the approved plan. Upon such certification, the Borough Council shall authorize release from the required financial security of an amount as estimated by the Borough Engineer as representing the value of the work completed.
E. The value of the work completed shall be determined by subtracting one hundred ten
(110) percent of the estimated cost of the completion of the remaining uncompleted work from the total amount of security deposited.
F. At such time as ninety (90) percent of the lots in the subdivision have been improved as set forth above, or if at the expiration of three (3) years from the date all of the improvements excepting the surface course has been completed, less than ninety (90) percent of the lots have been so improved, the Borough may notify the developer to complete the surface course within sixty (60) days from the date of such notice. In computing the sixty (60) day requirement, the period from October 1 to April 1 shall not be counted.
G. If at the time the surface course is completed, ninety (90) percent of the lots are not improved as set forth above, the developer must post with the Borough financial security in an amount equal to fifteen (15) percent of the reasonable cost of the surface course as security to guarantee that damages to the road or street will not occur during the completion of the improvements on the unimproved lots in such developer's subdivision or land development. The Borough shall hold such financial security and utilize it to pay for the repair of any damage occurring to the road during the period between the commencement of improvements on any particular unimproved lot and the completion of such improvements irrespective of whether or not it can be established that the damage to the road was caused by contractors or other persons working in and about the construction of such improvements. The financial security shall be in a form acceptable to the Borough.
SECTION 502. Effect of Plan Recording on Dedication and Reservations. Recording of the final plan after approval of the Borough Council has the effect of an irrevocable offer to:
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 49
§ 502. § 503.
A. Dedicate all streets and other public ways to public use, unless such streets are indicated on said plan as private streets.
B. Dedicate all neighborhood parks and all areas shown on the plan as being local recreation Sites and open space to public use.
SECTION 503. Release from Financial Security.
A. When the developer has completed all of the improvements as shown on the final plans, the developer shall notify the Borough Council, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the aforesaid improvements, enclosing therewith certification by the engineer responsible for the design of the improvements that they have been installed as designed, and shall send copies of the notice and certification to the Borough Engineer. The Borough Council shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the Borough Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The Borough Engineer shall thereupon file a report, in writing, with the Borough Council and shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed within thirty (30) days after receipt by the Borough Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Borough Council, said report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said improvements or any portion thereof shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Borough Engineer, said report shall contain a statement of the reasons for such non-approval or rejection. Improvements shall not be considered completed unless the developer can demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance, and all other applicable ordinances, statutes and regulations. Improvements shall also not be considered complete until As-Built Plans of all improvements to be dedicated to the Borough and of all streets, whether or not such streets shall be dedicated, have been submitted to the Borough. If storm water infiltration is proposed, post construction infiltration testing shall be conducted prior to the release of financial security.
B. The Borough Council shall notify the developer within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the engineer's report, in writing by certified or registered mail, of its action with relation thereto. If the Borough Council or Borough Engineer fails to comply with the time limitation provisions contained herein, or such time limitations as contained in the Municipalities Planning Code, whichever requirements shall contain a longer time period for action by the Borough, all improvements will be deemed to have been approved and the developer's posted financial security shall be released.
C. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Borough Council, the developer shall proceed to complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
D. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the developer's right to contest or question by legal proceedings or otherwise any determination of the Borough Council or Borough Engineer.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 50
§ 504. § 505.
SECTION 504. Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements. In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been installed as provided in this Ordinance or in accordance with the approved Final Plan, the Borough Council may enforce any letter of credit or other financial security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If proceeds of such financial security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by said security, the Borough Council may, at its option, install such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action or recover the monies necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements. All the proceeds, after deducting the costs of collection, whether resulting from the financial security or from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer or both, shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such security, and not for any other Borough purpose.
SECTION 505. Inspection During Construction. The Borough shall inspect the improvements during construction. The developer shall pay the cost of any such inspection in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the Municipalities Planning Code. The developer shall provide at least twenty-four (24) hours notice prior to the start of construction of any improvements that are subject to inspection. All inspections of completed items shall be requested, in writing, at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the inspection time and date.
The following phases of site construction shall have mandatory inspection. This list of phases may be amended by mutual agreement of the Borough and developer when the site requires special construction procedures. The inspection schedule shall be recorded with the Final Plan or shown on the approved improvement construction plan.
A. General Site Construction.
1. Upon completion of preliminary site preparation including stripping of vegetation, stockpiling of topsoil and construction of temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control devices.
2. Upon completion of rough grading, but prior to placing topsoil, permanent drainage, or other site development improvements and groundcovers.
3. During the construction of permanent storm water management and BMP facilities. All storm sewers, culverts, etc. shall be inspected prior to backfilling.
4. During construction of sanitary sewers and appurtenances, all sanitary sewers shall be constructed and inspected in accordance with Borough specifications.
5. Upon the final completion of permanent storm water management and BMP facilities, including the establishment of ground covers and plantings.
6. After review of the As-Built drawings, required by Section 508 of this Ordinance, but prior to final release of the financial guarantee for completion of final grading, vegetative controls required by the BMP standards, or other site restoration work.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 51
§ 505. § 507.
B. Street Construction.
1. Preparation of Road Subgrade. At the time of this inspection, the subgrade shall be proof rolled and the proposed crown and grade should be checked. A developer's/contractor's representative shall accompany the observer when the crown and grade are checked. Proof rolling shall be performed with a fully loaded, tandem-axle dump truck. This inspection shall occur prior to any stone subbase being placed.
2. Placement and Compaction of Road Subbase. At the time of this inspection, the depth of subbase shall be checked after compaction, the subbase shall be proof rolled in the same manner as the subgrade and the crown and grade shall be checked again. This inspection shall occur prior to any binder or base course being placed.
3. Placement and Compaction of the Binder/Base Course. At the time of this inspection, the depth of the binder/base course shall be checked, ambient temperature shall be monitored (this is important in early spring and late fall days when the temperature can go below acceptable limits, in accordance with PennDOT specifications, Form 408, as amended), the temperature of the bituminous material shall be checked (if possible), and it is recommended that copies of the weight slips for each truckload are obtained. The crown and grade shall also be checked again. This inspection shall occur prior to the wearing course being placed.
4. Placement and Compaction of the Wearing Course. At the time of this inspection, the guidelines for the placement and compaction of the binder/base course shall be followed.
C. In addition to the above outlined inspections, additional inspections shall be made at the request of the developer for reduction of financial securities. Random inspections shall be made at the frequency desired by the municipality. At the time of any of the above listed inspections, all ongoing construction (i.e. storm drainage, sanitary sewer, water, erosion control, etc.) shall also be checked for compliance with the approved plans and the findings reported. Since the above inspections are mandatory, requests for reduction of financial guarantee shall be submitted to coincide with the above inspections.
SECTION 506. Maintenance of Streets. The developer shall maintain all streets and alleys in the subdivision or development in travelable condition, including the prompt removal of snow and ice therefrom, until such time as the streets and alleys are accepted by the Borough as part of the Borough street system; or, if such streets are not to be dedicated, until a Homeowners Association or other entity responsible for the maintenance of the streets and alleys has been formed.
SECTION 507. Construction In Accordance With Plans. All streets, alleys and drainage facilities shall be constructed in strict accordance with the approved plans and no changes shall
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 52
§ 507. § 508.
be effected unless the same receive the written authorization of the Borough. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, the Borough may require changes during the construction stage where onsite conditions, in the opinion of the Borough, or its duly designated representative, indicates that the adverse effect of stormwater runoff and/or the adverse effect to the roadbed and/or road surface may be minimized by such changes.
SECTION 508. As-Built Plan. At such time as the construction of the road is found to meet all requirements of this Ordinance and the approved plans, as modified, the Developer, prior to offering the road for dedication, shall submit to the Borough a mylar and, an electronic version of the As-Built Plan of the road and any stormwater drainage facilities which shall form a part of the permanent records of the Borough. The plan shall be prepared by using the approved Final Plan as a base plan and shall be made available to the Borough prior to the final inspection of the project. As-Built Plans shall show the following:
A. Actual location of all concrete monuments which were set at all angle breaks, points of curvature and tangents around the perimeter of the total tract. When the outside perimeter of a tract falls within or along an existing road right-of-way, then the right-of-way of that roadway shall be monumented at the above referenced points.
B. Actual location of all iron pins or drill holes in curbs for all individual lot lines.
C. Actual cul-de-sac radii.
D. Actual location of cartway centerline versus right-of-way centerline.
E. Actual location of floodplain by elevation and dimension from property line.
F. Actual location and cross section of swales and accompanying easements.
G. Actual horizontal and vertical location of storm water management sanitary sewer and waterline facilities including type and size of storm drainage sanitary and waterline pipes.
H. Detention basin:
1. Actual contours of the detention basin.
2. Actual outlet structure details including type, size and inverts of outlet pipes.
3. Actual elevation of the embankment and emergency spillway.
4. A table showing the stage/storage/discharge curve for the constructed conditions.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 53
§ 509. § 510.
SECTION 509. Dedication. In case of a street or alley through residential properties, at such time as ninety (90%) percent of the lots fronting on the street have received occupancy permits, or in the case of a street through commercial, industrial or other non-residential developments, when lots having ninety (90%) percent of the footage have received occupancy permits, the Developer may offer the Borough a deed of dedication, accompanied by a fee to cover recording costs and costs of preparing the Resolution of Acceptance and recording of the same. If the deed is found to be in proper order and there are no violations of any provision of this Ordinance, the Borough Council, may at its sole discretion, adopt a Resolution accepting the street or alley and or in applicable cases, drainage facility. No street or alley, or in applicable cases, drainage facility, shall be considered finally accepted by the Borough until the deed has been recorded and filed with the applicable offices for filing for Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. Notwithstanding final acceptance of the street, alley or drainage facility, the developer shall remain responsible for maintenance of the same, snow removal excepted, for a period of eighteen (18) months from the date of final acceptance.
SECTION 510. Development Agreement. Final Plan approval may, at the sole discretion of Borough Council, be subject to the signing of a Development Agreement prepared by the Borough Solicitor pertaining to the laying out of streets, service lanes, or alleys and the construction of all improvements including necessary grading, paving, curbs, soil erosion and sediment control, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, fire hydrants, water mains, underground electric facilities, landscaping, and traffic control devices, in accordance with the approved final plans, where such (or some of them) improvements are required as a condition of the approval of the plan by the Borough Council, within the time or times specified in the approval. The agreement may include any other specified conditions or requirements agreed to by the Borough Council and developer and/or owner.
The developer and/or owner shall reimburse the Borough for the legal fee and filing cost incurred for the preparation and recording of this agreement (or memorandum thereof).
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 54
§ 601. § 602.
ARTICLE VI DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION 601. General.
A. Minimum Standards. The standards and requirements contained in this Article, and in the Form-Based Code Regulations in Appendix 20, shall apply as minimum design standards for all subdivision and/or land developments in the Borough, and shall apply to any new development or redevelopment on a property of 8,400 square feet or larger within any zoning district.
B. Compliance with Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Hearing Board Decisions. Whenever the Zoning Ordinance provides that the use proposed by the Applicant for subdivision or land development approval shall constitute a use by special exception or conditional use, or when a variance from the terms of the Zoning Ordinance is required to develop in accordance with the plan, the applicant shall obtain such special exception, variance or conditional use approval from the Borough Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, as applicable, prior to the submission of the preliminary plan. The plan shall be designed and developed in accordance with any conditions which have been imposed upon the grant of such special exception, variance or conditional use by the Borough Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, as applicable.
C. The Demolition regulations of the Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance (§322) shall be applicable to the demolition or demolition by neglect for all structures within the Borough
SECTION 602. Streets, Private Streets, and Driveways.
A. General.
1. Proposed streets and alleys shall conform to Borough and State street and highway plans as have been prepared, adopted and/or filed as prescribed by law.
2. Streets shall be designed with consideration to both existing and planned streets. All streets shall be arranged to conform as closely as possible to the original topography. New streets shall be connected with streets of similar function, to form continuations thereof. Local streets shall be laid out to discourage use by through traffic. Streets shall be laid out to provide convenient and safe access to the property. Where a development abuts an existing or proposed arterial or collector street, the Borough Council may require the use of reverse frontage lots or such other treatment that will provide protection for abutting properties, reduce the number of intersections with the major street and separate the local and through traffic.
3. Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce, satisfactory drainage and suitable building sites.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 55
§ 602. § 602.
4. Half streets, or streets centered upon a boundary line of a tract to be subdivided shall be prohibited. All plans shall be designed to provide for the entire right-of- way and cartway widths.
5. When existing stub streets, temporary cul-de-sac streets, or dedicated or platted areas reserved for future street usage join the tract to be developed, they shall be extended into the site and made part of the proposed street layout. Where a temporary cul-de-sac is being extended, the bulb shall be reconstructed to Borough street specifications, any existing sidewalk extended through the area and the remaining areas shall be regraded and seeded.
6. The extension of existing streets which are presently constructed with a cartway different from current Borough standards shall be provided with a transition area, the design of which is subject to Borough approval.
7. All existing streets at the perimeter and/or through the development shall be reconstructed according to Borough or PennDOT specifications: (1) if an existing street lies at the perimeter of the development, it shall be reconstructed to the centerline of the street; and (2) if an existing street lies through the development, it shall be reconstructed to the full width of the street as required by Borough or PennDOT specifications and design standards.
8. When the proposed development requires construction within an existing street right-of-way, such as sewer, water or storm water lines, the Borough may require construction of a new wearing course along the frontage and/or disturbed area.
9. If lots resulting from original subdivision are large enough to permit re- subdivision or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, adequate rights-of-way for streets and other required improvements shall be reserved as necessary to permit further subdivision and be reflected in the Borough Official Map.
10. As a minimum, all new streets shall be graded to the right-of-way line. All cut and fill banks shall not exceed a maximum of 3:1 slope.
11. Streets shall be designed to preclude or minimize the need for guide rail. The Borough may, however, require guide rail to be placed for protection on embankments when a barrier is indicated as warranted in Design Manual Part 2 Highway Design by PennDOT, as amended. The design and selection of guide rail shall generally be in accordance with the standards in Design Manual Part 2 Highway Design, as amended, however, the Borough shall approve all guide rail systems.
12. Streets and alleys that are extensions of or obviously in alignment with existing streets shall bear the names of the existing streets and alleys. Street and alley names shall not be repeated within the Borough and all street and alley names shall be subject to the approval of the Borough, the Postmaster, and Lancaster County Wide Communications.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 56
§ 602. § 602.
13. Street and alley name signs shall be installed at all intersections and their design shall be approved by the Borough. All signing shall identify both intersecting streets and alleys. Regulatory signs shall be installed at all locations identified by a traffic circulation study prepared by the developer. Standard traffic signs shall be approved by the Borough, and shall be supplied and installed in accordance with Borough regulations; PennDOT Publication 68, Official Traffic Devices; and the MUTCD, Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, FHWA. Street signs shall be installed when the binder course is installed and the street is useable.
14. All proposed streets shall be offered for dedication. Where a modification of this Section is granted by the Borough, all private streets shall conform to the requirements of Section 602.I.
15. The Design Standards of the Smart Transportation Guidebook of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation may also be utilized.
16. The use of cul-de-sacs shall be minimized, and the use of interconnected streets shall be maximized.
B. Horizontal Alignment.
1. Horizontal street alignments shall be measured along the centerline. Horizontal curves shall be used at all angle changes greater than one (1) degree.
2. The centerline of the street cartway shall correspond with the centerline of the street right-of-way.
3. Plans with street locations along the perimeter of a property shall be required to show building setback lines and clear site triangles within the adjacent properties. Written permission from the effected adjacent land owner shall be provided prior to preliminary plan approval.
4. There shall be a tangent of at least one hundred (100) feet between reverse curves for all local and collector streets.
5. Horizontal curve centerline radii shall be designed in coordination with vertical geometry, subject to the approval of the Borough Engineer. Generally, however, the minimum acceptable centerline radii shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet.
C. Vertical Alignment.
1. Vertical curves shall be used in all changes of grade in excess of one (1) percent.
2. The following minimum and maximum vertical grades shall be used:
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 57
§ 602.
3. The minimum length of vertical curve for all streets shall be seventy-five (75) feet.
4. Notwithstanding the above minimum length of vertical curve, the actual length of vertical curve shall be based on the formula L = 15 x A; where "L" is the minimum length of curve in feet, and "A" is the algebraic difference in grade (in percent).
D. Cul-de-sacs.
1. The use of cul-de-sacs shall be minimized.
2. The centerline distance of permanent cul-de-sac streets shall be greater than two hundred fifty (250) feet in length and shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length. The length of the cul-de-sac street shall be measured from the centerline intersection of the intersecting street to the center of the cul-de-sac turn-around. Permanent cul-de-sac streets shall be provided with a paved turn-around with a minimum diameter of one hundred (100) feet to the outside curb and of one hundred twenty (120) feet to the street right-of-way.
3. Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the turn-around right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to the tract boundary with sufficient
additional width provided along the boundary line to permit extension of the street at full width.
4. Temporary cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) feet in length.
5. Where an adjacent stub street in an existing development is not proposed for
Maximum
Minimum
§ 602.
a. Arterial Street
State Highway Standards
1%
b. Collector Street
7%
1%
c. Local Street
8%
1%
d. Access Drives
8%
1%
e. Lanes
8%
1%
f. Alleys
8%
1%
g. Close
5%
1%
h. At all intersections, 50 ft. each side
4%
1%
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 58
§ 602. § 602.
extension as a through street, a cul-de-sac shall be constructed in compliance with Borough standards.
6. Drainage of cul-de-sac streets shall preferably be toward the open end. If drainage is toward the closed end, water shall be conveyed away in an underground storm sewer or by other means approved by the Borough. The minimum grade on
cul-de-sacs shall be designed to ensure a minimum of one (1) percent along the curb line to the designed low points.
7. Temporary cul-de-sacs shall be constructed within the right-of-way for a future street extension.
E. Close. The Design Standards for a Close shall be in accordance with Article VIII, Form-Based Code Regulations of the Zoning Ordinance.
F. Street Intersections.
1. Intersections involving the junction of more than two (2) streets shall be prohibited.
2. The centerline of streets opening onto the opposite sides of existing or proposed streets shall be directly opposite from each other. When this is physically impossible, the distance between centerlines shall be no less than one hundred and fifty (150) feet between centerlines, measured along the centerline of the street being intersected.
3. Intersections with arterial or collector streets shall be located not closer than one thousand (1,000) feet, measured from centerline to centerline, along the centerline of the arterial or collector street being intersected.
4. Right angle intersections shall be used.
5. The cartway edge at street intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a minimum radius of thirty-five (35) feet for local streets or lanes and fifty (50) feet for intersections involving arterial and collector streets. The right-of-way radii at intersections shall be substantially concentric with the edge of the cartway. The Borough may require larger radii based on the largest design vehicle using the intersection.
6. All streets intersecting a state highway shall be subject to the approval of PennDOT. A PennDOT Highway Occupancy Permit shall be required prior to any construction involving a PennDOT right-of-way.
7. There shall be provided and maintained at all intersections a clear sight triangle with a line of sight between points of one hundred (100) feet from the intersection of the centerlines for collectors and seventy five (75) feet for local streets. Clear
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 59
§ 602. § 602.
sight triangles shall be indicated on all plans. No building or other obstruction that would obscure the vision of a motorist shall be permitted within these areas.
8. Proper safe stopping sight distance shall be provided with respect to both horizontal and vertical road alignments at all intersections. Sight distance at street intersections shall be such to provide the sight distance in accordance with current PennDOT criteria.
a. Appendix No. 21 depicts stopping sight distance for selected speeds. The sight distances in Appendix No. 21 apply for roadway grades in whole numbers from +13% to -13% along with speeds from fifteen (15) to sixty
(60) miles per hour in increments of five (5) miles per hour. The designer may use this table in lieu of the above formula.
b. Inadequate Sight Distance Remedies. If it is impossible to achieve required safe stopping sight distance in both directions the Borough may:
(1) Prohibit left turns by entering or exiting vehicles;
(2) Require alteration of the horizontal or vertical geometry of the roadway or access; all such work shall be at the expense of the Applicant;
(3) Require removal of physical obstruction from the line of sight, at the expense of the Applicant;
(4) Require installation of a separate left turn standby lane; or
(5) Deny access to the roadway.
G. Future Rights-of-Way
1. Future rights-of-way are rights-of-way reserved for future street extension into adjoining tracts. They shall be designed in conformance with the design requirements of a street, and the contiguous parcels must contain proper setbacks and sight distances.
a. The area within the future right-of-way shall be included within the deeds to the abutting lots with an easement in favor of the Borough and land owners of the land into which the future right-of-way will extend to permit the use of the future right-of-way for public street purposes should the adjoining lands be developed. Reserved rights-of-way may be permitted only when they will be no longer than the depth of one (1) lot. For lengths longer than one (1) lot a fully constructed stub street and temporary cul- de-sac shall be required.
b. The landowners of the lots in which the future right-of-way is included shall have the duty to maintain the area included within the future right-of- way and this duty shall be indicated in a note on the final plan and in all deeds to such lots.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 60
§ 602. § 602.
c. The landowners of the lots in which the future right-of-way is included shall have no obligation concerning the improvement of such future right- of-way for street purposes.
d. Landowners adjacent to rights-of-way reserved for future use shall not provide primary access to their property from the future right-of-way. Structure frontage and primary access shall be from the adjacent street.
H. Right-of-Way and Cartway Widths.
1. The minimum street rights-of-way and cartway widths for new streets shall be as follows:
Street
Classification Minimum Cartway Minimum Right-of-Way
a. Arterial Street As determined after consultation with the Borough (Highway) and PennDOT.
b. Collector Street 36 feet w/curb 56 Feet (with 2-11 foot travel lanes, and 2-7 foot parking lanes)
c. Local Street 34 feet w/curb 54 Feet (with 2-10 foot travel lanes, and 2-7 foot parking lanes)
d. Cul-de-sac streets:
Cartway In accordance with Subsection b or c, above.
Turn-around 100 feet in diameter 120' in diameter
e. Lanes 20 feet w/curb N/A
f. Close 16 feet w/curb N/A
g. Alley 16 feet w/o curb 20 feet
I. Private Streets. Private streets shall meet all the design standards for public streets as required by this Ordinance. Applications which propose a private street shall be by an agreement which shall be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds as part of the Final Plan. This agreement shall establish the conditions under which the street will be constructed and maintained, as well as conditions controlling an offer of dedication, and shall stipulate:
1. That the street shall be constructed and maintained to conform to the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. The method of assessing maintenance and repair costs.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 61
§ 602. § 602.
3. That an offer for dedication of the street shall be made only for the street as a whole.
4. That the owners of the abutting lots will include with any offer of dedication sufficient funds, as estimated by the Borough, to restore the street to the prevailing standards.
5. That an agreement by the owners of fifty-one (51) percent of the front footage thereon shall be binding on the owners of the remaining lots.
J. Driveways.
1. Driveways shall be located as to provide minimum safe stopping sight distance at intersections with streets and shall not be located within any required clear sight triangle in accordance with Section 602.F. Access shall be provided to the street of lesser classification when there is more than one street classification involved. Driveways shall not interfere with the normal traffic movement or be inconsistent with the design, maintenance and drainage of the street. Driveway locations shall be delineated on all plans.
2. Single-family residential driveways shall have a minimum width at the street right-of-way of ten (10) feet and a maximum width at the street right-of-way of twenty (20) feet. The number of driveway entrances per dwelling shall be one (1). The Borough Council may grant additional driveway entrances if severe topographic conditions exist and the width of the lot exceeds one hundred fifty
(150) feet at the street right-of-way.
3. Common driveways which serve more than three (3) dwelling units shall be prohibited. When common driveways are provided, an access and maintenance agreement shall be provided in the deeds of the lots having use of the driveway. The agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the Borough Solicitor. Common driveways shall have a minimum paved width of fourteen (14) feet.
4. When a proposed driveway has access to an arterial or collector street, the Borough may require the use of a turn-around area to prevent vehicles from backing onto the street.
5. All private driveways shall have, for a distance of thirty (30) feet from the street right-of-way, a maximum gradient of eight (8) percent.
K. Access Drives.
1. The cartway of all access drives shall be constructed in accordance with Section 603.A.9.
2. Access drives do not require a specific right-of-way; however, the following
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 62
§ 602. § 602.
standards for cartway width shall apply:
Number of Lanes Cartway Width
Three (3) Lanes 30 feet
Two (2) Lanes 20 feet
One (1) Lane 10 feet
3. The vertical and horizontal alignments of access drives shall conform to Sections
602.B and 602.C, respectively.
4. Access drive intersections shall conform to the specifications for streets as stated in Section 602.F.
5. Access drives shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from side or rear property lines and a minimum of twenty (20) feet from buildings/structures.
6. Access drives shall be subject to the identical maintenance related items as outlined for lanes in Section 602.L.
L. Lanes:
1. Lanes shall have the following characteristics:
a. A property which utilizes a lane shall maintain frontage along a public or private street.
b. An application that proposes lanes shall be accompanied by an agreement which shall be recorded with the final plan and which shall establish the conditions under which the lanes will be maintained.
c. The final plan, for recordation with the Recorder of Deeds shall include a plan note which identifies (1) the specific lanes, (2) the recorded maintenance agreement, and (3) a notification that the lanes do not qualify for dedication to the Borough and that the Borough shall not assume any responsibility for their maintenance.
2. The cartway of all lanes shall be constructed in accordance with Section 603.A.9 of this Ordinance.
a. No part of any structure shall be located within thirty (30) feet from the cartway edge of a lane.
b. The vertical and horizontal alignments of lanes shall conform to the specifications for local streets as stated in Sections 602.B and 602.C,
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 63
§ 602. § 602.
respectively.
c. Lanes and their intersections shall conform to the specifications for local streets as stated in Sections 602.F and 602.H.
d. Lanes which form a cul-de-sac shall not exceed four hundred (400) feet in length, measured from the centerline intersection of a street or private street which is not a cul-de-sac. Lane cul-de-sacs which do not terminate in a parking lot shall be provided at the terminus with a fully paved turn- around. The turn-around shall be designed in accordance with one of the following methods:
(1) An eighty (80) foot paved diameter.
(2) T-shaped turn-around with a twelve (12) foot width and the flared portions rounded by minimum radii of twenty (20) feet.
e. All lanes shall be privately maintained. The plan shall contain a note which shall state that the lane shall not be offered for dedication and shall be privately maintained.
(1) If a lane is to be for the common use of two (2) or more properties, the applicant shall provide for the maintenance of such lane. The Applicant shall provide for private maintenance through the formation of a Homeowners Association or through the setting forth of the maintenance responsibilities in easements in the deeds to the lots which have the right to use the lane. If a Homeowners Association is formed, a document setting forth the maintenance responsibilities of such association and the right of such association to assess lots within the development shall be recorded at the same time as the final plan is recorded. All such documents shall be in a form acceptable to the Borough Solicitor.
(2) All persons who shall purchase a lot abutting or having the right to use a lane shall be given a copy of the final plan, and, if a Homeowners Association has been formed, shall be given a copy of all such documents relating to the maintenance responsibilities of such Homeowners Association.
f. All lanes and associated parking areas shall be located outside the minimum required rear yard and side yard setbacks.
M. Emergency Access Requirements. All subdivisions or land developments containing twenty five (25) or more dwelling units, or non-residential buildings or buildings containing fifteen thousand (15,000) or greater square feet of gross floor area shall be provided with at least two (2) separate and distinct means of access to the subdivision or land development.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 64
§ 602. § 603.
1. Access may be provided through the location of two (2) or more streets each of which intersects with an existing public street. Such streets shall meet all the requirements of this Ordinance concerning design and construction.
2. Access for a land development may be provided through two (2) or more access drives into the land development. Such access drives shall be separated by a distance of at least one hundred fifty (150) feet and shall comply with all requirements of this Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance.
3. If the Applicant is unable to provide access to the subdivision or land development through two (2) or more streets or access drives, an emergency access shall be provided.
a. The emergency access shall be improved so that emergency vehicles may safely transverse it and shall be indicated on the plans.
b. The emergency access shall be acceptable to the providers of emergency services within the Borough. Applicants proposing to provide emergency access shall submit evidence of such approval.
c. The emergency access may be located so that access to the subdivision or land development is gained from a public street at a location unsuitable for regular access with an existing public street.
d. The emergency access may be located so that access is gained from an adjacent tract. For example, a subdivision or land development adjoining a parking lot of another use may provide emergency access through a point with a break chain. Applicants with plans indicating emergency access through an adjoining private tract shall provide evidence that the adjoining property owner has consented to such emergency access location.
N. Street Lights.
1. Poles or standards for street lights, with underground "parkway cable" service lines shall be installed by the subdivider, when required by the Borough Council, located in the right-of-way and shall be approved by the Borough Council as to type and location along each right-of-way not more than two hundred fifty (250) feet apart and at all intersections.
SECTION 603. Vehicular Parking Facilities, Sidewalks and Curbs.
A. Parking Areas. Off-street vehicular parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
1. Parking lot dimensions shall be no less than those listed in Appendix No. 17.
2. Buffer planting shall be provided for parking compounds and access drives which
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 65
§ 603. § 603.
are adjacent to residential properties and public right-of-ways. The buffer planting area shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wide. Buffer planting shall be installed in accordance with Section 609.A. Buffer plantings shall not restrict sight distances.
3. Where parking lots are designed for more than ten (10) spaces, no less than five
(5) percent of the total area must be landscaped and continually maintained. Planting along the perimeter of a parking lots, whether for required screening or general beautification, will not be considered as part of the five (5) percent parking area landscaping. The internal planting areas shall contain appropriate natural ground cover and a minimum of one (1) tree, as specified in Section 609.D, for each ten (10) parking spaces, or portion thereof. The Borough may reduce the required minimum internal planting area where the proposed overall landscape contains additional perimeter and/or internal trees.
4. No portion of a parking compound shall be permitted within ten (10) feet of side or rear property lines and twenty (20) feet from street right-of-way lines.
5. Not less than five (5) foot radius of curvature shall be permitted for horizontal curves in parking lots.
6. All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient back-up area for all end stalls.
7. Painted lines, arrows and dividers shall be provided and maintained to control parking when necessary to direct vehicular circulation.
8. Parking lots, main entrances and exits which are open to the public shall be lighted to a maximum average of two (2) foot candles at an elevation of three (3) feet above the surface. All lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises and public rights-of-way.
9. All parking lots and access drives shall be paved to meet the following minimum standards:
a. Crushed aggregate base course with a minimum thickness of six (6) inches, as specified in PennDOT Specifications, Form 408, and its latest revisions.
b. The bituminous surface shall consist of a minimum of one and one-half
(1-1/2) inches of ID-2 binder course and one (1) inch ID-2 wearing course. Material shall be equal or superior to PennDOT Specifications Publication 408/90, as amended, and shall be applied in accordance with those same specifications.
10. Bicycle Racks shall be provided in accordance with the Form-Based Code Regulations.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 66
§ 603. § 603.
B. Sidewalks.
1. The Borough shall require installation of curbs and sidewalks in any subdivision and land development as provided herein. Sidewalks are required to provide pedestrian access to and/or within a commercial, industrial or community facility. Sidewalks which are provided as part of such non-residential facilities shall be designed and constructed to service the projected pedestrian needs. All public areas shall be designed barrier free in accordance with applicable federal and state standards, including but not limited to, the Americans with Disabilities Act. Appropriate details shall be provided on the plans.
2. Sidewalks shall be constructed of Class A cement concrete four (4) inches thick, containing steel mesh of six by six by fourteen (6 x 6 x 14) inch gauge, upon a properly prepared subgrade. Four (4) inches of AASHTO #57 crushed stone shall be properly compacted using a mechanical tamper. Upon the crushed stone, the sidewalks shall be constructed by pouring concrete in separate slabs twenty (20) feet in length. The slabs shall be completely separated by one-quarter (1/4) inch expansion joint and scored every five (5) feet.
3. A grass planting strip of at least three (3) feet in width shall be provided between the curb and sidewalk, or as otherwise specified in the Form-Based Code Regulations.
4. Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all streets in residential and nonresidential subdivisions and land developments as herein specified. Sidewalks shall be located, if possible, within the street right-of-way line, and shall be a minimum of 4’-6” wide.
5. Sidewalks shall comply with the Borough's specifications for curb and sidewalks, as amended.
C. Curbs.
1. Curbs shall be required along all proposed streets in subdivisions; along all proposed streets, access drives, alleys, and parking compounds in land developments; and along all existing streets in and abutting both subdivisions and land developments. The developer shall submit the location and grade of all curbs to the Borough for consideration.
2. Curbs shall be installed to the dimensions and construction standards of the Borough's specifications for curb and sidewalks, as amended or, in lieu of such standards, in accordance with the standards of PennDOT Publication 408/90, as amended.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 67
§ 603. § 604.
3. Standard straight curb shall be required along all state highways and along all Borough streets. Other types of curbing are not permitted unless matching an existing condition or a waiver is requested and granted by Borough Council.
SECTION 604. Blocks and Lots.
A. General Configuration. The configuration of blocks and lots shall be based upon the lot area requirements, the salient natural features, the existing man-made features, and the proposed type of structure. Lot configurations should provide for flexibility in building locations while providing safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation. Lots with areas that are two (2) or more times the minimum requirements shall, wherever feasible, be designed with configurations which allow for additional subdivision.
B. Residential Blocks. All blocks in a residential subdivision shall have a maximum length of twenty (20) times the minimum allowable lot width, but not to exceed twelve hundred (1200) feet, subject to the following:
1. Wherever practicable, blocks shall be two (2) lot depths in width.
2. In blocks over eight hundred (800) feet in length, a dedicated right-of-way shall be provided and either a pedestrian walkway or an alley shall be built and maintained at or near the middle of such blocks.
C. Non-Residential Blocks. Blocks in non-residential areas may vary from the requirement of Section 604.B when required by the nature of the use. Adequate provisions shall be made for off-street parking, loading areas and traffic and pedestrian circulation.
D. Lot and Parcel Configuration.
1. Whenever practical, side lot lines shall be radial to street lines.
2. In order to avoid jurisdictional problems, lot lines shall, wherever feasible, follow municipal boundaries rather than cross them. Where a lot is divided by a municipal boundary, the minimum standards of both municipalities shall apply.
3. All lots with a width of fifty (50) feet or more shall contain an average depth not less than one-half (1/2) nor more than two and one-half (2 1/2) times their width.
4. Lot and parcel configuration shall conform to the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
5. All lots shall front on an approved public or private street (with the exception of lanes) and maintain a minimum lot width in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance.
6. Double frontage lots shall be prohibited except where provided as reverse frontage lots. Reverse frontage lots are only permitted when a reduction of driveway intersections along a street with a high volume of vehicular movements
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 68
§ 604. § 605.
is desired. All reverse frontage lots shall include an identification of the frontage for use as a road access.
7. All reverse frontage lots shall have a rear yard in accordance with the Borough Zoning Ordinance, measured at the shortest distance from the proposed dwelling unit to the street right-of-way and except for alleys shall, within each rear yard and immediately adjacent to the street right-of-way, have a buffer area and planting screen at least ten (10) feet in width, across which there shall be no vehicular access. The buffer and planting screen shall be in accordance with applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
8. All remnants of land (areas remaining after subdivision) shall conform to the lot area and configuration requirements.
E. Lot Size and/or Intensity. All lot sizes shall conform to the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
F. Flag Lots. Flag lots shall not be created when lots can be designed to provide full frontage along street. The Borough Council at its sole discretion may approve the plotting of a limited number of flag lots when:
1. The flag lot is being created to serve a homesite in the back of an existing tract of land where there is no potential of direct street access to the proposed lot.
2. No more than two (2) adjoining flag lots shall be permitted. Double tier flag lot shall not be permitted.
3. The "flagpole" or access portion of the flag lot shall maintain a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet and shall not change direction more than once or not greater than a forty-five (45) degree angle. The area of the flagpole shall not be included with the body (flag) of the lot for satisfying the Borough Zoning standards for minimum lot size.
4. The Borough Council may attach any reasonable conditions to the creation of flag lots as it finds necessary or desirable to provide for the orderly development of land and street systems.
5. Flag lots shall not be permitted to be accessed from the bulb portion of a cul-de- sac.
SECTION 605. Building Setback Lines and Building Separation.
A. A building setback line shall be provided along each street and private street. The area in front of the building setback line shall be preserved in accordance with the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
B. The distance to the building setback line shall be measured from the street centerline or right-of-way line as required by the Borough Zoning Ordinance. Setback lines on private
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 69
§ 605. § 606.
streets shall be the required setback as per the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
C. In the case of corner lots, the setback from each adjacent street shall apply.
D. All building separations and height requirements shall conform to the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
E. On any lot abutting a railroad, no dwelling shall be placed within seventy-five (75) feet of any portion of the railroad right-of-way.
F. On any lot abutting or traversed by a high voltage transmission line, no dwelling shall be placed within seventy-five (75) feet of any portion of the right-of-way.
G. Where application for a land development plan is made for the purpose of erecting more than one (1) principal structure on a single lot, the appropriate setback and yard requirements shall be provided for each structure as though it were on an individual lot. In each case, the Borough shall require suitable provisions for utilities and access in the event of potential subdivision of the tract.
SECTION 606. Easements and Right-of-Ways. Easements and right-of-ways for sanitary sewer facilities, storm water drainage facilities, public utilities, or pedestrian access shall meet the following standards:
A. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be adjacent to property lines.
B. Nothing shall be placed, planted, set, or put within the area of an easement that would adversely affect the function of the easement or conflict with the easement agreement. This requirement shall be noted on the final plan and shall be included in all deeds for lots which contain an easement.
C. Pedestrian walkways shall have a minimum right-of-way width of ten (10) feet, and contain sidewalk in accordance with Section 603.B of this Ordinance.
D. Utility easements shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet, and all utility companies are encouraged to use common easements.
E. The Applicant shall reserve easements where storm water or surface water drainage facilities are existing or proposed, whether located within or beyond the boundaries of the property. Easements shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet and shall be adequately designed to provide area for (a) the collection and discharge of water, (b) the maintenance, repair and reconstruction of the drainage facilities, and (c) the passage of machinery for such work. The easements shall clearly identify who has the right-of- access and responsibility of maintenance. This requirement shall be noted on the final plan and shall be included in all deeds for lots which contain an easement.
F. Where any petroleum or petroleum product transmission line traverses a subdivision or land development, the applicant shall confer with the applicable transmission or distribution company to determine the minimum distance which shall be required
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 70
§ 606. § 608.
between each structure and the centerline of such petroleum or petroleum product transmission line. Additionally, the Borough will require, with the Final Plan application, a letter from the owner of the transmission line stating any conditions on the use of the tract which shall contain the above.
G. Where a subdivision or land development is adjacent to or traversed by a water course, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement conforming substantially with the line of such water course, drainageway, channel, or stream of such width as will be adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow from a one hundred (100) year design rainfall.
H. When a subdivision proposes multi-family attached dwellings, such as townhouses, the plans shall include an access easement along the front and rear property lines of all units, and side property lines of the end units, to allow all lot owners within the unit access to front and rear yards. The access easement shall have a minimum width of six (6) feet. This requirement shall be noted on the final plan and shall be included in all deeds for lots which contain the easement.
SECTION 607. Survey Monuments and Markers.
A. Permanent concrete monuments shall be accurately placed along at least one (1) side of each street at the beginning and end of all curves and at all angles.
B. Markers shall be set at the points where lot lines intersect curves and/or other property lines.
C. Monuments shall be of concrete, with a flat top having a minimum width or diameter of four (4) inches and a minimum length of thirty (30) inches. Cast-in-place or pre-cast concrete monuments shall be marked with center punch mark in a three- quarter (3/4) inch copper or brass dowel. Metallic markers shall consist of Copperweld bars at least thirty (30) inches along and not less than three-quarters (3/4) inch in diameter. Alternative monumentation methods will be at the discretion of the Borough Engineer. All monuments shall be inscribed with a proper inscription indicating the name of the surveyor responsible for the survey.
D. All monuments and markers shall be placed by a registered engineer or surveyor so that the scored or marked point shall coincide exactly with the point of intersection of the lines being monumented or marked.
E. All existing and proposed monuments and lot line markers shall be delineated on the Final Plan.
SECTION 608. Stormwater Management and Floodplain Controls. All storm water management, collection, conveyance, soil erosion control, and floodplain considerations shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of the Borough Storm Water Management Ordinance, as amended:
A. Floodplain areas shall be established and preserved as provided by the Borough Zoning
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 71
§ 608. § 609.
Ordinance.
B. Whenever a floodplain is located within or along a lot, the plan shall include the boundary of the floodplain and the elevation or locational dimensions from the centerline of the watercourse; a plan note that the floodplain shall be kept free of structures, fill and other encroachments; and a plan note that floor elevations for all structures adjacent to the floodplain shall be two (2) foot above the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.
SECTION 609. Landscaping.
A. Buffer Planting. Buffer plantings shall be provided along the rear of reverse frontage lots, except in the case of an alley. Parking and buildings shall be prohibited within the
buffer area and. the use of buffer areas for site access shall be limited. Buffer areas shall include a suitable, uninterrupted and predominantly evergreen planting for at least eighty (80) percent of the buffer area length, of a minimum 30” to 42” in height (at the time of planting) and of a sufficient density to give maximum screening within four (4) years following initial installation. Such screening shall be permanently maintained and replaced if necessary to present an attractive appearance and to retain an effective buffer at all times.
B. Buffers for Residential, Commercial and Industrial Areas outside of the Downtown. A planted barrier, designed to sufficiently inhibit visual access within four (4) years following the date of initial planting, shall be provided between any commercial or industrial use and contiguous tracts if adjoining tracts do not also accommodate a commercial or industrial use.
1. An equivalent barrier shall be provided between residential uses of differing densities.
2. Any portion of the commercial or industrial tract which is not used for buildings, structures, parking, etc. shall be planted in accordance with an overall plan to be approved by the Borough Council and the Borough Engineer.
3. The perimeter of all commercial and industrial parking areas and all mechanical equipment which is not enclosed shall be screened in accordance with Section 609.A., or to the full height of such mechanical equipment.
C. Existing Wooded Areas. Existing wooded areas shall be protected to prevent unnecessary destruction. At least twenty-five (25) percent of all trees (minimum trunk caliper of five [5] inches at twelve [12] inches above ground) that exist at that time of plan submission shall be maintained. In addition, the Borough may require that trees removed due to construction activities be replaced immediately following construction. Replacement trees shall be a minimum trunk caliper of two (2) inches at a height of six (6) inches above finished grade, and located within unbuildable sections of the site (e.g. steep
slope and setback areas).
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 72
§ 609. § 609.
D. Shade Trees. Shade trees shall be required by the Borough in accordance with the following standards:
1. All trees shall be nursery grown in a climate similar to that of the Borough.
2. All trees shall have a normal habit of growth and shall be sound, healthy and vigorous; they shall be free from disease, insects, insect eggs, and larvae.
3. Trunk calipers, measured at a height of six (6) inches above finished grade, shall be a minimum of three (3) inches.
4. Trees shall be planted between the street right-of-way line and the building setback line except where the Borough has authorized placement of trees within the street right-of-way. Mature trees shall not adversely affect street cartways, sidewalks or utility lines.
5. All planting shall be performed in conformance with good nursery and landscape practices.
6. Requirements for measurements, branching, grading, quality, balling, and burlapping of trees shall follow the code of standards recommended by the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc., in the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSIZ60, 1-1973, as most recently amended.
7. One (1) street tree shall be installed for each building containing two (2) or fewer dwelling units and two (2) trees shall be provided for buildings containing three
(3) of or more dwelling units. In any event, at least one (1) street tree shall be installed and maintained for every 50 linear feet of building perimeter.
8. A minimum of one (1) street tree shall be provided for each residential lot, and such trees shall be spaced not less than twenty (20) feet nor more than sixty (60) feet apart along the entire length of each existing or proposed street. In commercial and industrial zoning districts, street trees shall be spaced not less than forty (40) feet nor more than sixty (60) feet apart along each street frontage.
9. If not included in the following list of recommended tree species, desired street trees shall be subject to the review and approval of the Borough of Lititz Shade Tree Commission.
10. No one species shall comprise more than 33% of the entire number of plants in a landscape plan.
11. Street trees shall typically be selected from the following Lititz Borough Street Tree List:
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 73
§ 609. § 609.
Small Trees – Mature Height Less Than Thirty Feet (30’)
Crategus viridis ‘Winter King’
Winter King Hawthorn
20-35’ Broad, round head
Multi-colored bark, ornamental fruit
Prunus x incam ‘Okame’
Okame Cherry
15-25’ Vase-shaped, becoming rounded with age
Attractive bark; pink flowers in early spring
Syringa reticulata ‘Ivory Silk’
Ivory Silk Tree Lilac
20-25’ Uniform rounded shape
White flowers in mid- Summer
Medium Trees – Approximate Mature Height of Thirty to Fifty Feet (30-50’)
Carpinus caroliniana
American Hornbeam
20-30’
Round spreading, native, fall color, compaction tolerant
Gleditsia triancanthos var. inermis ‘Imperial’ , ‘Skyline’, or ‘Moraine’
Thornless Honeylocust
30-40’ Pyramidal
Small, lightweight leaves; Golden yellow fall color; Produces light shade
Ostrya virginiana
American Hophornbeam
25-40’ Pyramidal in youth becoming broad
Attractive bark and hop- like fruit; native
Pyrus calleryana ‘Chanticleer’
Chanticleer Callery Pear
30-40’ Upright, pyramidal
White spring flowers, red- purple fall leaf color; better structure than older cultivars
Quercus acutissima
Sawtooth Oak
35-40’ Pyramidal in youth, becoming rounded
Yellow fall color; attractive bark; acorns
Large Trees – Mature Height Greater Than Fifty Feet (50’)
Acer rubrum ‘Bowhall’ or Armstrong
Columnar Red Maples
50-60’ Columnar
Red flowers, fruit, and fall color; native
Acer rubrum ‘October Glory’ or ‘Red Sunset’
Red Maples
50-60’ Pyramidal in youth, irregular at maturity
Red flowers, fruit, and fall color; native
Ginkgo biloba (male)
Male Ginkgo
50-80’ Upright, symmetrical
Brilliant yellow fall color; easy to transplant
Liquidambar styraciflua ‘Rotundiloba’
Fruitless Sweetgum
60-75’ Pyramidal
Star-shaped leaves; good fall color
Platanus x acerifolia
London Plane Tree
70-90’ Pyramidal, broad with age
Large flat leaf; exfoliating ornamental bark
Quercus imbricaria
Shingle Oak
50-60’ Pyramidal in youth, broad with age
More easily transplanted than other oaks; native
Quercus phellos
Willow Oak
60-80’ Pyramidal in youth, broad with age
Mod. Fast growing; yellow-brown foliage; native
Quercus rubra
Red Oak
60-75’ Rounded
More easily transplanted than other oaks; red fall color; native; acorns
Ulmus ‘Alcolade’ or ‘Morton’
Hybrid Elm
50’ Broad vase-shaped
Very lustrous dark green leaves; resistant to Dutch Elm disease; very adaptable
Zelkova serrata ‘Green Vase’
Green Vase Zelkova
60-80’ Upright, vase- shaped
Nice form; orange-brown fall color
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 74
§ 609. § 610.
Large Buffer Area Trees & Shrubs*
Abies concolor
White Fir
30-50’ Ht.
Highly adaptable evergreen; tolerant of heat and drought
Euonymus kiautschovicus ‘Manhattan’
Spreading Euonymus
8-10’ Ht.
Highly adaptable to most soils; semievergreen; fast- growing
Hydrangea quercifolia
Oakleaf Hydrangea
4-6’ Ht.
Attractive bark; large white flowers in June; burgundy fall color; native
Juniperus virginiana
Eastern Redcedar
30-50’ Ht.
Highly adaptable evergreen; valuable food source for birds; native
Rhus aromatica
Fragrant Sumac
2-6’ Ht.
Highly adaptable; spreading; orange-red fall color; native
Rhus typhina
Staghorn Sumac
15-20’ Ht.
Highly adaptable; spreading; orange-red fall color; native
Viburnum trilobum
American Cranberrybush Viburnum
8-12’ Ht.
Flowers in May; attractive fruit; red fall color; native
* Other potential plant selections will be considered by the Borough’s Shade Tree Commission
E. Ground Cover. Maintained ground cover shall be provided on all disturbed site areas which are not covered by paving, stone or other solid materials to prevent soil erosion. Ground cover shall conform to the standards and recommendations of the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc. in the American Standard for Nursery Stock, as most recently amended.
F. Structural Soil. Structural Soil, in accordance with Cornell University specifications, as shown in the Form-Based Code Regulations shall be installed and maintained for all Street Trees in the Downtown, TNDO, and all non-residential zoning districts.
G. Landscape Design Guidelines. Refer to Article VIII of the Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance for additional Landscape Design Guidelines, and the Form-Based Code Regulations in Appendix 20.
H. All Landscape Plans shall be reviewed by the Lititz Borough Shade Tree Commission.
SECTION 610. Sanitary Sewage Disposal and Water Supply.
A. Sanitary Sewage Disposal. Where determined as feasible and necessary by the Borough Council, the Applicant shall be required to extend and/or connect to the public sewer system.
1. When the Borough, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act 537 of 1966, as amended, determines the necessity for a sewer facilities plan
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 75
§ 610. § 611.
revision (plan revision module for land development), or supplement, the Borough Council shall require that notice of approval from DEP be submitted as a condition of final plan approval.
2. If the Applicant proposes connection to the public sewer system, the sewerage installation shall be in accordance with the specifications of the Borough. The Borough shall establish requirements for the ownership and maintenance of such system.
B. Water Supply.
1. The Applicant shall extend and/or connect to, the existing public water system.
2. If the Applicant proposed extension or and/or connection to, the public water system, the locations and kind of fire hydrants shall be in accordance with the specifications of the Borough in concert with the local fire department thread requirements, but in no case shall the spacing of five fire hydrants be no less than five hundred (500) feet apart.
3. If the Applicant proposes extension of and/or connection to the public water system, the installation and construction shall be in accordance with the specifications of the Borough. The Borough shall establish requirements for the ownership and maintenance of such system.
SECTION 611. Public Dedication of Park and Recreation Land. All residential subdivisions and land developments are encouraged to provide park and recreation land which shall be dedicated to the Borough. The developer may request that the Borough not require the dedication of land, and any such request should be accompanied by an offer to pay a fee in lieu of dedication of the land, computed in accordance with the guidelines provided herein, an offer to construct recreational facilities and /or an offer to privately reserve land for park or recreation purposes.
A. The land reserved for park, recreation and open space usage shall be a single lot which shall comply with applicable requirements of this ordinance, the Borough Zoning Ordinance, and the following requirements:
1. The land reserved for park, recreation and open space shall conform to all standards of the Borough Zoning Ordinance contained within the Open Space Recreation regulations.
2. No storm water management facilities designed to retain or detain water from other portions of the development shall be permitted on such land reserved for park, recreation and open space.
3. In the event that the tract contains natural features which are worthy of preservation, the developer may request that the Borough Council permit the provision of recreational land configured in such a manner as to best preserve
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 76
§ 611. § 611.
natural features.
4. The park, recreation and open space land shall be accessible to utilities such as sewer, water and power that are provided with the subdivision, and if so requested by the municipality that will accept dedication of the land, the developer shall extend such utilities to the park, recreation and open space land.
5. If the adjoining property has previously been developed and recreational land has been provided at the boundary of that previously developed property, the Borough Council shall require that the recreational land required of the development shall be located adjoining the previously provided recreational land.
6. If the adjoining property is undeveloped land, the Borough Council shall require that such land be provided at the property boundary of the development in order that it may be added to land provided for park and recreation purposes on the adjoining tract at such time that the adjoining property is developed.
B. A minimum of five one-hundredths (0.05) acres of land shall be reserved as park or recreational land for each residential lot created in a subdivision or each dwelling unit created in a land development.
C. The developer may request that the Borough Council permit the provision of park and recreation land other than through public dedication of land as set forth above. The developer shall set forth, in writing, the means by which he will fulfill this requirement which may include the payment of a fee in lieu of dedication of all or a portion of the amount of land required to be dedicated, construction of recreational facilities, the private reservation of land, or any combination of dedication, fees, construction of recreational facilities, or private reservation.
1. If a fee in lieu of dedication is proposed by the developer, said fee shall be in accordance with the recommendations of the Borough Recreation and Open Space Plan and the Fee Schedule adopted by the Borough Council. All fees shall be held and used by the Borough in accordance with the requirements of Article V of the Municipalities Planning Code.
2. If the developer proposes to construct recreational facilities, the developer shall present a sketch plan of such facilities and an engineers estimate of the cost of construction.
3. If the developer proposes the private reservation of land, the developer shall provide for the maintenance of such land through either the inclusion of such land as common elements of a condominium or the creation of a Homeowners Association which shall meet the requirements for a unit owners association contained in the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa. C.S. §3101 et seq. Such documentation shall be recorded, shall provide that the land cannot be further developed and shall give the Borough the rights to maintain the land as set forth in Article VII of the Municipalities Planning Code dealing with the
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 77
§ 611. § 614.
maintenance of common open space in planned residential developments. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the developer may request that the Borough Council approve transfer of the land to an organization dedicated to the conservation of natural resources with deed restrictions preventing further development acceptable to the Borough Solicitor.
4. The developer shall enter into an agreement with the Borough setting for the fees to be paid, the facilities to be constructed, or the land to be privately reserved and the method of its maintenance. All such agreements shall be in a form satisfactory to the Borough Solicitor, and shall be provided prior to final plan approval.
SECTION 612. Refuse Collection (Dumpster) Stations.
A. Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash removal when individual collection is not made and indoor storage is not provided.
B. Collection stations shall be located so as to be separated adequately from habitable buildings to avoid being offensive, but at the same time be convenient for both collectors and residents and shall be screened and/or landscaped adequately so as to continue the aesthetic characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood. The Borough shall determine if the proposed screening is adequate.
C. Collection stations shall be so constructed as to prevent the escape of refuse by wind, water or other natural elements and prevent animals, rodents, etc. from entering.
SECTION 613. Stripping, Piling, Replacement, or Removal of Topsoil.
Initial construction on the subdivision site shall consist of stripping and piling of topsoil from all areas planned to be disturbed. Upon completion of other construction, the entire amount of topsoil stripped shall be replaced on the subdivision site. No topsoil shall be disposed of, by sale or otherwise, off the site of the subdivision. Subsoil may be disposed at the option of the subdivider.
SECTION 614 Lighting and Lighting Plans.
A. Purpose.
The standards established in this section set forth criteria for:
1. Providing lighting in outdoor public places where public health, safety, and welfare are potential concerns.
2. Controlling Glare from non-vehicular light sources that impair safe travel.
3. Protecting neighbors and the night sky from nuisance Glare and stray light from poorly aimed, placed, applied, maintained, or shielded light sources.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 78
§ 614. § 614.
B. Applicability.
Outdoor lighting shall be required for safety and in areas of public assembly and travel, including, but not limited to: Streets, multi-family dwelling units, commercial, industrial, recreation areas, and institutional uses. Lititz Borough may require lighting to be incorporated for other uses or locations, as they deem necessary. The Glare control requirements herein contained apply to lighting in all above mentioned uses as well as sign, architectural, Landscaping, and residential lighting.
C. Illumination Levels.
Lighting shall have intensities and uniformity ratios in accordance with the current recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) as contained in the IESNA Lighting Handbook. Future amendments to said recommended practices shall become a part of this Ordinance without further action of Lititz Borough. Examples of intensities for typical outdoor applications, as extracted from the 8th Edition of the Lighting Handbook, are presented below:
Use
Task
Maintained Footcandles1
Uniformity Ratio2 (Max.:Min.)
Streets
Local Residential
0.4 Min.
6:1
Local Commercial
0.9 Min.
6:1
Parking: Multi- Family Residential
Low Vehicular/Pedestrian Activity
0.2 Min.
4:1
Medium Vehicular/Pedestrian Activity
0.6 Min.
4:1
Parking: Industrial Commercial, Institutional and Municipal
High Activity (e.g., regional Shopping centers/fast food facilities, major athletic/civic/ cultural events)
0.9 Min.
4:1
Medium Activity (e.g., community shopping centers. Office parks, hospital, commuter lots, cultural/civic/ recreational events)
0.6 Min.
4:1
Low activity (e.g., neighborhood shopping, industrial employee parking, schools, church parking, farm businesses, farm operations)
0.2 Min.
4:1
Walkways and Bikeways
0.5 Min.
5:1
Building Entrances and Signs
4.0 Avg.
-
1. Illumination levels are maintained horizontal Footcandles on the task, e.g., pavement or area surface.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 79
§ 614. § 614.
2. Uniformity ratio is a measure of the dispersion of light on an area. The ratio is measured as maximum light level to minimum light level. Example: 4:1 for the given area, the maximum level of illumination should be no less than 4 times the minimum level of illumination (0.2 x 4 =
0.8 maximum light level)
D. Lighting Fixture Design.
1. Dedicated fixtures shall be of a type and design appropriate to the lighting application and aesthetically acceptable to Lititz Borough.
2. For lighting horizontal tasks such as roadways, sidewalks, entrances, and parking areas, fixtures shall meet IESNA Fully Shielded criteria (no light output emitted above ninety (90) degrees at any lateral angle around the fixture). Individual fixtures whose aggregate lamp output does not exceed one thousand eight hundred (1,800) lumens (typical household outdoor lighting) are exempt from this requirement.
3. The use of floodlighting, spotlighting, wall-mounted fixtures, decorative globes and spheres, and other fixtures not meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria shall be permitted only with the approval of Lititz Borough, based upon applicability in retaining the Urban character of Lititz Borough and achieving acceptable Glare control.
4. Fixtures shall be equipped with, or be modified to, incorporate light directing and/or shielding devices such as shields, visors, skirts, or hoods to redirect offending light distribution and/or reduce direct or reflected Glare. Glare control shall be achieved primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields and baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height, wattage, aiming angle and fixture placement.
E. Control of Nuisance and Disabling Glare.
1. All outdoor lighting shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted, and maintained so as not to present a hazard to drivers or pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely travel.
2. Unless for safety, security, or all-night operations, lighting shall be controlled by automatic switching devices to permit extinguishing between eleven (11) p.m. and dawn.
3. Lighting proposed for use after eleven (11) p.m., or after the normal hours of operation, shall be reduced by an average of seventy-five percent (75%) from that time until dawn, unless supporting a specific purpose.
4. Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the primary means for controlling Glare.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 80
§ 614. § 614.
5. The intensity of illumination projected onto an existing residential use from an existing property boundary shall not exceed the following vertical Footcandle, measured at the existing property line at a height of 5 feet;
a. 0.6 Footcandles in the Downtown.
b. 0.2 Footcandles in the Districts immediately adjoining the Downtown.
c. 0.1 Footcandle in other Districts.
6. Directional fixtures, e.g., floodlights and spotlights, shall be so shielded, installed and aimed that they do not project their output into the windows of neighboring residences, adjacent uses, past the object being illuminated, skyward or onto a public roadway or pedestrian way.
7. Externally illuminated billboards and signs shall be lighted by fixtures mounted at the top of the billboard or sign and aimed downward. The fixtures shall be designed, shielded and aimed to shield the source from off-site view and to restrict the light output onto and not beyond the sign or billboard. At no point on the face of the sign or billboard shall the illumination exceed 30 initial vertical footcandles with a maximum to minimum uniformity ration not to exceed 6:1.
8. Only the United States and the state flag shall be permitted to be illuminated from dusk till dawn. All other flags shall not be illuminated past 11:00 p.m. Flag lighting sources shall not exceed 7,000 initial lamp lumens per flagpole. The light source shall have a beam spread no greater than necessary to illuminate the flag and shall be fully shielded.
9. Under-canopy lighting, for such applications as gas/service stations, hotel/theater marquees, fast-food/bank/drugstore drive-ups, shall be accomplished using flat- lens full-cutoff fixtures aimed straight down and shielded in such a manner that the lowest opaque edge of the fixture shall be below the light source at all lateral angles. The illumination in the area directly below the canopy shall not exceed 20 average footcandles and the maximum shall not exceed 30 footcandles.
10. The use of white strobe lighting for tall structures such as smokestacks, chimneys and radio/communications/television towers is prohibited during hours of darkness, except as specifically required by FAA.
F. Installation.
1. Electrical feeds to lighting standards shall be run underground, not overhead.
2. Pole mounted fixtures shall not be mounted in excess of 25 feet height.
3. Lighting standards in parking areas shall be placed outside paved areas or on concrete pedestals at least thirty (30) inches high above the pavement, or by other approved protective means.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 81
§ 614. § 614.
4. Except for certain recreational lighting covered elsewhere in this Ordinance, fixtures not meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria shall not be mounted in excess of sixteen (16) feet above finished grade and fixtures meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria shall not be mounted in excess of twenty (20) feet above finished grade. For the illumination of greater than 100 contiguous parking spaces, Lititz Borough may permit the use of a mounting height not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet for fixtures meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria when it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of Lititz Borough that light trespass and glare control requirements in this Ordinance have been met.
G. Recreational Uses – The nighttime illumination of outdoor recreational facilities for such aerial sports as baseball, basketball, soccer, tennis, track and field, and football typically necessitate higher than normally allowed fixture mounting heights and aiming angles, utilize very high-wattage lamps and potentially produce unacceptable levels of light trespass and glare when located near residential properties. Permission to illuminate such facilities shall be granted only when Lititz Borough is satisfied that the health, safety and welfare rights of nearby property owners and Lititz Borough as a whole have been properly protected. When recreational uses are specifically permitted by Lititz Borough for operation during hours of darkness, the following requirements shall apply:
1. Recreational facilities for basketball, baseball, football, soccer, miniature golf, tennis or track shall not be illuminated if located within a residential district or sited on a nonresidential property located within 1,000 feet of a property containing a residential use.
2. Maximum mounting heights for recreational lighting shall be in accordance with the following:
a. Basketball 20’
b. Football 70’
c. Soccer 70’
d. Little League Baseball
(1) 200’ Radius 60’
(2) 300’ Radius 70’
e. Lacrosse 70’
f. Miniature Golf 20’
g. Swimming Pool Aprons 20’
h. Tennis 20’
i. Track 20’
H. Plan Submission – For subdivision and land-development applications where site lighting is required by this Ordinance, is otherwise required by Lititz Borough or proposed by Applicant, lighting plans shall be submitted to Lititz Borough for review and approval with preliminary and final subdivision/land development plan applications and conditional use applications and shall contain the following:
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 82
§ 614. § 614.
1. A plan or plans of the site, complete with all structures, parking spaces, building entrances, traffic areas (both vehicular and pedestrian), vegetation that might interfere with lighting, and adjacent uses that might be adversely impacted by the lighting. The lighting plan shall contain a layout of all proposed fixtures by location, orientation, aiming direction, mounting height and type. The submission shall include, in addition to existing and proposed area lighting, all other exterior lighting, e.g., architectural, building-entrance, landscape, flag, sign, etc.
2. A 10’x 10’ illuminance grid (point-by point) plot of maintained horizontal footcandles overlaid on the site plan, plotted out to 0.0 footcandles, which demonstrates compliance with the light trespass, illuminance and uniformity requirements as set forth in this Ordinance or as otherwise required by Lititz Borough. When the scale of the plan, as judged by Lititz Borough, makes a 10’x 10’ grid plot illegible, a larger grid spacing may be permitted.
3. The maintenance (light-loss) factors, IES candela file nomenclature, lamp-lumen ratings and specific lamp manufacturer’s lamp ordering nomenclature, used in calculating the presented illuminance levels.
4. Description of the proposed equipment, including fixture catalog cuts, photometrics, glare reduction devices, lamps, on/off control devices, mounting heights, pole foundation details and mounting methods.
5. When landscaping plans are involved, they shall contain the lighting fixture locations and shall demonstrate that the site lighting and landscaping have been coordinated to minimize conflict between vegetation and intended light distribution, both initially and at vegetation maturity.
6. Plan Notes – The following notes shall appear on the Lighting Plan:
a. Post-approval alterations to lighting plans or intended substitutions for approved lighting equipment shall be submitted to Lititz Borough for review and approval.
b. Lititz Borough reserves the right to conduct post-installation inspections to verify compliance with the Ordinance requirements and approved Lighting Plan commitments, and if deemed appropriate by Lititz Borough, to require remedial action at no expense to Lititz Borough.
c. All exterior lighting shall meet IESNA full-cutoff criteria unless otherwise approved by Lititz Borough.
I. Post-Installation Inspection.
1. Lititz Borough reserves the right to conduct a post installation nighttime inspection to verify compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance and, if appropriate, to require remedial action at no expense to Lititz Borough.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 83
§ 614. § 615.
J. Street Lighting Dedication.
1. Lititz Borough must accept Dedication of Street lighting facilities located within the Right-of-Way of a Street dedicated by Lititz Borough.
2. Until such time as the Street lighting is dedicated, the Developer of the Tract (who has escrowed the Street lighting) will be responsible for any and all costs associated with each Streetlight. Such costs shall include, but not be limited to: administration, placement, and maintenance. Electrical charges shall be the responsibility of Lititz Borough at the issuance of the first Building occupancy permit within the development.
3. Streetlights not dedicated to Lititz Borough will remain the responsibility of the Developer or appropriate private entity including all cost and responsibilities for the lighting in perpetuity.
SECTION 615 Supplemental Design Standards for Traditional Neighborhood Developments. as defined and provided in the Lititz Borough Zoning Ordinance, Article II, Section 216. The following design guidelines shall apply to Traditional Neighborhood Developments Option (TNDO).
A. The design standards are enabled by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended), Article VII-A, Traditional Neighborhood Development.
B. The TNDO shall be required to meet the design guidelines set forth in the Borough of Lititz Design Guidelines for New Development and Redevelopment Areas as approved by Resolution No. 649, 7/29/03, and amended.
C. The TNDO shall comply with the Form-Based Code Regulations of Article VIII of the Zoning Ordinance, and Section 616 and Appendix 20 of this Ordinance.
D. The following additional design criteria shall be required for streets and streetscape design.
1. Streets shall be laid out to promote pedestrian circulation and ease of access from all points in the Central Residential Areas and Neighborhood Residential Areas to the Neighborhood Storefront Areas.
2. Traffic calming measures shall be considered to promote the safe, pedestrian crossing of streets.
a. Easements shall be reserved to permit streets to be extended to allow adjoining properties to be connected in the future, if so desired.
b. The minimum street width shall be the sum of the width of the travel lanes, parking lane, and planting strips, including curbs, as listed on
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 84
§ 615. § 615.
the following table and shown in the street width schematic (See street width schematic on the following page).
Street type
Travel lane
Parking lane
Planting strip, including curb
Collector
11’
7’
5’
Local
10’
7’
5’
Close
16’
(see d.)
N/A
Alley
16’
N/A
N/A
c. Narrower travel lanes may be considered on local streets and alleys, if they are privately owned and maintained.
d. The width of the Parking Lane for a Close depends on the type of curbside parking, either parallel or angled, in accordance with the parking standards in the Zoning Ordinance.
3. Street Trees
a. The coordinated planting of deciduous shade trees within the right-of- way of all streets is a central unifying feature of development in Traditional Neighborhood Development.
b. In the Neighborhood Residential Area (NRA) and Central Residential Area (CRA) shade trees shall be planted in planting strips (sometimes called "tree lawns") at least five (5) feet wide, located between the pavement or curb and the continuous sidewalk or footpath system, which shall also be required.
c. Such trees be in accordance with Section 609.D of this Ordinance, and shall be spaced at average intervals no greater than forty (40) feet along both sides of each street, including arterial roads, but not including rear access alleyways.
d. Species shall be selected according to the following criteria:
i. Cast moderate shade to dense shade in summer;
ii. Be long-lived (over 60 years);
iii. Attain a mature height of at least fifty (50) feet;
iv. Be tolerant of pollution and direct or reflected heat;
v. Require little maintenance, by being mechanically strong (not brittle) and insect-and disease-resistent;
vi. Be able to survive two (2) years with no irrigation after establishment;
vii. Be of native origin, provided they meet the above criteria.
e. Streetscape Standards
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 85
§ 615. § 616.
i. All area streets shall be provided with concrete sidewalks (with the exception of alleyways), consideration shall be given to alternative paving treatments, such as: brick, stone or concrete paving block in commercial areas and in front of civic, institutional or community uses.
ii. Street lighting in the TND shall use Washington Boulevard Lighting Standards or a comparable lighting standard with the approval of the Borough Council. A lighting plan and photometrics shall be consistent with Section 614.
4. Modifications
a. Modifications shall be in accordance with Section 802 of this Ordinance.
b. The design and modifications shall generally enhance the development plan, the subareas, and the streetscapes, or at least not be any less desirable than the plan that could be created in conformance with this article.
c. The design and modifications shall not produce lots or street systems that would be impractical or detract from the appearance of the District, and shall not adversely affect emergency vehicle access or deprive adjoining noncommercial properties of adequate light and air.
d. The Applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed modification will produce equal or better results, from the municipality's perspective, and represent the minimum modification necessary.
SECTION 616. Form-Base Code Regulations
A. The Form-Based Code Regulations of Article VIII and Appendix 20 shall apply.
B. Purpose.
Refer to the Overall Goals in Article VIII and Appendix 20.
C. Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards. Refer to Article VIII and Appendix 20.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 86
§ 701. § 705.
ARTICLE VII MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION 701. General. Mobile home park plans shall be processed in accordance with Article III of this Ordinance and the Borough Zoning Ordinance. The design standards shall comply with applicable sections of each Ordinance.
SECTION 702. Lot Size and/or Density. Lot size and density shall comply with the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 703. Water Supply.
A. Source. All mobile home parks shall be connected to the public water system. All water supply systems shall be provided in accordance with Section 610.B of this Ordinance.
B. Connection. All mobile homes and service buildings shall be connected to a public water supply system. Individual water riser pipes having an inside diameter of not less than three-fourth (3/4) inches shall be provided for each mobile home stand and shall terminate no less than four (4) inches above the ground.
C. Protection of Water Lines. Adequate provisions shall be made to protect water service lines from damage including a shut-off valve installed below the frost line at the curb line for each mobile home space.
D. Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants or yard hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of the Middle Department Association of Fire Underwriters and the Authority regulations, when applicable.
SECTION 704. Sewage Disposal.
A. Connection. All mobile homes and service buildings shall be connected to a public sewer system. Individual riser pipes having a minimum inside diameter of four (4) inches shall be located on each mobile home lot and shall extend four (4) inches above ground level. The sewer riser pipe shall be sealed with a securely fastened plug when the site is unoccupied. Positive surface drainage away from the plug shall be provided to ensure no infiltration of surface water will occur. All sewer lines shall be constructed with materials and by methods approved by the Borough.
B. Protection. Adequate provision shall be made to protect sanitary sewers from storm water infiltration and damage.
SECTION 705. Storm Drainage, Erosion and Sedimentation, and Floodplain Controls. All mobile home parks shall conform to the requirements of Section 608 of this Ordinance.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 87
§ 706. § 712.
SECTION 706. Interior Streets. All interior streets shall remain private and be provided as access drives. All access drives shall be designed in accordance with Section 602.K.
SECTION 707. Vehicular Parking Facilities. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in all mobile home parks. Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided either on the mobile home lot or in a common, paved parking lot within two hundred (200) feet of the mobile home to be served. The spaces shall be designed in the accordance with this Ordinance and/or the Zoning Ordinance. Mobile home parks shall also provide off-street parking spaces for visitors. The number of visitors spaces shall be at least one half space per dwelling unit.
SECTION 708. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided for all interior streets in accordance with Section 603.B of this Ordinance.
SECTION 709. Lighting. All internal streets and parking compounds shall be lighted in accordance with Section 614 of this Ordinance. All lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises and public rights-of-way.
SECTION 710. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 609 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 711. Building Setbacks and Separations. Mobile homes shall conform to the building setback requirements of the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 712. Solid Waste Disposal. Solid waste disposal shall be the responsibility of the mobile home park operator and shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of DEP.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 88
§ 801. § 802.
ARTICLE VIII
ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
SECTION 801. Fees.
A. Fee Resolution
1. The Borough Council shall establish by resolution a collection procedure and schedule of fees to be paid by the applicant at the time of submission of all plans.
2. Fees for all other permits required for and by the Borough shall be established by the resolution.
3. Said schedule of fees shall be posted in the Borough Office.
B. Engineering Fees. Engineering fees required to be paid in accordance with this Ordinance shall be paid to the Borough by the applicant for the below listed services:
1. Reviewing all information submitted in conformance with provisions of this Ordinance. This includes all originally submitted and revised plans, reports and specification.
2. Inspecting the layout of the site for conformance to the submitted survey, plan and specifications.
3. Reviewing planning modules for land development.
4. Reviewing cost estimates of required improvements as submitted by the developer.
5. Inspecting required improvements during construction.
6. Final inspections of completion of installation of the required improvements.
7. Such other technical services as deemed necessary or required by the Borough.
C. Legal Fees. Legal fees incurred by the Borough for the review of all information submitted for conformance with provisions of this Ordinance, or other similar services, shall be paid to the Borough by the Applicant.
SECTION 802. Modifications. The provisions of these regulations are intended as a minimum standard for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. If the literal compliance with any mandatory provision of these regulations is shown by the applicant to the satisfaction of the Borough Council present at a public meeting to be unreasonable and to cause undue hardship as it applies to the particular property, the Borough Council may grant a modification from such mandatory provision so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured while
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 89
§ 802. § 806.
permitting the reasonable utilization of the property. However, the granting of a modification shall not have the effect of making null and void the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
SECTION 803. Application Requirements.
A. All requests for modifications shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 308 of this Ordinance.
B. Should a revision to a submitted plan require a waiver which was not apparent at the time of the initial plan submission, the request for a modification shall be submitted in accordance with Section 308 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 804. Action on Modification Applications. At a public meeting, the Borough Council shall review the request to determine if the literal compliance with any mandatory provision of this Ordinance is demonstrated by the applicant to exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this Ordinance is observed. The Applicant shall demonstrate that an alternative proposal will allow for equal or better results and represents the minimum modification necessary. If the Borough Council determines that the Applicant has met his burden, it may grant a modification from the literal compliance with the terms of this Ordinance. In granting modifications, the Borough Council may impose such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure the objectives and purposes of this Ordinance. When a modification is granted with conditions, a statement of the approved modification including the imposed condition(s) shall be provided on the Final Plan.
SECTION 805. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Borough Council and/or their duly authorized representative to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. The Zoning Officer shall require that the application for a zoning permit contain all information necessary to enable them to ascertain whether the proposed building, alteration, or use is located in an approved subdivision or land development. No zoning permit shall be issued until the Borough
has determined that the site for the proposed building, alteration or use complies with all the provisions of this Ordinance and conforms to the site description as indicated on the approved and recorded final plan.
SECTION 806. Penalties and Preventive Remedies.
A. Any person, partnership, corporation or the members of such partnership or the officers of such corporation who or which being the owner or agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall lay out, construct, open and/or dedicate any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main, or other improvement for public use, travel or other purposes or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon; or who sells, transfers or agrees or enters into an agreement to sell any land in a subdivision or land development, whether by reference to or by use of a plan of such subdivision or land development or otherwise; or who erects any building thereon, unless and until a Final Plan has been prepared in full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and has been recorded as provided herein; or who in any other way be in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 90
§ 806. § 806.
commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation unless the District Justice determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the Ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth (5th) day following the date of determination of a violation of the District Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. In addition to other remedies, the Borough may institute and maintain appropriate actions at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate violations of this Ordinance, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and/or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises.
C. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
D. The Borough may further refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real property in violation of this Ordinance. The authority to deny such permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
1. The owner of record at the time of such violation.
2. The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such violation without regard to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
3. The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time of the violation without regard as to whether such current owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
4. The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual constructive knowledge of the violation.
E. As an additional condition for the issuance of a permit or the granting of an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee, or lessee for the development of any such real property, the Borough may require compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the property at the time the Applicant acquired an interest in such real estate.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 91
§ 901. § 903.
ARTICLE IX
APPEALS, INTERPRETATION AND EFFECTIVE DATE
SECTION 901. Appeals. All appeals from decisions of the Borough Council in the administration of this Ordinance shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code.
SECTION 902. Interpretation and Application of Provisions. In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this Ordinance, said provisions shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements necessary for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Where the provisions of this Ordinance and all standards and specifications implementing it impose greater restrictions upon subdivision or land development than those of any other Borough Ordinance or any regulation or any applicable land development agreement, the provisions of this Ordinance and its standards and specifications shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, regulation, other Borough Ordinance or applicable land development agreement impose greater restrictions upon subdivision or land development than this Ordinance, the provisions of such statute, regulation, other Ordinance, or applicable land development agreement shall be controlling.
SECTION 903. Application of Ordinance. With the exception of Sections 903.A and 903.B, the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to and control all subdivisions and/or land developments whose plans have not been recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds prior to the effective date of these regulations.
A. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not adversely affect an application for approval of a Preliminary Plan or Final Plan which was duly filed with the Borough and is pending action at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance, and in which case the Applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application had been duly filed. When a Preliminary Plan has been duly approved, the applicant shall be entitled to final plan approval in accordance with the terms of the approved Preliminary Plan. However, if an application is properly and finally denied, any subsequent application shall be subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. If an Applicant has received approval of a preliminary or final plan prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, no provision of this Ordinance shall be applied to adversely affect the right of the Applicant to commence and complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance with the terms of such approval within five (5) years from the date of such approval. When approval of the Final Plan has been preceded by approval of a Preliminary Plan, the five (5) year period shall be counted from the date of preliminary plan approval. If there is any doubt as to the terms of approval, the terms shall be construed in light of the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time when the application for such approval was duly filed.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 92
§ 904. § 906.
SECTION 904. Construction. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights or liability incurred, or any permit issued, or any approval granted, or any cause or causes of action existing prior to the enactment of this Ordinance.
SECTION 905. Severability. The provisions of this Ordinance are severable, and if any section, sentence, clause, part, or provision hereof shall be held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the court shall not affect or impair the remaining sections, sentences, clauses, parts, or provisions of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this Ordinance would have been enacted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part, or provision had not been included herein.
SECTION 906. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force in five (5) days as provided by law.
DULY ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Borough Council of the Borough of Lititz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, on the day of , in lawful session duly assembled.
BOROUGH COUNCIL LITITZ BOROUGH
Attest:
Secretary
[BOROUGH SEAL]
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 93
APPENDICES
1 Certificate of Accuracy (Plan)
2 Certification of Accuracy (Survey)
3 Storm Water Management Certification
4 Certificate of Ownership, Acknowledgement of Plan Offer and Dedication
5 Lititz Borough Preliminary Plan Approval Certificate
6 Lititz Borough Final Plan Approval
7 Lititz Borough Approval Certificate for a Lot Add-On Plan
8 Lititz Borough Planning Commission Review Certificate
9 Lancaster County Planning Commission Review Certificate
10 Recorder of Deeds Certificate
11 Application for Consideration of a Subdivision and/or Land Development Plan
12 Notice of Acceptance of an Improvement Guarantee
13 Required Improvements Listing (form)
14 Application for Consideration of a Modification (Waiver)
15 Standard Street Section Detail
16 Standard Curb and Sidewalk Details
17 Standard Parking Compound Details
18 Safe Stopping Sight Distance Chart
19 Sample Legal Documents
20 Form-Based Code Regulations
21 Downtown Lititz Master Plan
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 94
APPENDIX NO. 1 CERTIFICATION OF ACCURACY (PLAN)
I hereby certify that, to the best of my knowledge, the plan shown and described hereon is true and correct to the accuracy required by the Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
, 20 *
*Signature and seal of a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania qualified to perform such duties and responsible for the preparation of the plan.
APPENDIX NO. 2 CERTIFICATION OF ACCURACY (SURVEY)
I hereby certify that, to the best of my knowledge, the survey shown and described hereon is true and correct to the accuracy required by the Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
, 20 *
*Signature and seal of a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania qualified to perform such duties and responsible for the preparation of the plan.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 95
APPENDIX NO. 3
STORM DRAINAGE PLAN CERTIFICATION
I hereby certify that, to the best of my knowledge, the storm drainage facilities shown and described hereon are designed in conformance with the Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
, 20 *
*Signature and seal of a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania qualified to perform such duties and responsible for the preparation of the storm drainage plan.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 96
APPENDIX NO. 4
CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP, ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF PLAN AND OFFER OF DEDICATION
INDIVIDUAL
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA COUNTY OF LANCASTER
On this, the day of , 20 , before me, the undersigned officer, personally appeared , who being duly sworn according to law, deposes and says that he is the * of the property shown on this plan, that the plan thereof was made at his direction, that he acknowledges the same to be his act and plan that all necessary approval of the plan has been obtained and is endorsed thereon, that he desires the same to be recorded, and that all streets and other property identified as proposed public property (excepting those areas labeled "NOT FOR DEDICATION") are hereby dedicated to the public use.
**
***
My Commission Expires , 20
* Identify Ownership or Equitable Ownership
** Signature of the Individual
*** Signature and Seal of Notary Public or Other Authorized to Acknowledge Deeds.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 97
APPENDIX NO. 4
CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP, ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF PLAN AND OFFER OF DEDICATION
COPARTNERSHIP COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
COUNTY OF LANCASTER
On this, the day of , 20 , before me, the undersigned officer, personally appeared , being the members of the firm of
who being duly sworn according to law, deposes and says that the copartnership is the *
of the property shown on this plan, that the plan thereof was made at its direction, that it acknowledges the same to be its act and plan that all necessary approval of the plan has been obtained and is endorsed thereon, and desires the same to be recorded, and that all streets and other property identified as proposed public property (excepting those areas labeled "NOT FOR DEDICATION") are hereby dedicated to the public use.
**
***
My Commission Expires , 20
* Identify Ownership or Equitable Ownership
** Signature of the Individual
*** Signature and Seal of Notary Public or Other Officer Authorized to Acknowledge Deeds.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 98
APPENDIX NO. 4
CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP, ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF PLAN AND OFFER OF DEDICATION
CORPORATE
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA COUNTY OF LANCASTER
On this, the day of_ , 20 , before me, the undersigned officer, personally appeared , being * of **
who being duly sworn according to law, deposes and says that the corporation is the ***
of the property shown on this plan, that he is authorized to execute said plan on behalf of the corporation, that the plan is the act and deed of the corporation, that the corporation desires the same to be recorded that all necessary approval of the plan has been obtained and is endorsed thereon, and on behalf of the corporation further acknowledges, that all streets and other property identified as proposed public property (excepting those areas labeled "NOT FOR DEDICATION") are hereby dedicated to the public use.
****
*****
*******
My Commission Expires , 20
* Individual's Title
** Name of Corporation
*** Identify Ownership or Equitable Ownership
**** Signature of Individual
***** Corporate Seal
****** Signature and Seal of Notary Public or Other Officer Authorized to Acknowledge Deeds.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 99
APPENDIX NO. 5
LITITZ BOROUGH COUNCIL PRELIMINARY PLAN APPROVAL CERTIFICATE
At a meeting on , 20 , the Lititz Borough Council granted PRELIMINARY PLAN APPROVAL of this project, including the complete set of plans marked sheet(s) through which form a part of the application dated , last revised , and bearing Lititz Borough File No. . This plan may not be recorded in the office of the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds, nor may any construction be initiated.
*
*
*
*Signatures of the Borough Council President and Secretary.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 100
APPENDIX NO. 6
LITITZ BOROUGH COUNCIL FINAL PLAN APPROVAL CERTIFICATE
At a meeting held on , 20 , the Lititz Borough Council approved this project including the complete set of plans and information which are filed with the Borough Council in File No. , based upon its conformity with the standards of the Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
*
*
*
*Signatures of the Borough Council President and Secretary.
APPENDIX NO. 7 LITITZ BOROUGH COUNCIL
APPROVAL CERTIFICATE FOR A LOT ADD-ON PLAN
This lot add-on plan, bearing Lititz Borough File No. , approved by the Lititz Borough Council this day of , 20 .
*
*
*
*Signatures of the Borough Council President and Secretary.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 101
APPENDIX NO. 8
LITITZ BOROUGH PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW CERTIFICATE
At a meeting held on , 20 , the Lititz Borough Planning Commission reviewed this plan and a copy of the review comments is on file in the Borough office.
* *
*Signatures of the Chairman and Secretary or their designees.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 102
APPENDIX NO. 9
LANCASTER COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW CERTIFICATE
The Lancaster County Planning Commission, as required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended, reviewed this plan on , 20 , and a copy of the review is on file at the office of the Planning Commission in CCPC File No.
. This certificate does not indicate approval or disapproval of the plan by the Lancaster County Planning Commission, and the Commission does not represent nor guarantee that this plan complies with the various ordinances, rules, regulations, or laws of the local municipality, the Commonwealth or the Federal government.
* *
*Signatures of the Chairman and Vice Chairman or their designees.
APPENDIX NO. 10
Removed by Ordinance C-550 - November 29, 2016
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 103
APPENDIX NO. 11
APPLICATION FOR CONSIDERATION FOR A SUBDIVISION
AND/OR LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN
BOROUGH FILE NO.
DATE OF RECEIPT/FILING
(FOR BOROUGH USE ONLY)
The undersigned hereby applies for approval under the Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance for the (Subdivision) (Land Development) Plan submitted herewith and
described below:
1. Plan Name:
Plan No.: Plan Date:
2. Project Location:
3. Name of Property Owner(s):
Address:
Phone & Fax No.:
4. Land Use and Number of Lots and/or Units (indicate answer by number):
Single-Family (Detached) Commercial
Multi-Family (Attached-Sale) Industrial
Multi-Family (Attached-Rent) Institutional
5. Total Acreage:
6. Application Classification: (Check One)
Preliminary Plan Final Plan
Revised Sub-division and/or Land
Lot Add-On Plan for Development Plan for processing in
processing in accordance with accordance with Section 308 of the
Section 308 of the Ordinance. Ordinance.
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 104
7. Name of Applicant (if other than owner):
Address:
Phone & Fax No.:
8. Firm Which Prepared Plan:
Address:
Phone & Fax No.:
Person Responsible for Plan:
9. Have all zoning approvals been obtained? Please specify approvals:
10. Type of water supply proposed:
Public
Community
Individual
11. Type of sanitary sewer disposal proposed:
Public Live
Community Capped
Individual
12. Lineal feet of new street
Identify all street(s) not proposed for dedication:
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 105
13. Acreage proposed for park or other public use:
14. Have plans been submitted to the Lancaster County Planning Commission?
I am aware that I cannot commence development of the property and cannot commence
excavation, earthmoving, grading, or construction until a plan has been recorded in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds or until an Improvement Construction Plan has been approved by the
Borough Council of Lititz. By signing this application, I certify that all facts in the application
and all accompanying documentation are true and correct. This application is being made by me
to induce official action on the part of Lititz Borough, and I understand that any false statements
made herein are being made subject to the penalties of 18 Pa. C.S. Section 4904 relating to
unsworn falsification to authorities.
Date Signature of Landowner or Applicant
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 106
APPENDIX NO. 12
NOTICE OF ACCEPTANCE OF AN IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE
DATE:
Lititz Borough Council
7 South Broad Street Lititz, PA 17543
SUBJECT: Acceptance of Improvement Guarantee Dear Borough Council:
The developer of the project known as has provided an improvement guarantee in the form of a to assure the proper installation of the following improvements:
Water Supply Facilities
Fire Hydrants
Other
This form of improvement guarantee was accepted by formal action of the Lititz Borough Council at a meeting on_ , 20 .
Authorized Signature
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 107
APPENDIX NO. 13 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS LISTING
Plan Name:
Plan Location:
The undersigned developer hereby agrees to provide throughout his development, as shown on the plan of , dated the following improvements:
Improvements
Quantity
Units
Price Per
Unit
Construction
Cost
Street Grading
Street Base
Street Paving
Street Signs
Curbs
Sidewalks
Storm Sewer Facilities
Sanitary Sewer Facilities
Water Supply Facilities
Fire Hydrants
Survey Monuments
Buffer Planting
Street Trees
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 108
Traffic Control Signs
Other (specify)
ESTIMATED COST: $
CONTINGENCIES (10%): $ INSPECTION FEE DEPOSIT (5%): $ REQUIRED ESCROW: $
SIGNATURE OF DEVELOPER
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 109
APPENDIX NO. 14
APPLICATION FOR CONSIDERATION OF A MODIFICATION (WAIVER)
BOROUGH FILE NO.
DATE OF RECEIPT/FILING
(FOR BOROUGH USE ONLY)
The undersigned hereby applies for approval of waiver, submitted herewith and described below:
1. Name of Project:
2. Project Location:
3. Name of Property Owner(s):
Address:
Phone & Fax No.:
4. Name of Applicant (if other than owner):
Address:
Phone & Fax No.:
1. Specify section(s) of the Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance for which waiver is requested:
2. The proposed alternative to the requirement:
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 110
3. Justification for the waiver:
8. Identification of plans, reports or supplementary data which is part of the application:
The undersigned hereby represents that, to the best of his knowledge and belief, all information listed above is true, correct and complete.
Date Signature



Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 114
APPENDIX 18
FORMULA SIGHT DISTANCES (WHOLE FEET)
Speed (V) Grade (G)
(Miles Per Hour) Percent
0
+1
+2
+3
+4
+5
+6
+7
+8
+9
+10
25
147
146
144
143
142
141
140
139
138
137
136
30
196
194
192
190
188
186
184
182
180
179
177
35
249
246
243
239
237
234
231
229
226
224
222
40
314
309
304
300
296
292
288
284
281
278
274
45
384
377
370
364
359
353
348
343
339
335
330
50
462
453
445
437
429
422
416
409
403
398
393
55
539
528
518
508
499
491
483
475
468
461
455
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
-8
-9
-10
25
147
149
150
152
154
155
157
160
162
164
167
30
196
199
202
204
207
211
214
218
222
226
231
35
249
253
257
261
265
270
275
280
286
292
299
40
314
319
325
331
338
345
353
361
370
379
390
45
384
391
399
407
416
425
436
447
459
473
487
50
462
472
482
493
505
518
531
547
563
581
601
55
539
550
563
576
590
606
623
641
661
683
707
Lititz Borough Subdivision Land Development Ordinance 115
APPENDIX 19
Exhibit A - Improvement Guarantee Agreement - Letter of Credit (Example) Exhibit B - Improvement Guarantee Agreement - Cash (Example)
Exhibit C - Irrevocable Letter of Credit (Example) Exhibit D - Demand for Payment (Example)
APPENDIX 19
EXHIBIT A
IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE AGREEMENT - LETTER OF CREDIT
THIS AGREEMENT is made this day of. , 20 , by and among Lititz Borough, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, a political subdivision of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, ("Borough"); ______________
Of __________________________________________, Pennsylvania ("Owner"); and ______________________, (“Bank”)
WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, Owner intends to construct certain_ improvements according to the Final Plan prepared by _________________________, known as Land Development Plan for ____________, Plan No. _________, dated __________________, and revised ___________ hereinafter called "Plan"; and
WHEREAS, Borough requires that security be established to insure construction of improvements ("Improvements") in compliance with Borough ordinances, regulations, and resolutions; and
WHEREAS, Bank is willing to provide an irrevocable Letter of Credit for the funds required to complete the Improvements in compliance with Borough's ordinance, regulations, and resolutions.
NOW, THEREFORE in consideration of the mutual covenants and promises contained herein, the parties hereto, intend to be legally bound, agree as follows:
ARTICLE I: Owner will-obtain from Bank an irrevocable Letter of Credit in order to provide funds in the amount of $ to insure completion of the
Improvements set forth in Owner's professional engineer's certification of costs, as provided in Article V of the Lititz Borough Subdivision and Land Development Regulations, marked Exhibit "A", attached hereto and made a part hereof, are completed in accordance with the Borough's specifications.
ARTICLE II: If Owner defaults or abandons the construction of the Improvements in the Plan, or if Bank sends Borough a notice, via certified mail, of Banks intention not to renew the Letter of Credit, Borough may draw on the Letter of Credit in order to pay for completion of the Improvements.
ARTICLE III: Borough, by its Engineer or other designated person, will, observe the
construction of the improvements at progressive stages of completion as deemed necessary by
the Borough.
ARTICLE IV: In the event there is a difference of opinion as to the quality of the work
completed, or as to the completion of the work to meet Borough specifications, the decision of Borough's representative shall control and Owner's obligation to maintain the Letter of Credit shall continue until the work is in compliance with Borough’s specifications.
ARTICLE V: It is intended that all Improvements built pursuant to the Plan shall be private until offered for dedication or easements are granted, at Borough’s election, and formally accepted by the Borough pursuant to Article VI
ARTICLE VI: Upon satisfactory completion of the Improvements under this Agreement, Borough agrees to make a final inspection and to release Owner from any further obligation to maintain the Letter of Credit if the Improvements meet Borough’s specifications. Despite final inspection all Improvements shall be deemed to be private Improvements until such time as the same have been offered for dedication or easement and formally accepted by the Borough by ordinance, resolution, deed or other formal document
ARTICLE VII: Legal engineering, inspection, and administration costs incurred by Borough under this Agreement in regards to the Improvements set forth in Exhibit “A” shall be paid by the Owner. All said fees must be paid in full before the Letter of Credit is released.
All Improvements as specified herein shall be completed on or before one (1) year from the date hereof. Should said Improvements not be completed, the Borough’s Engineer shall notify the Borough that the Owner has defaulted. Upon written application, the Borough Council, at their discretion, by formal resolution, may extend from time to time the one year period by not more than two additional years.
ARTICLE VIII: The specifications for the Improvements are those set forth on the Plan.
All Improvements are to be constructed in compliance with the Ordinance, regulations, and resolutions of the Borough, all of which are by this reference made a part hereof.
ARTICLE IX: Borough will, prior to the final release at the time of completion and final inspection and approval by the Borough's Engineer, require a maintenance guarantee, for a period of eighteen (18) months, in the amount of fifteen percent (15%) o:f the cost of the Improvements. Said guarantee shall be in the form as permitted in the Municipalities Planning Code, Section 509(k).
ARTICLE X: Owner agrees to pay all costs involved in establishing and servicing the Letter of Credit with the Bank.
ARTICLE XI:: This Agreement shall be construed, performed and enforced in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ARTICLE XII: This Agreement is not transferable, without the consent of the Borough, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
ARTICLE XIII: This Agreement sets forth the entire Agreement and understanding among the parties as to the subject matter thereof and may be amended subsequent to the date hereof in writing and signed by the party to be bound hereby.
IN WITNESS, THEREOF, and intending to be legally bound thereby, the parties hereto have caused these presents to be executed and their corporate seals thereunto affixed, the day and year first written above.
Lititz Borough
BY: ___
BY: ___
BY: ___
BANK
BY: _
OWNER
BY: ___________
APPENDIX 19
EXHlBIT B
IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE AGREEMENT - CASH
THIS AGREEMENT is made this day of. , 20 , by and among Lititz Borough, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, a political subdivision of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, ("Borough"); ______________
Of __________________________________________, Pennsylvania ("Owner"); and ______________________, (“Bank”)
WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, Owner intends to construct certain_ improvements according to the Final Plan prepared by _________________________, known as Land Development Plan for ____________, Plan No. _________, dated __________________, and revised ___________ hereinafter called "Plan"; and
WHEREAS, Borough requires that security be established to insure construction of improvements ("Improvements") in compliance with Borough ordinances, regulations, and resolutions; and
WHEREAS, Owner is willing to provide cash security for the funds required to complete construction in compliance with Borough’s ordinances and resolutions.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants and promises contained therein, the parties do agree as follows:
ARTICLE I: Owner will deposit with Borough cash in in the amount of ____ Dollars and Cents ($ ) to be held by Borough in an interest bearing account using Owner’s Social Security Number or Tax Identification Number as security that Owner will properly construct and complete Improvements set forth on the Plan to Borough’s satisfaction and reimburse Borough for its inspection and administration expenses. Attached hereto and marked Exhibit "A", is a copy of the estimated costs of the Improvements prepared by the Owner and approved by the Borough's Engineer.
ARTICLE II: If Owner defaults or abandons the construction of the said Improvements
set forth in the Plan, the Borough may complete the said Improvements using the escrowed funds hereinbefore mentioned to pay for said Improvements.
ARTICLE III: Borough, by its Engineer or other designated person, will inspect the construction of the improvements at progressive stages of completion as shall, specified by the
Borough Engineer.
ARTICLE IV: In the event there is a difference of opinion as to thequality of the work completed, or as to the completion of the work to meet Borough's specification, the decision of Borough's representative shall control and Owner's obligation to provide the cash security shall continue until the work is in compliance with Borough's specifications.
ARTICLE V: It is intended that all Improvements built pursuant to the Plan shall be
private except the following which are intended for dedication to the Borough (list or state none).
ARTICLE VI: Upon satisfactory completion of the Improvements under this Agreement, Borough agrees to make a final inspection and release to Owner the cash security and any
-
. interest earned thereon if the Improvements meet Borough specifications. Despite final inspection, all Improvements shall be deemed to be private Improvements, unless stated otherwise in Paragraph V above. As the work of installing the required Improvements proceeds, Owner may request the governing body to release or authorize the release from time to time such portions of financial security for payment to the contractor or contractors performing the work.
Borough or its agents shall have final say on the amount of escrow to be released but agree to be fair and reasonable.
ARTICLE VII: Legal engineering and observation costs incurred by Borough under this
Agreement shall be paid by Owner.
All Improvements as specified herein shall be completed on or before one (1) year from the date hereof. Should said Improvements not be completed, then and in that event the Borough's Engineer shall notify to the Borough that the Owner has defaulted. Upon written application, the Supervisors, at their discretion, may extend from time to time the one (1) year period by not more than two (2) additional years by formal resolution.
ARTICLE VIII: The specifications for the various Improvements are those set forth on the Plan last revised and any accompanying documents and shall be constructed in compliance
with the ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of Borough, all of which are by reference made
apart hereof.
ARTICLE IX: Borough will, prior to the final release at the time of completion and final review by its Engineer, require a maintenance guarantee in the amount of fifteen (15%) percent of the estimated costs of the Improvements specified herein, for a period of eighteen (18) months.
ARTICLE X: This Agreement shall be construed, performed and enforced in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ARTICLE XI: This Agreement is not transferable, without the consent of Borough,
which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
ARTICLE XII: This Agreement sets forth the entire Agreement and understanding among the parties as to the subject matter thereof and may be amended subsequent to the date
hereof in writing and signed by the party to be bound hereby.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, intending to be legally bound thereby, the parties hereto have caused these presents to be executed and their corporate seals thereunto affixed, the day and year first above written.
LITITZ BOROUGH OWNER
BY: _ BY: ______________________________________
BY: _ BY: ______________________________________
BY: _________________________
APPENDIX 19
EXHIBIT C IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT
Date Expiration Date Letter of Credit Amount
$
Beneficiary Lititz Borough
Applicant
Gentlemen:
We are issuing in your favor this irrevocable standby Letter of Credit (our number________)
in the amount of ________ Dollars and __________ Cents ($ ) available at sight, drawn at your option to be presented at least five (5) days after the date of your invoice to the applicant, but not later than the expiration date of this Letter of Credit. This Letter of Credit pertains to the Plan known as the Plan for
, Plan No. _________, dated 20 ,prepared by______________,
and presented to Lititz Borough and to be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds in and for Lancaster County, Pennsylvania ·
Intending to be legally bound, we hereby agree:
I. That demands, in an aggregate amount not exceeding $ _
accompanied by a document in the form attached hereto and marked Exhibit "A" (executed by the Borough Council of Lititz Borough), shall be duly honored if
presented to us at our office at ______________________ , Pennsylvania, within one
(I) Year (such date hereinafter referred to as the "expiration date"). Payment demands drawn on Letter of Credit # ______________ shall be restricted to completion of
Certain improvements (“Improvements") on Plan known as the Plan for ___________ as described above.
2. This Letter of Credit shall be extended for additional one-year periods upon the
expiration date, and upon each anniversary of such date unless thirty (30) days prior to such date or each anniversary of such date we notify the beneficiary in
writing, by certified mail, at __________________, Pennsylvania, that we elect not to renew this Letter of Credit.
Payment under this Letter of Credit will be made without determination of conditions of facts pertaining to related contractual agreements between the applicant and the beneficiary.
Except as so far otherwise stated herein, this Letter of Credit is subject to the "Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credit", revised, International Chamber of Commerce Brochure No. 400.
Intending to be legally bound hereby, this Letter of Credit # has been executed by a duly authorized officer of the, Bank.
Sincerely,
APPENDIX 19
EXHIBIT D
DEMAND FOR FINAL PAYMENT
TO: Bank
Attention:
We hereby demand payment to the Lititz Borough Council the sum of
Dollars ($ ) and certify that this demand is due to failure of to complete to our satisfaction improvements on , Drawing # ,
. . .
dated , for development known as recorded in
ATTEST: LITITZ BOROUGH COUNCIL
BY________________________________
BY: __________________________
BY: ___________________________
DATE __________________________
APPENDIX 20
FORM-BASED CODE REGULATIONS
Applicability Overall Goals
Site Design Standards
Street Sections Typologies Benches
Moveable Tables and Chairs Bollards and Litter Receptacles Bike Racks
Sidewalk Paving Materials Crosswalks
Street Lights
Pole-Mounted Signs & Signals Streetscape Edge
Streetscape Best Practices Street Tree Guidelines
Street Tree Use and Selection
Recommended Street Tree & Buffer Plant Selections Street Tree Placement and Spacing
Street Tree Planting Details Street Tree Best Practices
Front Yards for Residential Neighborhoods
Streetscape Edge Treatments for Off-Street Parking Areas Stormwater Infiltration
Stormwater Infiltration at Off-Street Parking Area Edges Interior Plantings for Off-Street Parking Areas Stormwater Infiltration within Off-Street Parking Areas
Off-Street Parking Area Best Practices Buffer Design Guidelines
Planted Buffers Selection & Application Planted Buffers for Downtown Areas Planted Buffers for Non-Downtown Areas Planted Buffer Examples
Buffer Design/Enhancement Civic Art
Green Urbanism Architectural Design
Maintenance of Improvements
20
Contents
20.1
20.2
20.4
20.6
20.7
20.8
20.9
20.10
20.11
20.12
20.13
20.14
20.15
20.16
20.17
20.18
20.19
20.20
20.21
20.22
20.23
20.24
20.25
20.26
20.27
20.28
20.29
20.30
20.31
20.32
20.33
20.35
20.43
Applicability Overall Goals
Street Section Typologies Benches
Moveable Tables and Chairs Bollards and Litter Receptacles Bike Racks
Sidewalk Paving Materials Crosswalks
Street Lights
Pole-Mounted Signs & Signals Streetscape Edge Streetscape Best Practices Street Tree Use and Selection
Recommended Street Tree & Buffer Plant Selections Street Tree Placement and Spacing
Street Tree Planting Details Street Tree Best Practices
Front Yards for Residential Neighborhoods
Streetscape Edge Treatments for Off-Street Parking Areas Stormwater Infiltration at Off-Street Parking Area Edges Interior Plantings for Off-Street Parking Areas
Stormwater Infiltration within Off-Street Parking Areas
Off-Street Parking Area Best Practices Planted Buffers Selection & Application Planted Buffers for Downtown Areas Planted Buffers for Non-Downtown Areas Planted Buffer Examples
Buffer Design/Enhancement Civic Art
Green Urbanism Architectural Design
Maintenance of Improvements
Note: These FBC Design Standards are part of the Subdivion & Land Development Ordinance.
20
Applicability
TNDO
Downtown
Other Districts Overall Goals ? ? ?
Site Design Standards
Street Section Typologies ? ?
Benches
?
?
? Moveable Tables and Chairs ? ? ?
Bollards and Litter Receptacles
?
?
? Bike Racks ? ? ?
Sidewalk Paving Materials
?
?
? Crosswalks ? ? ?
Street Lights
?
?
? Pole-Mounted Signs & Signals ? ? ?
Streetscape Edge
?
?
? Streetscape Best Practices ? ? ?
Street Tree Standards
Street Tree Use and Selection ? ? ?
Recommended Street Tree & Buffer Plant Selections
?
?
? Street Tree Placement and Spacing ? ? ?
Street Tree Planting Details
?
?
? Street Tree Best Practices ? ? ?
Front Yards for Residential Neighborhoods
?
?
? Streetscape Edge Treatments for Off-Street Parking Areas ? ? ?
Stormwater Infiltration
Stormwater Infiltration at Off-Street Parking Area Edges ? ? ?
Interior Plantings for Off-Street Parking Areas
?
?
? Stormwater Infiltration within Off-Street Parking Areas ? ? ?
Off-Street Parking Area Best Practices
?
?
? Buffer Design Standards
Planted Buffers Selection and Application
?
?
? Planted Buffers for Downtown Areas ?
Planted Buffers for Non-Downtown Areas
?
? Planted Buffers Examples ? ? ?
Buffer Design/Enhancement
?
?
? Civic Art ? ?
Green Urbanism
?
?
? Architectural Design ? ?
Maintenance of Improvements
?
?
?
? = Applicability of Manual Provisions
Refer to Section 601 (General Minimum Design Standards) for Applicability of Form-Based Code Regulations.
20.1
Overall Goals
20.1 This Manual is intended to comply with Section
708-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code titled: Manual of Written and
Graphic Design Guidelines.
20.2 This Manual is intended to help protect and
enhance the character of Lititz Borough.
Traditional Lititz Neighborhood to inspire TNDO
20.3 This Manual shall be utilized as part of the Form
Based Code Regulations.
20.4 This Manual shall be utilized, in particular,
for development in the Downtown, and in the
Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay
District (TNDO).
20.5 This Manual shall be utilized to plan, design,
construct and maintain buildings, structures,
Streetscapes, and landscapes.
20.6 The places, spaces, buildings, and Streetscapes,
as shown in this Manual shall be emulated.
Traditional Lititz Neighborhood to inspire TNDO
Traditional Lititz Neighborhood to inspire TNDO
20.2
Overall Goals
20.7 This Manual is intended to apply to the area of
the Downtown as delineated in the Downtown
Lititz Master Plan.
20.8 This Manual shall be utilized to plan, design,
construct and maintain buildings, structures,
Streetscapes, landscapes, and hardscapes in
the Downtown.
20.9 The applicable places, spaces, buildings,
Streetscapes, etc. as shown in this Manual shall
be emulated in the Downtown.
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
Zum Anker Alley Outdoor Dining Outdoor Dining Along Broad Street
Note: The above images are from Derck & Edson Associates, Downtown Lititz
Master Plan, dated September 1, 2008
20.3
Site Design Standards
Street Section Typologies
20.10 Where new neighborhoods are created, it is intended that complete streets be constructed to replicate existing Borough Streetscapes.
20.11
Proposed streets shall be designed to include travel lanes, on-street parking spaces, sidewalks, and Build-to Lines which resemble existing Borough street sections.
20.4
Site Design Standards
Street Section Typologies
20.12 Where new neighborhoods are created, it is intended that complete streets be constructed to replicate existing Borough Streetscapes.
20.13
Proposed streets shall be designed to include travel lanes, on-street parking spaces, sidewalks, and Build-to Lines which resemble existing Borough street sections.
20.5
Site Design Standards
Benches
Existing assortment
of Downtown seating
options does not promote
visual continuity among
the Borough’s public
outdoor spaces.
20.14 To promote greater visual continuity among
the Borough’s diverse public spaces,
selection of open space amenities such
as high-quality site furnishings, sign poles,
street lights, and paving materials is intended
to be from a list of approved Streetscape
components.
20.15 Compliance with Borough-approved public
amenities (or Borough-approved equals)
is intended to celebrate local heritage, to
withstand the test of time, and to create
durable, safe, and attractive public spaces
which reinforce a distinctive sense of place.
20.16
20.17
20.18
20.19
20.20
All benches to be placed within the Borough’s public outdoor spaces shall be model # PRS127 (with a
center bench arm) manufactured by Victor Stanley Inc in a color to replicate the Borough’s street light
pole color, or Borough-approved equal. The Borough may consider suggested bench alternatives. In
some settings, a backless bench may be used to provide seating orientation options. Typically, benches
with backs shall be provided, and backs shall be oriented to permit direct views of passing pedestrians
and motorists from bench seats.
Benches shall be provided at all public gathering spaces including greens, plazas, squares, pocket
parks, and bus stops.
Benches shall not obstruct pedestrian travel zones required for ADA compliance, nor building entrances
and fire hydrant access.
All benches shall be permanently mounted to secured paving materials per the bench manufacturer’s
specifications, and leveling hardware shall be used to compensate for sloping pavement conditions
where applicable.
While bench donor recognition plaques may be permitted following plaque design review by the
Borough, no commercial logos and/or outdoor advertising will be permitted on public site furnishings.
20.6
Site Design Standards
Moveable Tables and Chairs
20.21 To promote greater visual continuity among
the Borough’s diverse public spaces,
selection of open space amenities such
as high-quality site furnishings, sign poles,
street lights, and paving materials is intended
to be from a list of approved Streetscape
components.
20.22 Compliance with Borough-approved public
amenities (or Borough-approved equals)
is intended to celebrate local heritage, to
withstand the test of time, and to create
durable, safe, and attractive public spaces
which reinforce a distinctive sense of place.
20.23
20.24
20.25
20.26
20.27
Because the installation of moveable furnishings is temporary in nature and subject to the aesthetic
preferences of business owners, specific tables and chair selections are not required. All moveable
furnishings must, however, be made of safe, sturdy, and durable materials such as wood, steel,
aluminum, or wrought iron. They must also be of commercial grade and specifically manufactured for
outdoor use. Tables may be no larger than two (2) feet and six (6) inches wide, and they should visually
complement adjacent chairs.
Moveable furnishings shall not encroach into pedestrian travel zones required for ADA compliance, nor
obstruct building entrances and fire hydrant access.
Neither moveable tables nor chairs may be secured to sidewalk pavement, street lights, trees, benches
or other public site furnishings.
In addition to tables and chairs, outdoor cafes must include securely mounted litter receptacles (see
p.194.4), if such receptacles do not currently exist within twenty (20) feet of the cafe area.
All moveable furnishings must be regularly cleaned and maintained. They must be stored indoors and/
or out of the public rights-of-ways beyond seasonal periods of cafe operation.
20.7
Site Design Standards
Bollards and Litter Receptacles
20.28 To promote greater visual continuity among
the Borough’s diverse public spaces,
selection of open space amenities such
as high-quality site furnishings, sign poles,
street lights, and paving materials is intended
to be from a list of approved Streetscape
components.
20.29 Compliance with Borough-approved public
amenities (or Borough-approved equals)
is intended to celebrate local heritage, to
withstand the test of time, and to create
durable, safe, and attractive public spaces
which reinforce a distinctive sense of place.
20.30
20.31
20.32
20.33
20.34
To delineate and separate pedestrian and vehicular zones, decorative bollards for public areas
must match the quality and appearance of model #CB-C manufactured by Olympic Foundry
Inc. and available from Fairweather Site Furnishings & Accessories in a color to replicate the
Borough’s street light pole color, or Borough-approved equal.
All litter receptacles to be placed within the Borough’s public spaces shall be model # T-32
with dome-top (model #DS-32) manufactured by Victor Stanley Inc. in standard green color, or
approved equal.
Receptacles shall be located near street intersections (but outside the established Clear Sight
Triangles) at mid-block crosswalks, and near proposed bench locations. Typically, two litter
receptacles located on opposite corners of a downtown street intersection shall be sufficient.
Receptacles and bollards shall not obstruct pedestrian travel zones required for ADA compliance,
nor building entrances and fire hydrant access.
All receptacles and bollards shall be permanently mounted to secured paving materials per the
manufacturer’s specifications, and leveling hardware shall be used to compensate for sloping
pavement conditions where applicable.
20.8
Site Design Standards
Bike Racks
20.35 To promote greater visual continuity among
the Borough’s diverse public spaces,
selection of open space amenities such
as high-quality site furnishings, sign poles,
street lights, and paving materials is intended
to be from a list of approved Streetscape
components.
20.36 Compliance with Borough-approved public
amenities (or Borough-approved equals)
is intended to celebrate local heritage, to
withstand the test of time, and to create
durable, safe, and attractive public spaces
which reinforce a distinctive sense of place.
20.37
20.38
20.39
20.40
20.41
Bike Racks shall be provided in the following locations, and in the following quantities:
a. At all institutional land uses such as post office, school, municipal building, municipal park,
and the like (with at least one [1] Bike Rack [model specified in 194.34] per lot);
b. At all non-residential developments with new buildings of 20,000 square feet or more on the
ground floor (with at least two [2] Bike Racks [model specified in 194.33] per lot);
c. At all new TNDO developments (with at least six [6] Bike Racks [model specified in 194.33]
per TNDO site).
Bike Racks shall not obstruct pedestrian travel zones required for ADA compliance, nor building entrances, fire
hydrant access, and clear sight triangles.
All Bike Racks shall be permanently mounted to secured paving materials per the manufacturer’s specifications,
and leveling hardware shall be used to compensate for sloping pavement conditions where applicable.
To promote alternatives to vehicular transportation, Bike Rack model #FW2E-4 manufactured by Keystone
Ridge Designs in a color to replicate the Borough’s street light poles (or Borough-approved equal) shall be
provided in public sidewalk areas where the developer or Borough determine that such amenity is warranted.
Within public greens, plazas, and squares where more ample space and parking demand exist, Bike Rack
model “Boa” manufactured by Dobra Design in a color to replicate the Borough’s street light poles (or Boroughapproved
equal) shall be provided.
20.9
Site Design Standards
Sidewalk Paving Materials
Existing assortment of impervious paving types which
attempt to replicate brick and stone masonry.
Required brick and/or concrete paving materials which
respect traditional sidewalk construction practices.
20.42 To promote greater visual continuity among
the Borough’s diverse public spaces,
selection of open space amenities such
as high-quality site furnishings, sign poles,
street lights, and paving materials is intended
to be from a list of approved Streetscape
components.
20.43 Compliance with Borough-approved public
amenities (or Borough-approved equals)
is intended to celebrate local heritage, to
withstand the test of time, and to create
durable, safe, and attractive public spaces
which reinforce a distinctive sense of place.
20.44
20.45
20.46
20.47
20.48
20.49
20.50
Although durable and easy to maintain, concrete sidewalk paving does not permit essential air and water penetration to street tree root
zones, and it must be destroyed, thrown away, and replaced whenever access to underground utilities is required. Furthermore, concrete
colors and patterns of replaced paving sections rarely match earlier paving areas. For these reasons, a continuous brick sidewalk paving
band shall be provided adjacent to Downtown street curbs wherever more than fifty (50) feet of contiguous Streetscape improvements are
proposed. For smaller Downtown areas, this brick paving band may be omitted, but use of porous concrete paving is recommended in
its place.
All other Borough sidewalks separated from a street curb by an unpaved area (i.e. tree lawn) shall be concrete, but such concrete shall not
be colored and/or patterned to falsely replicate other paving materials such as stone and/or brick.
Downtown brick paving bands shall extend two (2) feet and four (4) inches from the back of a street curb unless such width is greater than
40% of the overall sidewalk width. In such areas, the band width may be reduced, but it shall be consistent throughout an entire block.
Downtown sidewalk areas located between required brick paving bands and building facades shall be paved with concrete (preferably
porous concrete), and shall not include surface color or texture treatments which attempt to falsely replicate other paving materials.
Paving bricks for sidewalks shall be model ‘2-1/4”x4”x8” Brick Paver’ manufactured by Watsontown Brick Company in standard red color.
They shall be set in a non-mortared 90 degree Herringbone Pattern over stable, well-compacted base materials which permit stormwater
infiltration (except at street intersections and driveways where a concrete base material may be used to withstand occasional vehicular
encroachment).
Brick and concrete sidewalk paving (designed for vehicular use) shall extend across access drives and shall not be interrupted with
bituminous paving.
Accessible sidewalk ramps with ADA-approved detectable sidewalk warnings shall be provided and such warnings shall visually contrast
with surrounding paved areas. Detectable warning materials composed of raised truncated domes shall be presented to the Borough for
approval.
20.10
Site Design Standards
Crosswalks
20.51 To promote greater visual continuity among
the Borough’s diverse public spaces,
selection of open space amenities such
as high-quality site furnishings, sign poles,
street lights, and paving materials is intended
to be from a list of approved Streetscape
components.
20.52 Compliance with Borough-approved public
amenities (or Borough-approved equals)
is intended to celebrate local heritage, to
withstand the test of time, and to create
durable, safe, and attractive public spaces
which reinforce a distinctive sense of place.
20.53
20.54
20.55
20.56
Crosswalks shall be located at all downtown street intersections, connecting opposing accessible
sidewalk ramps.
In most Crosswalk locations, heat-applied Crosswalk Striping shall be provided. Such
Crosswalks shall be six (6) to ten (10) feet wide and shall be immediately re-striped whenever
removal of bituminous paving and subsequent street patching occurs, and when striping
becomes worn from regular use.
As a viable alternative to striped Crosswalks, textured paving consisting of brick (2-3/4 inch,
model ‘#36 Red Sunset’ manufactured by Whitacre-Greer) shall be installed on a reinforced
concrete base to address pedestrian safety and vehicular traffic calming. Such Crosswalks
shall be edged with flush concrete curb to create a visual and functional transition between brick
pavers and adjoining bituminous paving. Brick Crosswalk pavers are to be set at a 90 degree
herringbone paving pattern, and the overall Crosswalk width shall be ten (10) feet.
Crosswalks shall not be constructed of colored and stamped bituminous paving due to visual
inconsistency of such materials with the Borough’s built environment, and due to increased
maintenance inherent to such paving practices.
20.11
Site Design Standards
Street Lights
Downtown Street Light
Downtown Street Light
20.57 To promote greater visual continuity among
the Borough’s diverse public spaces,
selection of open space amenities such
as high-quality site furnishings, sign poles,
street lights, and paving materials is intended
to be from a list of approved Streetscape
components.
20.58 Compliance with Borough-approved public
amenities (or Borough-approved equals)
is intended to celebrate local heritage, to
withstand the test of time, and to create
durable, safe, and attractive public spaces
which reinforce a distinctive sense of place.
20.59
20.60
Pedestrian-scaled Washington Boulevard Street Lights with standard green poles as
supplied by PPL (or approved equal) shall be installed and maintained along both
sides of a street. To address ‘dark sky’ initiatives by reducing light pollution and light
trespass, model # ‘K118 Washington’ luminaires with ‘VL1 Cut Off Optical System’
manufactured by King Luminaire Ornamental Lighting shall be used.
Street Lights and street trees shall be located to achieve proper spacing for street
and sidewalk illumination levels desired by the Borough Engineer, and to minimize
impacts with open doors of vehicles parked in on-street parking spaces.
20.12
Site Design Standards
Pole-mounted Signs & Signals
Inconsistent Streetscape
colors and materials
Inconsistent pole colors
and materials combined
with non-consolidated
signage contribute to
visual Streetscape clutter.
20.61 To promote greater visual continuity among
the Borough’s diverse public spaces,
selection of open space amenities such
as high-quality site furnishings, sign poles,
street lights, and paving materials is intended
to be from a list of approved Streetscape
components.
20.62 Compliance with Borough-approved public
amenities (or Borough-approved equals)
is intended to celebrate local heritage, to
withstand the test of time, and to create
durable, safe, and attractive public spaces
which reinforce a distinctive sense of place.
20.63
20.64
20.65
Poles and posts for mounting signs and/or signals shall be fiberglass, aluminum, cast
iron, steel, or painted wood. Unpainted wood sign poles/posts shall not be used.
Poles which accommodate traffic signalization must closely replicate the standard
color and form of PPL’s Washington Boulevard street light poles.
To reduce visual Streetscape clutter, signs providing vehicular wayfinding and
regulations shall be consolidated on shared sign poles, or securely attached to nearby
street light or traffic signal poles wherever feasible.
20.13
Site Design Standards
Streetscape Edge
Masonry pier with hedge/’green wall’ Masonry seat wall
Masonry pier and wall Painted wood gate and fence
20.66 Pedestrian-scaled site features such as fences, walls, piers, gates, and hedges are intended to define Streetscape edges where buildings and other structures that typically delineate Street Walls are non-existent.
20.67
20.68
20.69
20.70
Walls, piers, fences, and hedges with a maximum three (3) feet and six (6) inch height shall be used to effectively delineate Downtown Street Walls, and to provide a clear visual division between public and private outdoor spaces where building facades do not already exist to serve this purpose.
Wall and fence materials shall be architecturally compatible with nearby structures, and shall be constructed of painted wood, indigenous stone, brick, cast limestone, wrought iron, and/or black, powder-coated metal components (excluding chain-link fencing).
Hedges shall be regularly maintained so as to not exceed a three (3) feet and six (6) inch height, nor encroach into public pedestrian areas.
Walls, piers, fences, and hedges may be terminated and/or punctuated with masonry piers, and they may be interrupted by pedestrian-scaled gates. Such gates shall be constructed of painted wood, wrought iron, or black, powder-coated metal.
20.14
Site Design Standards
Streetscape - Best Practices
Narrow, ineffective Streetscape edge delineation
between sidewalk and off-street parking area.
Streetscape
Enhancement
Utilizing Appropriate
Design Elements from
Existing Site Context
Design Standards
Improved Streetscape delineation between these
same public and private outdoor spaces.
20.71 Where building facades do not adequately define a Street Wall, other
features such as appropriately-scaled walls, fences, piers, hedges,
and other plantings shall be used to separate front yard areas from
adjoining sidewalks.
20.15
Site Design Standards
Street Tree Use and Selection
20.72 It is intended that trees will be planted within
the Borough’s Streetscapes, parking areas, and
required landscape buffers to provide a pedestrianscaled
environment, a seasonal succession of
landscape interest, a buffer from undesirable views,
a barrier to the detrimental effects of wind and noise,
and a comfortable shade canopy to lower energy
consumption and reduce carbon dioxide levels.
20.73 With due consideration of mature plant forms, trees
shall be selected to fit a given site context and to
produce desired landscape effects such as shade,
buffers, and/or seasonal vibrancy.
20.16
Site Design Standards
Recommended Street Tree & Buffer Plant Selections
SMALL TREES
Crategus viridis 'Winter King' Winter King Hawthorn 20-35' Ht. Small Standard Form Multi-colored bark, red ornamental fruit persist into winter
Prunus x incam 'Okame' Okame Cherry 15-25' Ht. Small Standard Form Attractive reddish-bronze bark; pink flowers in early spring
Syringa reticulata 'Ivory Silk' Ivory Silk Tree Lilac 20-25' Ht. Small Standard Form White flowers in mid-summer
MEDIUM TREES
Carpinus caroliniana American Hornbeam 20-30' Ht. Broad Umbrella Form Round spreading; native; yellow to orange fall color; tolerant of soil compaction
Gleditsia t. var. inermis 'Imperial', 'Skyline', or 'Moraine' Thornless Honey Locust 30-40' Ht. Large Standard Form Small, lightweight leaves; golden color in fall; produces light shade
Ostrya virginiana American Hophornbeam 25-40' Ht. Large Standard Form Attractive exfoliating bark and hop-like fruit; native
Pyrus calleryana 'Chanticleer' Chanticleer Callery Pear 30-40' Ht. Large Standard Form White flowers, red-purple fall leaf color; better structure than older cultivars
Quercus acutissima Sawtooth Oak 35-40' Ht. Large Standard Form Yellow fall color; acorns provide valuable wildlife food source
LARGE TREES
Acer rubrum 'Bowhall' or 'Armstrong' Columnar Red Maples 50-60' Ht. Large Columnar Form Red flowers, fruit and fall color; native
Acer rubrum 'October Glory' or 'Red Sunset' Red Maple 50-60' Ht. Large Standard Form Red flowers, fruit and fall color; native
Ginkgo biloba (male) Male Ginkgo 50-80' Ht. Large Standard Form Brilliant yellow fall color; easy to transplant and establish
Liquidambar styraciflua 'Rotundiloba' Fruitless Sweetgum 60-75' Ht. Large Standard Form Star-shaped leaves; rich reddish purple fall color
Platanus x acerifolia London Plane Tree 70-90' Ht. Large Standard Form Large flat leaf; exfoliating bark, exposing white inner bark
Quercus imbricaria Shingle Oak 50-60' Ht. Broad Umbrella Form More easily transplanted than other oaks; native
Quercus phellos Willow Oak 60-80' Ht. Large Standard Form Moderately fast growing; yellow brown fall color; native
Quercus rubra Red Oak 60-75' Ht. Large Standard Form More easily transplanted than other oaks; red fall color; native; acorns
Ulmus 'Accolade' or 'Morton' Hybrid Elm 50' Ht. Broad Umbrella Form Lustrous dark green leaves; resistant to Dutch Elm disease; very adaptable
Zelkova serrata 'Green Vase' Green Vase Zelkova 60-80' Ht. Large Standard Form Nice form; orange-brown fall color
LARGE BUFFER AREA TREES & SHRUBS *
Abies concolor White Fir 30-50' Ht. Pyramidal Form Highly adaptable evergreen; tolerant of heat and drought
Euonymus kiautschovicus 'Manhattan' Spreading Euonymus 8-10' Ht. Large Shrub Form Highly adaptable to most soils; semievergreen; fast-growing
Hydrangea quercifolia Oakleaf Hydrangea 4-6' Ht. Large Shrub Form Attractive bark; large white flowers in June; burgandy fall color; native
Juniperus virginiana Eastern Redcedar 30-50' Ht. Pyramidal Form Highly adaptable evergreen; valuable food source for birds; native
Rhus aromatica Fragrant Sumac 2-6' Ht. Large Shrub Form Highly adaptable; spreading; orange-red fall color; native
Rhus typhina Staghorn Sumac 15-20' Ht. Large Shrub Form Highly adaptable; spreading; orange-red fall color; native
Viburnum trilobum American Cranberrybush Viburnum 8-12' Ht. Large Shrub Form Flowers in May; attractive fruit; red fall color; native
* Other potential plant selections will be considered by the Borough's Shade Tree Commission
20.74 It is intended that trees will be selected for
the Borough’s Streetscapes, parking areas,
and required landscape buffers utilizing
species proven tolerant of urban conditions,
and able to prosper in spite of environmental
and physical constraints (overhead utilities,
nearby building facades, limited root zones,
etc).
20.75
20.76
20.77
20.78
20.79
With due consideration of the proposed planting location and existing site constraints, tree types
shall be determined by referring to the appropriate section in the list above. A preference shall
be given to use of native plant species.
Trees for Streetscapes and parking areas shall be responsibly pruned to have bottom tree
branches at least eight (8) feet above sidewalk areas and at least ten (10) feet above vehicular
areas at the time of tree maturity. No street tree shall be smaller than a two (2) inch caliper size
(the diameter of the trunk measured six [6] inches above grade) at the time of tree installation.
Where more than fifty (50) feet of contiguous Streetscape improvements are proposed, such
caliper measurements shall be no less than three (3) inches.
Tree and shrub species selection for required landscape buffers shall be in accordance with
the list provided above, and shall be planted according to quantities established on p.194.25.
Tree species for required landscape buffers shall not have a caliper less than three (3) inches in
size (the diameter of the trunk measured six [6] inches above grade) at the time of installation.
To avoid creation of monocultures consisting of only one plant type, each Borough block shall
include at least two street tree species, and each large buffer area shall include at least three
species.
20.17
Landscape Design Standards
Street Tree Standards - Placement & Spacing
20.80
20.80.a
20.81
20.82
20.83
20.84
20.85
20.85.a
Street tree spacing requirements have intended variations depending upon selected tree forms at the time of plant maturity, and due to unique contextual considerations inherent to each planting site.
The Tree Lawn of five feet (5’) typical as shown on this page is not intended for lots with Commercial Use.
Small street trees selected from the Borough’s approved list of species shall be spaced a minimum of twenty (20) feet and a maximum of forty (40) feet apart.
Mid-sized trees and larger street trees selected from this same list shall be spaced a minimum of forty
(40) feet and a maximum of sixty (60) feet apart.
Street tree placement shall typically occur within the center of a tree lawn or brick sidewalk paving band.
Tree locations shall generally be staggered on opposing sides of a street unless a street’s width exceeds forty (40) feet, requiring alignment of proposed lighting and trees on opposite street sides to obtain proper levels of Streetscape illumination. Tree spacing shall be responsive to street light locations which, in turn, shall relate to locations of on- street parking spaces (where spaces are delineated with pavement markings). Careful coordination of tree placement, lighting, and parked vehicles shall prevent blocked lighting patterns and blocked access to car doors caused by poorly located street trees and light poles. Tree placement is subject to existing locations of underground utilities and/ or vaults which potentially extend beneath some sidewalk areas.
Trees shall not be planted within five (5) feet of access drives, within twenty-five (25) feet of existing trees, within bus stop zones, below fire escape balconies, where blockage to building entrances presents safety concerns, or within five (5) feet of hydrants and permanent Streetscape furnishings. Full visibility of traffic signals, street intersections, and wayfinding signage (both vehicular and pedestrian forms) shall always be maintained.
Whenever a lot is used for Commercial Use, a paved area shall be created between the curb and the sidewalk, in lieu of a tree lawn, using brick, concrete, Belgian block, or other approved unit pavers, as well as street trees with a 40 to 60 foot spacing.
20.18
Landscape Design Standards
Street Tree Standards - Planting Details
20.86 For new tree plantings in areas without tree lawns,
and where more than fifty (50) feet of contiguous
Streetscape enhancements are proposed, it is intended
that continuous trenches of structurally engineered soil
be provided parallel to curb-lines to facilitate better root
growth, while permitting air and water to reach critical
root zones. Individual tree planting pits are not permitted
in such areas unless existing tree and utility locations
render continuous trenches infeasible.
20.87 For areas without tree lawns and where continuous
trenches are not required due to a limited Streetscape
improvement area (less than fifty [50] feet overall
sidewalk length), it is intended that trees be installed
within individual planting pits (minimum three [3] feet wide
by three [3] feet long by three [3] feet deep).
20.88 For areas with tree lawns, it is intended that native soil
within the entire width of such unpaved area be amended
to a depth equal to the height of the installed tree’s root
ball. Structurally engineered soil is not required.
20.89
20.90
20.91
20.92
20.93
20.94
For new tree plantings in areas with tree lawns (unpaved area between curbs and sidewalks), native soils shall be
used in place of structurally engineered soils. Such soils shall be amended with ample organic matter at the time of
tree planting.
Where tree lawns are not permitted and where sidewalks extend to curbs, sidewalk pavements often fail due to tree
root growth. To minimize failure, structurally engineered soil and adequately compacted sub-surface base materials
for sidewalk pavements shall be used. Such soils shall contain a mix of loam, stone, water, and a moisture-retaining
polymers so that weight-bearing loads are transferred from stone to stone, leaving the soil between stones unaffected by
compaction, capable of greater nutrient holding capacity, and enhanced with improved drainage.
Where sidewalks extend to curbs and where continuous trenches are not required, soil within a minimum three (3) feet
wide by three (3) feet long by three (3) feet deep tree planting pit shall be prepared in accordance with section 194.80.
The base of the root collar (area where the trunk transitions to the tree’s root mass) shall remain above surrounding
soil backfill.
Following tree planting in areas without tree lawns, paving shall be placed over four (4) inches of stone paving subbase
and over structurally engineered soils whcih have been adequately compacted per manufacturer’s specifications.
Due to associated costs and on-going maintenance, tree grates shall not be used unless specifically approved by the
Borough. Instead, tree plantings in areas without tree lawns and where brick paving bands are required shall be covered
with non-mortared brick pavers (retaining two [2] feet by two [2] feet pavement openings centered on tree trunks), shall
include a sub-surface, paver edge restraint to keep brick pavers in place, and shall be mulched with double-shredded
hardwood mulch (two [2] inch depth). Other newly planted areas shall be covered with either mulch and/or groundcover
plantings. Stone mulch and decorative edgings which extends above the soil surface are not permitted.
20.19
Site Design Standards
Street Tree Best Practices
Images of a Borough street presently lacking the inherent aesthetic and environmental
benefits of street trees, and this same street depicted with the addition of tree plantings.
20.20
Site Design Standards
Front Yards for Residential Neighborhoods
20.95 It is intended that all new residential development
(including urban infill redevelopment) respect Front
Yard conditions common to the Borough’s existing
neighborhoods.
20.96 Front Yards for residential infill projects shall replicate
typical building setbacks for existing structures
located on the same block which accommodate
such infill development.
20.97 Front Yards for new residential neighborhoods may
incorporate a variety of permitted building setbacks,
but all Front Yards shall comply with traditional
Borough development patterns.
20.21
Site Design Standards
Streetscape Edge Treatments for Off-Street Parking Areas
20.98 Where off-street parking areas are adjacent
to Borough streets, it is intended that
evergreen hedge plantings, appropriate
fencing, and/or masonry structures be used
to delineate the Streetscape edge formed
elsewhere on the same block by building
facades.
20.99
20.100
20.101
Off-street parking areas shall be separated from public Streetscape by a hedge,
fence, wall, pier, and/or masonry structures to retain a pedestrian-scaled Streetscape
environment.
All hedges and fences shall be a maximum three (3) feet and six (6) inches high and
located within a minimum ten (10) feet wide buffer area adjacent to a public sidewalk.
Such edge treatments shall apply to both standard parking areas with bituminous
paving, and parking areas constructed with stabilized turf or other porous paving
materials.
20.22
Site Design Standards
Stormwater Infiltration at Off-Street Parking Area Edges
20.102 Where site topography permits, it is intended
that stormwater run-off will flow to bioinfiltration
areas located at edges of surface,
off-street parking areas.
20.103 Such bio-infiltration areas are intended
to cleanse stormwater pollutants prior
to releasing run-off into the groundwater
system.
20.104
20.105
20.106
Rather than discharge surface stormwater run-off into a standard stormwater
conveyance system, surface off-street parking areas shall be constructed to direct
flows to bio-infiltration areas located at the edges of such facilities.
Infiltration areas shall be planted with indigenous, facultative plant species (capable of
living under fluctuating environmental conditions brought about by flooding, drought,
and varying levels of oxygen within the soil), and they shall be regularly maintained to
prevent establishment of invasive weeds and/or collection of debris.
Such infiltration areas shall have a minimum ten (10) feet width and shall be
constructed in accordance with Borough Engineer approval.
20.23
Site Design Standards
Interior Plantings for Off-Street Parking Areas
20.107 With the exception of Downtown parking areas, off-street parking facilities are intended to incorporate shade trees and planted ‘islands’ for both aesthetic and environmental benefits.
20.108
20.109
Curbed ‘islands’ for tree and groundcover plantings shall be provided in accordance with the above illustration.
In addition, eight (8) feet wide planting strips (including a two [2] feet overhang area for parked vehicles) shall also be provided. To facilitate snow removal and stormwater infiltration (see p.194.21), continuous curbs may be omitted in these areas.
20.24
Site Design Standards
Stormwater Infiltration within Off-Street Parking Areas
20.110 With the exception of Downtown locations, it
is intended that stormwater run-off from offstreet
parking areas will flow to bio-infiltration
strips located between parking bays.
20.111 Such bio-infiltration areas are intended
to cleanse stormwater pollutants prior
to releasing run-off into the groundwater
system.
20.112
20.113
20.114
Rather than discharge surface stormwater run-off into standard stormwater
conveyance systems, surface off-street parking areas shall be constructed to direct
flows to bio-infiltration areas located within designated planting strips.
Infiltration areas shall be planted with indigenous, facultative plant species (capable of
living under fluctuating environmental conditions brought about by flooding, drought,
and varying levels of oxygen within the soil), and they shall be regularly maintained to
prevent establishment of invasive weeds and/or collection of debris.
Such infiltration areas shall have a minimum eight (8) feet width and shall be
constructed in accordance with Borough Engineer approval.
20.25
Site Design Standards
Off-Street Parking Area Best Practices
Conventional Off-Street Parking Area
Same area enhanced with perimeter edge treatments, street trees, planted interior islands, and a ‘green’ roof
Same area further enhanced with perimeter
stormwater run-off infiltration areas
20.26
Site Design Standards
Planted Buffers - Selection & Application
20.115 Where required, planted buffers are intended
to clearly delineate edges between public and
private outdoor spaces.
20.116 Narrow planted buffers (ten [10] feet width or
less) are intended to create visual barriers where
two incongruous land uses exist, objectionable
views might otherwise exist, and/or to accentuate
property boundaries within areas with limited,
narrow spaces such as Downtown or residential
neighborhoods.
20.117 Within or bordering areas zoned RA and GB,
and excluding all Downtown areas, wide planted
buffers (greater than ten [10] feet width) are
intended to create visual barriers where two
incongruous land uses exist and/or objectionable
views might otherwise exist.
20.118 Planted Buffers shall clearly delineate edges between public and private outdoor
spaces, and shall create visual barriers where two incongruous land uses exist,
objectionable views might otherwise exist, and/or to accentuate property boundaries.
20.27
Site Design Standards
Planted Buffers for Downtown Areas
20.119 Where required, planted buffers are intended to clearly delineate edges between public and private outdoor spaces, and to create visual barriers where two incongruous land uses adjoin and/or where objectionable views might otherwise exist.
20.120
20.121
20.122
20.123
Planted buffers shall respond to specific screening requirements for each site.
For each twenty-five (25) feet of buffer length, a typical Living Fence Buffer shall minimally include: ten (10) self-clinging vines combined with groundcover and/or flowering annuals & perennials.
For each twenty-five (25) feet of buffer length, a typical Hedge Buffer shall minimally include: eight (8) shrubs at least twenty-four (24) inches in height combined with perennial groundcover and/or flowering annuals & perennials.
For each twenty-five (25) feet of buffer length, a typical Informal Buffer (ten [10] feet wide) shall minimally include: three (3) evergreen trees at least ten (10) feet in height, and five (5) shrubs at least thirty-six (36) inches in height.
20.28
Site Design Standards
Planted Buffers for Non-Downtown Areas
20.124 Where required, planted buffers are intended
to clearly delineate edges between public
and private outdoor spaces, and to create
visual barriers where two incongruous land
uses adjoin and/or where objectionable
views might otherwise exist.
20.125 It is intended that planted buffers shall
respond to specific screening requirements
for each site.
20.126
20.127
20.128
20.129
20.130
For each twenty-five (25) feet of buffer length, a typical Living Fence Buffer shall minimally include: ten (10)
self-clinging vines combined with perennial groundcover and/or flowering annuals & perennials.
For each twenty-five (25) feet of buffer length, a typical Hedge Buffer shall minimally include: eight (8) shrubs
at least twenty-four (24) inches in height combined with perennial groundcover and/or flowering annuals &
perennials.
For each twenty-five (25) feet of buffer length, a typical Informal Buffer (ten [10] feet wide) shall minimally
include: three (3) evergreen trees at least ten (10) feet in height, and five (5) shrubs at least thirty-six (36)
inches in height planted in a non-linear arrangement.
For each one-hundred (100) feet of buffer length, a typical Informal Buffer (thirty [30] feet wide) shall minimally
include: seven (7) evergreen trees at least ten (10) feet in height, and ten (10) shrubs at least thirty-six (36)
inches in height planted in a non-linear arrangement.
For each one-hundred (100) feet of buffer length, a typical Informal Buffer (fifty [50] feet wide) shall minimally
include: nine (9) evergreen trees at least ten (10) feet in height, seven (7) evergreen trees at least six (6) feet
in height, and fifteen (15) shrubs at least thirty-six (36) inches in height planted in a non-linear arrangement.
20.29
Site Design Standards
Planted Buffer Examples
20.131 Where required, planted buffers are intended to clearly delineate edges between public and private outdoor spaces, and to create visual barriers where two incongruous land uses adjoin and/or where objectionable views might otherwise exist.
20.132
Planted buffers shall respond to specific screening requirements for each site.
20.30
Site Design Standards
Buffer - Design/Enhancement Best Practices
Existing buffer area consisting only of lawn Existing off-street parking edge with fence Existing Downtown buffer with informal
planting arrangement
Enhanced buffer consisting of shrubs Enhanced buffer consisting of living fence, Enhanced hedge buffer with clipped
and evergreen trees shade trees, and vegetated stormwater shrubs, masonry piers, and vegetated
infiltration area stormwater infiltration area
20.31
Civic Art
20.133 Civic Art in the form of sculpture, signage, walls,
piers, fountains, and the like, is intended to
provide distinctive signature elements to Lititz
Borough.
Wall and Fountain at Welcome Center
20.134 Civic Art in the form of sculpture, signage, walls,
piers, fountains, and the like shall be provided
and maintained in the Downtown and in new
neighborhoods.
Landscaped Median
Main Street Shops Sign War Memorial along Rt. 772
20.32
Green Urbanism
20.135 Green Urbanism is intended to implement the
Lancaster County Greenscapes Plan.
20.136 Green Urbanism is intended to promote
environmental and energy conservation.
Short, narrow lots increase density and reduce runoff
20.137 Green Urbanism shall incorporate short, narrow
streets in new neighborhoods to reduce runoff.
20.138 Green Urbanism shall include a network of
Pocket Parks connected by walkable streets to
enhance the health of Lititz Borough.
20.139 Tree lined streets shall be created to reduce
cooling load on buildings and promote
walkability.
Tree lined streets reduce cooling costs for buildings
Networks of walkable streets
promote health of residents and
visitors
Attractive bioswales filter stormwater
runoff from streets
20.33
Green Urbanism
20.140 Green Roofs are intended to help conserve
energy.
20.141 Green Roofs are intended to be one of the
certification requirements for the LEED -
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
program.
20.142 Green Roofs shall be installed and maintained
to the maximum extent possible.
20.143 Green Roofs shall be installed and maintained
to achieve consistency with the Downtown
Lititz Master Plan.
20.143 White, silver, or other heat reflecting color
roofs shall be installed and maintained to
reduce the heating effect on buildings.
Green Roofs reduce energy load on buildings.
Source: Derck & Edson Associates, Downtown Littiz Master Plan,
September 2008
Source: National Geographic May 2009
20.34
Architectural Design
Traditional Architecture along Main Street
Traditional Architecture along Main Street
Traditional Architecture along Main Street
Traditional Architecture along Broad Street
20.144 The design of new buildings is intended to be referential
to existing traditional buildings in Lititz Borough.
20.145 New buildings shall be designed, built, and maintained to reflect the
traditional architecture of Lititz Borough.
20.146 New Buildings shall have a scale, size, massing, proportion, and
fenestration similar to the traditional buildings in Lititz Borough.
20.147 Building design and materials shall emulate the character of buildings
shown in the photographs of pages 200 to 200.7
20.148 Architectural Plans and Building Elevations shall be submitted with all
land development plan submissions. Such plans and elevations shall
be dimensioned, and shall indicate proposed finishes.
20.35
Architectural Design
Side Porch along Main Street
Traditional Wraparound Porch on Main Street
Front Porch along Spruce Street
Traditional Front Porch on Spruce Street
20.149 The design of new Single-Family Dwellings is intended
to include porches.
20.150 New Single-Family Dwellings shall be designed, built, and maintained
with porches.
20.151 At least 80% of the primary facade of a Single-Family Dwelling shall
have a porch. The porch shall be raised at least 18 inches above
ground level.
20.36
Architectural Design
Portico along Main Street
Side Porch, Commercial Building along Broad Street
Stoop Along Broad Street
Second floor Porch of Commercial Building along Broad Street
20.152 The design of non-residential buildings and multi-family
dwellings is intended to include porticos and stoops, and
could include porches.
20.153 New non-residential buildings and multi-family dwellings shall be
designed, built, and maintained with porticos and stoops, and may
include porches.
20.37
Architectural Design
20.154 Architectural Design is intended to be compliant
with the Form-Based Code Regulations of Article
VIII of the Zoning Ordinance.
Materials wrap around building corner
20.155 New Buildings may be more contemporary in
style, but shall be consistent with the overall
form, scale, massing and proportions of
traditional buildings in Lititz.
20.156 New buildings are encouraged to have contextsensitive
design details.
Diversity of building materials and design details
Window and Shutter detail Building Arcade, Downtown
20.38
Architectural Design
20.157 New Buildings shall utilize a diversity of traditional
building materials, such as brick, stone, painted
wood clapboard siding, and stucco.
20.158 New Non-Residential Buildings shall have warm
colors, to the maximum extent possible, to
complement existing traditional materials.
20.159 Exposed concrete block shall be avoided,
except when used for foundations.
20.160 Rooftop HVAC units shall be visually screened.
Traditional Building Materials
Traditional Building Materials
Stoop at entrance Office Building with traditional window
proportions
20.39
Architectural Design
20.161 Non-residential buildings exceeding 20 feet
in width are intended to have recesses or
projections to break up the horizontal mass of
the building.
Pilasters create vertical rhythm to “tame” horizontal mass of former Woolworths
(now Iron Hill Restaurant), West Chester, PA
20.162 Recesses or projections shall be provided
every 18 to 20 feet on center for non-residential
buildings, through the use of Pilasters, Piers,
Columns, and the like.
20.163 The Pilaster material shall be extended to the
sidewalk as a full vertical unit, while maintaining
the minimum required sidewalk width.
20.164 The 18 to 20 foot wide bays shall enable
a proportion that respects Lititz Borough
character, and recessed niche spaces (such
as at 45 S. Broad Street) may be created to
form a plaza, pocket park, pedestrian pocket,
or other pedestrian gathering area, provided
that the required build-to line shall be achieved
for at least seventy five percent (75%) of the
alignment of the facade.
Alley view showing rhythm of Pilasters at former Wylie Garage, West Chester, PA
Pilasters along former Wylie Garage (now Offices), West Chester, PA
Piers along Bicentennial Garage, West Chester, PA
20.40
Architectural Design
Multi-Family Dwellings, Summerset at Frick Park TND, Pittsburgh, PA
Townhomes, Wyncrest TND, Sandy Spring, MD
Townhomes, Belvedere at Doyle Square TND, Doylestown, PA
Duplex Units, Eagleview TND, Lionville, PA
20.165 Townhomes and duplex/twin dwellings are intended to
provide housing diversity within the TNDO.
20.166 Duplex/twin dwellings are intended to provide for an
economy of lots, and units at both ends of the building.
20.167 A variety of building types shall be created.
20.168 Single-family attached dwellings may include triplex and quadraplex
units.
20.169 A variety of roof lines, architectural features and materials shall be
provided to create diversity.
20.41
Architectural Design
Brick Piers at Mashpee Commons, Massachusetts
Two-story Commerce Bank with Portico, Media, PA
Two-story Commercial Streetscape, Main Street at Exton, Exton, PA
Mixed-Use Neighborhood Center, Crocker Park, Ohio
20.170 Facade articulation, variation in roof lines, and vertical
expression of buildings, is intended to promote
consistency with the scale and proportion of traditional
Streetscapes and neighborhoods of Lititz Borough.
20.171 A vertical proportion to buildings shall be achieved
through the use of a crenelated type of recess and
projection through the use of windows, doors, pilasters,
piers, columns, arches, porches, porticos, stoops,
balconies, colonnades, arcades, and the like.
20.172 Facades, roof lines, and building heights shall be
provided and articulated along the primary facade of
a building. On corner lots, all buildings shall have two
primary facades, one for each street frontage.
20.173 Roof lines of buildings shall be varied through the use of dormers,
gables, and the like, to the maximum extent possible.
20.174 Facade wall heights of flat-roofed buildings shall be staggered to
create visual interest. Such heights shall vary by at least 42 inches
through the use of Parapet walls.
20.175 Retail store fronts shall have display windows with low sills and high
lintels.
20.176 The maximum glass area of the primary facade of a building wall shall
be 60%.
20.177 The minimum glass area of the primary facade of a building wall shall
be 30%.
20.42
Maintenance of Improvements
20.178 Perpetual maintenance of all improvements
is intended to retain quality control of the
Downtown and the TNDO
Well-maintained Arbor and Courtyard at General Sutter Inn
20.179 The developer shall operate and maintain all
improvements by inspecting, servicing, and
otherwise taking care of the same, putting and
keeping same in working order, and performing
any repairs, replacements and other work for
such purposes.
20.180 Maintenance shall include keeping
improvements well painted, clean, and clear of Well-maintained landscape median
rubbish and debris.
Well-maintained Outdoor
Dining Area
Well-maintained Lititz Springs Park
20.43
APPENDIX 21
21
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements
Introduction ............................................................................. 1
Vision Statement ..................................................................... 2
Inventory and Analysis ............................................................ 2
Guiding Principles ................................................................... 6
Master Plan ............................................................................... 8
Focus Areas ........................................................................... 11
prepared by
funded by
Next Steps ............................................................................. 24
Appendix
Acknowledgements
In cooperation with Venture Lititz, a non-profit organization whose mission is to enhance and sustain the social and commercial vibrancy of downtown Lititz, Derck & Edson Associates, along with the Delta Development Group, developed this Downtown Lititz Master Plan. This Master Plan incorporates the
planning strategies and goals from the 1999 Joint Strategic Comprehensive Plan for Warwick Township and Lititz Borough, the 2005 Update, as well as Lancaster County’s 2006 Comprehensive Plan. The plan speaks specifically to portions of each of these plans, as outlined here:
1999 Joint Strategic Comprehensive Plan Goals:
· promote and strengthen business opportunities in the downtown
· preserve the community character of the downtown
· recognize the downtown as a “gathering place” for the regional community
· provide recreational links to the region’s center of activities
2005 Joint Comprehensive Plan Update - Physical Development Strategies
· reinvestment area identification - the railroad corridor area contiguous to downtown, between Broad Street and Oak Street
Envision Lancaster County - Comprehensive Plan 2006
· Balance: Urban Growth Area Strategy Goal: Direct more development into designated Urban Growth Areas through reinvestment and new development that improves the quality of life by respecting and reinforcing existing community forms and values
Thanks to Venture Lititz, the Master Plan Steering Committee, the Pennsylvania Downtown Center, the Borough of Lititz, and the Lititz Open Space Board for their assistance during the planning process.
Introduction
It seems every town wants to be like Lititz. Everyone wants to live in Lititz, watch the fireworks in Lititz, and has probably hand-rolled a pretzel in Lititz. The streets of downtown Lititz possess an inherent sense of place that has resonated for more than 250 years. From the early 18th Century Moravian settlement east on Main Street to the 19th Century opening of Wilbur Chocolate and the Julius Sturgis Pretzel Bakery through 20th Century developments, Lititz has consistently evolved and changed with the times. The early 21st century holds the same promise for Lititz. At this junction in its history, looking forward to the tercentennial celebration in 2057, what more can Lititz achieve?
Role of the Master Plan
The role of a Downtown Master Plan is to develop an understanding of existing patterns of development and growth potential. Two considerations are key:
? Physical elements: These physical elements include building mass, space allocations, and connections.
? Community use: These potential uses include the types of services needed by the residents of the community.
Then, looking beyond the existing physical elements and community uses of today, the Master Plan lays out a specific vision for the future.
Process
The process used to develop this plan included:
Collection of Printed Data - assembling and summarizing pertinent information to reaffirm economic and market potential, including:
? 1999 Joint Comprehensive Plan,
? 2005 Joint Comprehensive Plan Update,
? Envision Lancaster County - Comp. Plan 2006
? 2003 Market Study,
? Existing Conditions Assessment,
? Market Analysis (Trade Area),
? Demographic Summary,
? Development Strategy,
? Parking Analysis Study,
? Floodplain Review,
? Utility Review (locations, capacities)
? Existing Regulations,
? Vision Statement – Venture Lititz.
Collection of Anecdotal Data
? Interview key stakeholders.
Visioning and Analysis
? Downtown Business District
- Review the development potential for the Downtown Business District.
- Create a conceptual land use plan along with a development strategy that describes general uses targeted for specific areas based on need, current buildings/ structures, and other marketing factors.
- Review up-to-date demographic and market analysis data.
? Long and Bomberger and Parkview Hotel Properties
- Develop scenarios specific to the Long and Bomberger property as well as the Parkview Hotel, within the context of the plan for the Downtown Business District.
Figure 1 - Downtown Lititz possesses an inherent sense of place.
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
22
Vision Statement
The vision for this effort is to create a Downtown Master Plan that will enhance, strengthen, and grow
downtown Lititz as the nucleus of the Borough and Warwick Township.
Inventory and
Analysis
Study Area Description
The study area for this Downtown Master Plan
is bounded to the north by Lincoln Avenue and
Kleine Lane, to the south by Orange Street and
Juniper Lane, to the east by Cherry Lane, and to
the west by Pine Lane.
Within the study area (see Figure 2), the following
physical elements were examined and analyzed to
set a framework for the planning process:
? Existing Land Use
? Existing Building Area
? Existing Parking
? Existing Land Cover
? Existing Infrastructure
Figure 2 - The Master Plan study area
Existing Land Use Map
Within each downtown building, there are multiple
floors with multiple tenants and uses. For the purpose
of this Master Plan, the review focused on the first
and second floor spaces. Office space occupies almost
33% of the first floor in the downtown buildings. By
including government and institutional uses, the
number increases to 43%. Retail establishments occupy
15% of the space. In the second floor spaces, residential
space is the dominant use, accounting for 42%, with
office space at 29%.
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
32
Building Use (1st Floor) Total SF
Food 45,111
Gov't / Inst'l 120,927
Lodging 12,651
Manufacturing 42,016
Office 177,752
Residential 115,546
Retail 103,578
Vacant 52,813
Grand Total 670,394
Figure 5 - First floor building use by
square feet
Within the study area, there are currently
significant historical features of interest for heritage
tourism including:
· Wilbur Chocolate Factory
· Lititz Springs Park Train Station
· Main Street
· Sturgis Pretzel
· Linden Hall School for Girls
· Moravian Church Square
· Lititz Museum
Figure 3 - A land use map of the study area, showing first
floor usage
Existing Parking
Throughout the study area, on-street parking is
provided by Borough-managed meters (the rate is
$ .25/hour). Most businesses provide employee
and limited consumer parking on surface lots
behind their buildings. There is one private,
two-level parking deck in town, which services
Susquehanna Bank.
15%
17%
8% 7%
27%
18%
2%
6%
Shared parking exists organically in town. There is
not a formal process in place at the municipal level
to encourage sharing facilities, nor is there code
language addressing the issue.
The total number of parking spaces available in the
study area is approximately 732. Parking, or space
Figure 4 - Types of uses that occupy the first floor
spaces in the study area
Existing Building Stock
The footprints of the existing buildings in the study
area cover approximately 670,394 square feet. For
comparison, a typical Wal-Mart is approximately
100,000 square feet and Park City Mall is
approximately 997,000 square feet.
to provide parking, appears to be a major limitation
for increased density of space.
Existing Land Cover
The land cover in the study area is a mixture of
buildings, impervious coverage (parking and
sidewalks), and open space (pervious surfaces).
The study area is comprised of 42% open space.
The remaining 58% is split between buildings and
impervious surfaces (see Figure 6).
Food
Gov't / Inst'l
Lodging
Manuafacturing
Office
Residential
Retail
Vacant
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
42
Inventory and Analysis
42%
23%
35%
provided to accommodate the projected population growth within the Borough of Lititz between 2007 and 2012. Approximately 576 housing units will be required to accommodate the projected population growth within a three-mile radius of the Borough.
? Household income within the Borough mirrors the state median, however income within a three- mile radius is 25% higher than in Pennsylvania.
Figure 6 - Existing Land Cover in the study area
An area of approximately 17 acres within the 67- acre study area is designated as 100 year floodplain by FEMA. Approximately 9 acres is mapped as floodway, an area that carries the majority of the storm flow and should remain unobstructed.
Existing Utility Review
Currently, there are no problems with the water or sewer systems downtown. The sewer system is
comprised of all 8” mains and there are no capacity or surcharge issues.
The water main in Main Street is 12” which is one of the larger mains in town. In the study area, the portion of the water main in Broad Street is 8”.
There have been no capacity or pressure problems anywhere in this area.
Currently, there is capacity in the system to accommodate increased demand through expansion and redevelopment.
Demographic Summary
The basis for the demographic information is data for Lititz Borough, a three-mile radius around the center point in the borough, and a five-mile radius from this same center point, as shown in Figure 8. Summary demographic data is presented here. For the numbers behind the summary, please see the Appendix.
? Population growth rate in Lititz is slightly higher than the rate of growth for the state of Pennsylvania, but the growth rate within a three- mile radius is more than double the state growth rate. Similar growth is expected to continue.
? Based on this growth rate, approximately 152 additional housing units of various styles can be
? According to 2007 demographic estimates, the most affluent neighborhoods are approximately three miles south of the Borough of Lititz, with average annual household incomes of up to
$165,000.
? Nearly 27% of residents within three miles of Lititz have attained a bachelor’s or graduate degree, compared to 22% of all Pennsylvanians.
Market Study Summary
Data on spending patterns of those who live within these same geographic limits (the Borough, three- mile radius, and five-mile radius) was collected
in order to identify existing spending patterns and identify what spending might be captured in downtown Lititz.
Figure 9 shows data on sales surplus areas and sales leakage areas. A sales surplus (shown in black) indicates that retailers are “exporting” goods to consumers from outside the area. A sales “leakage” (shown in red) indicates that consumers
Figure 7 - Currently, surface parking dominates the Lititz Run corridor.
Buildings Impervious Open Space
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
52
that live in a defined area are spending disposable income outside the area. The data reflects total spending and does not consider where the dollars were spent, just where the consumers live. This data indicates:
? Lititz Borough residents spend an estimated $87.5 million annually for retail goods and services. Those who live within a three-mile radius spend
$279 million annually, and those who live in the five-mile radius spent $716.7 million annually.
? Lititz Borough residents spend an estimated $11.5 million annually for food away from home (e.g. eating out). Within a three-mile radius, residents spend $35.8 million annually, and $119.3 million within a five-mile radius.
? Within a three-mile radius of Lititz, spending patterns and local sales estimates indicate an opportunity for additional clothing and accessory stores, eating/drinking places, and performing arts venues.
? Data indicates that the area is an exporter of furniture and home furnishings and miscellaneous
Inventory and Analysis
Figure 8 - The basis for the demographic and market study information is data for Lititz Borough, a three- mile radius around the center point in the borough, and a five-mile radius from this same center point.
Figure 9 - Estimated Retail Spending by Residents
A
B
C
D
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
62
Inventory and Analysis
retail merchandise, which reflects the unique retail shops found in downtown Lititz. These are potential clusters that could be built upon.
? New downtown development should focus on the local market. Heritage tourists are typically looking for a “local experience.” If downtown Lititz businesses truly reflect the character of local residents, they will also be attractive to tourists.
In addition to residents and tourists, Lititz is also host to a healthy workforce of approximately 6,000 workers. Using national averages and raw local data, day time work force spending can be estimated and is shown in Figure 10.
Figure 10 - Estimated Workforce Spending
Guiding Principles
The Master Plan will enhance the offerings of downtown Lititz through redevelopment of properties without adversely affecting the current business structure.
Our three over-arching goals are:
Expand social, cultural, and retail offerings for residents while accommodating visitors and tourists
Lititz is a real, functioning community and the Master Plan will sustain this by focusing on the needs of the residents, both present and future, first.
Currently, 18% of the available land in the borough is not taxable. The Borough is fortunate to have schools, churches, and civic enterprises to add to the richness of our town, but it is important to offset this situation by creating an increased tax base in order to continue to provide quality services to our residents.
Although the downtown core appears to be well- ordered and built-out, taking a step back in history brings the realization that downtown Lititz today is vastly different than 100, 75, 50, or even 25 years ago. In some cases, critical building mass has been lost and with it, the feel of a completely continuous streetscape and downtown experience. The planning process should look to our past to create a healthy and viable future. And in the case of physical development, that means filling in the holes and maximizing the use of our available space.
With this reference point in mind, there is room to enhance and grow to meet the current and anticipated needs of the Lititz community, within the existing context of the downtown. It is the missed and under- utilized opportunities that are the focus of this Master Plan.
1.
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
72
Integrate the Lititz Run corridor and other civic spaces into the connected fabric of the downtown
Lititz Springs Park has long been the jewel of the Lititz community. However, although the park is adjacent to the downtown, daily activties that
occur in the park are usually not an integral part of the downtown experience.
Lititz Run – which runs through the middle of the community – is considered an asset, but little has been done to celebrate its existence. Many locations have even turned their back on it and added to its degradation.
Therefore, a key element of this master plan is to realize the prominence of our current open space and natural assets and weave them into the fabric of the thriving downtown so that each supports the other and their boundaries are
indistinguishable. At the same time, it is important to protect our natural assets and resources. This can be accomplished through sustainable and green design practices.
Regarding other connections, Lititz is already a walkable community. A continuous streetscape treatment that creates a system of walkways and circuits will enhance walkability even more.
Alleys should assume their rightful position as service providers to the businesses fronting on the main streets, but the alleys should also be enhanced to add visual quality to the downtown and provide a clean, safe, and green pedestrian route.
Figure 11 - Integrating the Lititz Run corridor is a guiding Master Plan principle
3. Establish a parking strategy
Parking, or room for surface parking, is currently a major limitation for expansion of the downtown. Creating adequate parking will require new methods to meet the expanded need. There is no more land area to pave over in the downtown and, even if there was space available, more surface parking is not the appropriate approach.
Figure 12 - An example of structured parking with retail uses on the first floor and parking and mixed use units above
Figure 13 - Another example of a parking structure adding architectural value to the streetscape
2.
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
82
Master Plan
The strategies set forth in the Downtown Lititz Master Plan fulfill the intent of the guiding principles, as outlined here.
1. Expand the social, cultural, and retail offerings for residents
while accommodating visitors and tourists
? Establish a mixed use district for the entire study
area
? Increase density of buildings and uses in the core district of the study area
- Redevelop underutilized facilities
- Reserve the 1st floor for retail uses
- Encourage in-fill
- Redevelop properties along Lititz Run and the rail line, including the Susquehanna Bank property and the Long and Bomberger property
- Remove parking from the flood way
? Look to our past and the committment to preserve the buildings that give the community its character. Historic preservation is an important component of any effort to promote sustainable development. The conservation and improvement
of our existing built resources - including adaptive re-use of historic and older buildings, greening the existing building stock, and reinvestment in our historic community - is crucial.
? Further from the core district, reduce density of buildings and intensity of use
? Capitalize on the existing street and alley patterns to strengthen circulation and massing of buildings
? Re-establish the alley network for service access and pedestrian travel
? Expand housing opportunities within the study
area
- Add housing to upper floors throughout
- Provide a variety of housing types and living units
? Celebrate and integrate the arts within the fabric of the downtown: sculpture/art, music, and entertainment
2. Integrate the Lititz Run corridor and other civic spaces into the connected fabric of the downtown
? Provide a hierarchy of green space, open space, and pedestrian routes throughout the downtown
- Maintain Lititz Springs Park as the largest green and civic space in the downtown
- Develop the Lititz Run corridor as a linear green space for passive and active recreation
- Extend pathway or walk system along the corridor for connection to existing trails in the community
- Create a new, more structured open space on the Long and Bomberger property
- Add outdoor dining, seating, window boxes, and container plantings to extend the park-like feel throughout the downtown as well as green and soften the hardscape of the core district
- Front buildings along the stream and provide visual access to Lititz Run
? Encourage sustainable design practices including the use of green roofs, green alleys, green surface parking, and pervious paving as well as other best management practices
3. Establish a parking strategy
? Develop opportunities for shared parking
? Consolidate existing parking areas to the rear of buildings on Main and Broad Streets, making use of the existing alley network
? Locate a parking structure to the rear of the Parkview Hotel along North Lane
Figure 14 - The Downtown Lititz Master Plan graphic
Downtown Lititz Master Plan 9
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
1010
Figure 15 - The Master Plan in context of Lititz Borough and Warwick Township
The plan graphic (Figure 14) is the 15- to 20-year build-out plan. This plan represents an aerial view of the downtown and the vision for how it will appear when the guiding principles of the master plan are realized, utilizing the strategies outlined in the plan.
On the following pages are additional graphics that further illustrate the plan strategies and show suggested implementation scenarios in key areas of the downtown.
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
1110
Focus Areas
Central Business District
Main Street, from Broad to Cedar, is the heart of the downtown, and as a result, should be enhanced and strengthened to assume the role. Most would recognize this particular part of downtown as
the central business district, characterized by two and three story buildings. The first floors of
many of these structures are currently occupied by retail uses while the upper floors are occupied by residential or office space.
The plan expands the existing Main Street retail/ business base by activating the Lititz Run Corridor (Broad to Cedar). In addition, retail uses should
be introduced into this area that tie back to Main Street, specifically through enhanced offerings on
Figure 16 - Plan view of the Central Business District
Figure 17 - Zum Anker Alley, today
Figure 18 - Making use of the Zum Anker Alley for outside dining affords opportunity to connect with the street and enhance the social aspects of the downtown.
Broad Street and Sturgis Lane. Increased business frontage along each of these streets will serve as connectors and further frame the limits of the central business district.
To further connect all points of the downtown, additional built space will occur along Sturgis Lane from Main Street to Lititz Run, and along Kleine Lane. By using the alleys to add new construction, the historic core remains intact, while adding necessary density to the area. Additionally, the new buildings may be constructed integrally with a multi-story parking structure which, by location, will serve the surrounding mixed-use developments.
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
1210
Focus Areas
Increased density will be made possible by providing a parking structure of three to five levels off North Lane that matches the building heights of Main Street. The existence of this new structure will allow many of the existing surface lots to be removed and redeveloped for enhanced green space and new business space.
East on Main Street
Heading further east on Main Street, the area from Cedar Street to Cherry Lane includes many properties that are very residential in scale and
architectural style. In order to focus the majority of new business and retail space in the core business district, this area should remain predominantly residential but could include a limited mix
of convenience and service retail to serve the surrounding neighborhood as well as limited hospitality, entertainment, and office uses.
Figure 19 - An example of an existing, prime heritage tourism location
Figure 20 - The existing architectural heritage should
be preserved
Figure 21 - Properties that are residential in scale and architectural style are prevalent in this area.
MORAVIAN
CHURCH SQUARE
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
1310
Adaptive reuse of the existing structures could also provide additional retail and business space adjacent to the heritage tourist activities in the area (Julius Sturgis Pretzel Bakery, Moravian Church, and Lititz Museum).
South Broad Street
Currently viewed as part of our core downtown, the area of South Broad Street from Juniper Lane to Orange Street has struggled to establish a true identity. Immediately adjacent to the successful Main Street, the general architecture on the west side of Broad Street includes grand historic homes while the architecture on the east side includes townhouse/row home styles. The street has retained a mix of professional offices,
Focus Areas
limited specialty retail as well as some service and hospitality-retail integrated with the residential uses. The sporadic nature of the uses on Broad Street has limited the overall success of the street as a specialty retail corridor. Most first floor uses are office-oriented or retail establishments. Upper floors are occupied by both residential and office spaces.
Figure 22 - Existing structures at 35,
37, and 39
S. Broad Street
Figure 23 - Incorporating enhanced service uses and appropriate architectural materials on S. Broad Street engages the
first floor with the public street and sidewalk.
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
1410
Focus Areas
Figure 24 - Enhance signature architecture at the corner of Main and Broad Streets and maximize available street frontage
Figure 25 - Currently, the rhythm of the streetscape is lost as you travel on N. Broad Street.
Figure 26 - A massing diagram shows how the additional square footage proposed in the plan (shown in yellow) fits neatly into the existing open areas within the study area. Existing structures are shown in red.
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
1510
To capitalize on the style of architecture, configuration of space, and the high traffic
Focus Areas
volumes, South Broad Street should include a mix of convenience and service retail, office/ professional space, galleries, hospitality, and residential offerings. Small restaurants with outdoor seating on front porches or patios or bed and breakfast establishments fit the grand homes and could fill the buildings comfortably.
Figure 27 - The area east of Lititz Run on N. Broad Street
Figure 28 - A massing diagram of the existing conditions
shown in the photo above
Figure 29 - A massing diagram illustrating the future potential for this area.
Service and hospitality retail that relies on high traffic volume can also succeed in this area. Office and professional space should be relegated to the upper floors, where feasible.
North Broad Street
The area of North Broad Street from Kleine Lane to Lincoln Avenue provides a linkage and entry point to the downtown along the busy route 501 corridor. The building stock is an eclectic mix of row homes and small commercial structures that house a mix of food service establishments as well as some limited specialty retail. This part of North Broad Street is at times considered an island detached from the core of the downtown due to numerous visual obstructions – the rail line and several large parking areas as well as breaks in the architectural façade and uses.
As with South Broad Street, based on high traffic volumes, a mix of convenience and service retail, restaurants, and residential units can be created in this area, with services provided for local residents and the workforce of downtown. Providing infill development will strengthen the existing retail identity while linking this area to the central business district.
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
1610
KREADY
PROPERTY
Focus Areas
A Dynamic New Residential Neighborhood
Research based on current growth rates has indicated that an additional 152 new housing units could be supported in the Borough of Lititz over the next five (5) years. This area of the plan, from Cedar to Water Street and North Lane to Kleine Lane, is nearer to the existing residential fabric and therefore has a unique spatial identity. Currently a large portion of this area is occupied by surface parking and the rail line. To capitalize on the proximity and value of the Lititz Run and the adjacent residential neighborhoods, the plan proposes to accommodate the potential growth with a maximum of 225 units, creating a dynamic new neighborhood.
Limited mixed-use development along the existing street frontage is also encouraged. In addition,
the plan continues to incorporate parks and civic spaces in this zone.
The Kready property, located at the edge of the study area, should be developed as a destination hospitality venue or a condo-style residential property. In either case, redeveloping this property in this manner will provide a necessary link between the residential fabric, the heritage tourism destinations in the area, and ultimately the central business district.
Figure 30 - Shipoke in Harrisburg, PA is an example of a residential neighborhood where all new units were built with parking on the first level and living space above.
Figure 31 - The plan shows several new buildings that could be developed into a variety of new living units.
Figure 32 - An example of residential units with parking on the ground floor from Charleston, SC
Figure 33 - The Schuylkill River Development in Philadelphia, PA also maintains parking on the ground floor
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
1710
Focus Areas
Figure 34 - The existing rail line with Susquehanna Bank in the background
Figure 35 - The transformed space shows an expansion of the square footage of the Susquehanna Bank building and an adjacent walking path.
Figure 36 - Sturgis Lane today
Figure 37 - Increasing building mass along existing streets and alleys will improve circulation and energy and provide key connections throughout the entire study area.
The incorporation of a centralized parking
structure and the expansion of the Susquehanna Bank building in the distance all add to a more structured and intriguing sense of place in this corridor.
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
1810
Focus Areas
Figure 38 - An aerial view of a transformed portion of the study area
Taking a Bird’s Eye View
From a vantage point above Lititz, you can see how the Vision, Guiding Principles, and Master Plan strategies take shape. Working from left to right across this transformation sketch:
? The northern edge is further defined with additional building and lease-able space that helps to tie the North Broad Street businesses into the core.
? Streamlining vehicular access at this point on Broad Street to an enter-only arrangement reduces the congestion on Broad Street and allows exiting to occur at a consolidated and safe location on Front Street or Cedar Street.
? A new civic space in front of the current Freeze and Frizz Restaurant captures activity along Broad Street and serves as the entry piece to an enhanced greenway and pedestrian connection from Wilbur Chocolate and along Lititz Run.
? To the east on the Bomberger Property, additional buildings are arranged facing the Lititz Run Corridor. These buildings, as shown, are three- and four-story with retail on the first floors and office and residential on the upper floors.
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
1910
Focus Areas
Figure 39 - An aerial view of the existing space from the rooftop of the Wilbur Factory.
? Asphalt parking areas are removed from the banks of Lititz Run. The floodway is developed as a natural greenway with pathways linking the greater community to the downtown. This network also provides an important connection of new retail along the Run to the North Broad Street corridor and the Main Street corridor.
? The new parking structure (see sketch on page 17) shown to the far right of the aerial is critical to increase available parking spaces while also allowing removal of existing surface lots within the floodway. As shown in Figures 12 and 13, parking structures do not need to look like eyesores. They can include retail space on the exterior ground floor or be woven into the fabric of the downtown through architectural treatments matching the style of the community.
? Throughout the Lititz Run corridor, asphalt should be removed and these spaces transformed into green space that engages the architectural edge.
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
2010
Focus Areas
Figure 40 - Section A-A1
? Susquehanna Bank anchors the downtown as a major business entity. The plan provides room to grow adjacent to their main building.
? New opportunities for retail, office, and residential is provided to the right, heading up Sturgis Lane. Again, this connection strengthens the fabric of business in the downtown and provides an easy connection for pedestrians through the entire downtown.
A1
A
B1
B
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
2110
Focus Areas
Figure 41 (at left) - This portion of the plan shows increased retail uses along the Lititz Run corridor, the location of the parking structure, and an addition to The Park View.Also on this plan, the locations of the sections (Figures 39 and 41) are indicated. See A1 - A and B1 - B.
Park View Hotel
Although not part of the aerial graphic on pages 18 and 19, the Park View Hotel is a key part of this revitalized area.
As seen in Figures 41 and 42, the interior of the building should be expanded to the east for greater dining opportunities and to the north, a porch
or deck should be added for outdoor dining that would maximize views of Lititz Run. Suite-style rooms or other lodging or banquet space should be provided on the upper floors.
Figure 42 - Section B - B1
WILBUR CHOCOLATE
VISITORS CENTER
BACK OF THE PARKVIEW
LITITZ RUN
BACK OF FREEZE AND FRIZZ
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
2210
Focus Areas
SUSQUEHANNA BANCSHARES
CONSOLIDATED PARKING FACILITY
Parking Enhancements
Short term parking strategies should provide a framework for shared parking agreements.
Smaller lots should be combined into consolidated, larger lots to gain effciency of use and circulation. Landscaping and buffering should be added to these consolidated lots for aesthetic appeal and to support sustainable design practices.
Two examples of lot consolidation appear here in Figures 43 and 44. As presented in the Master Plan, each lot now contains a more logical parking layout and serves multiple retail or office enterprises.
In addition, by using consolidated lots, we gain
parking. The existing layout behind the businesses
Focus Areas
on Main Street yields 80 spaces. With consolidation, the area yields 100 parking spaces.
The existing layout to the rear of the businesses on
S. Broad Street yields 32 spaces. With consolidation, the same area yields 90 parking spaces.
The long-term parking solution involves providing vertical parking structures to consolidate parking and free up land for building or green space.
Figure 43 (at left) - A consolidated lot behind Nino’s and Wertsch Vision yields 100 spaces (verses 80 currently).
Figure 44 (below) - The individual lots behind many office uses along S. Broad Street currently yield only 32 spaces total.With consolidation, 90 spaces are available.
CONSOLIDATED PARKING FACILITY
Downtown Lititz Master Plan 23
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
2424
Next Steps
This completed plan has an estimated 15- to 20-year build-out horizon. Some projects will take longer
than others but, with a plan in hand, implementation strategies can be realized. Detailed here are the
recommended next steps:
Support
Review and gain support for the Master Plan from
key governing agencies/officials and the general
public including:
? DCED (Department of Community and Economic
Development),
? Elected officials,
? DEP (Department of Environmental Protection),
? DCNR (Department of Conservation and Natural
Resources),
? PA DOT (Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation),
? PA Fish & Boat Commission,
? Norfolk Southern,
? General Public
Responsible Entity: Venture Lititz
Master Plan Advisory Council
? Establish a Master Plan Advisory Council of 8-10
persons comprised of a member of the steering
committee, Venture Lititz Board, Borough
Council, Planning Commission, a member from
each of the Venture Lititz Sub-Committees, and
the Main Street Manager.
? This Master Plan Advisory Council should
establish a chairperson, hold regularly scheduled
meetings, and develop specific milestones.
? The purpose of the Advisory Council is to
keep the Plan moving forward and implement
the strategies while an Economic Development
Corporation (EDC) is being established.
Responsible Entity: Venture Lititz
Lititz Run Improvement Plan
? Review, analyze and design enhancements to
Lititz Run from the Lititz Springs Park entrance at
route 501 to the Locust Street crossing in order to
improve flood control, stream quality, and
mechanics as well as integrating Lititz Run as an
integral element of the green space hierarchy of
the downtown area.
? Conduct a Stream Morphology Study (Hydrologic
and Hydraulic Assessment) to determine
best practices for rejuvenating Lititz Run and
incorporating it into the green space.
- Review existing and proposed conditions
and historic characteristics of the stream
to determine the best treatment of the
different sections of Lititz Run within the
Master Plan area.
- Perform Visual Site Assessment and
Trench Evaluation.
- Review and analyze existing conditions
data.
- Review and analyze opportunities for
surface water features along the stream
corridor.
? Provide an updated floodplain analysis using the
US Army Corps of Engineers HEC II software.
- The study will serve as a baseline for all
reviewing agencies to measure specific
impacts of proposed implementation
projects.
- Improve stream and floodplain quality
and carrying capacity, as appropriate.
? Create a green space plan that establishes a
recommended hierarchy of recreation and civic
spaces along Lititz Run.
- Review and analyze existing recreation
and open space studies and needs.
- Work with the joint recreation commission
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
2524
to establish priorities and strategies
- Provide conceptual design of desired and civic spaces that are integrated into the proposed stream and flood control enhancements.
- Provide implementation strategy for acquisition, funding, design, and construction.
? Perform an audit and assessment of current regulations of the study area.
- Outline suggested methods to address stormwater runoff on a regional basis (much of the land affected falls within the 100 year floodplain).
- Outline suggested methods to address stormwater quality through use of Best Management Practices – green roofs, pervious paving, rain gardens,
and wetlands, all on a regional basis.
- Consider providing incentives for greening of the downtown, for example, the installation of a green roof.
Responsible Entity: Venture Lititz
Parking Management Plan
Provide detailed study/strategy for review of existing parking conditions as well as proposed build-out conditions and provide implementation strategy for short term and long term
parking solutions and funding of the same.
? Review existing reports, studies and other materials available to establish background information.
? Update, analyze, and inventory current parking supply (private and public) information including type, location, and cost information.
? Perform occupancy counts for all spaces within the study area on an hourly basis for typical and peak times.
? Create a plan to maximize use of existing facilities. Provide techniques and management strategies for improvement.
? Provide recommendations to update current zoning and development codes to support the plan.
? Outline the present and future parking adequacy.
? Outline supply and demand analysis.
? Develop a financial pro forma and feasibility analysis for proposed improvements.
Short Term Goals:
? Increase capacity and efficiency of existing parking lots.
? Provide larger, more efficient parking areas that serve the needs of multiple properties.
? Improve occupancy rate of existing infrastructure.
? Consider alternate methods to share existing parking facilities.
? Enhance pedestrian connections from larger central lots to the business district.
? Provide directional signage to easily direct visitors to available parking areas and provide lot signage with regulations and quantity of spaces, per lot.
Long Term Goals
? Establish a parking program to manage the parking needs for the downtown.
? Establish centralized public lots to create consolidated areas that serve multiple users.
? Consider a parking mitigation fund. Within the revised code, consider a requirement for owners/ developers to pay a fee based on established criteria related to use, square footage, and location.
? Consider alternate methods to fund long term improvements and maintenance of facilities.
? Construct Parking Structure. Consider bond financing at appropriate time to construct new structure. Seed money based on fees, fines, leases, parking taxes, and impact fees.
Responsible Entity: Venture Lititz
Traffic and Circulation Analysis
? Perform an assessment of current traffic and circulation challenges within the downtown area.
? Summarize current baseline information to be available to potential developers. Outline current levels of service for roadways and intersections.
? Project anticipated problems/ improvements possible with proposed master plan.
? Continue to advocate relocation of Route 772 from Main Street to remove as much truck traffic
as possible.
? Consider creative solutions to traffic management, for instance, incentives for altered standard work days.
? Review and recommend necessary improvements to handle additional traffic loads as well as
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
2624
redirecting service and deliveries to the alley system.
Rail Line Service Enhancement Plan
? Improve opportunity for Rail Service to businesses in Warwick/Lititz Region.
? Interview existing business/industrial companies to ascertain existing and anticipated shipping patterns.
? Outline minimum and ideal service requirements by Norfolk Southern.
? Review and analyze options for improved rail service and siding location west of Route 501.
? Provide schematic design.
? Discern options for funding.
? Implement plan.
Responsible Entity: Borough Council
Business Recruitment Strategy
? Develop a Business Recruitment Strategy to identify and pursue the desired mix of uses in the downtown.
? Meet with existing business entities to ascertain current and projected needs.
? Serve as an enabler to accommodate uses within the building stock.
? Consider assistance to fast track approvals.
? Provide background study information (base parking, stream and traffic study information) for development of business plans to individual users/owners.
? Provide background demographic and marketing study information to prospective and desired businesses.
Responsible Entity: Venture Lititz
Ordinance Audit and Assessment
? In conjunction with the Joint Comprehensive Plan for Lititz Borough and Warwick Township, the Comprehensive Plan for Lancaster County, and this current downtown master plan, review current Zoning, Land Development, Subdivision, Design Guidelines and Stormwater Ordinances.
? Review and revise ordinances as necessary to enable future development to occur as envisioned. Specific elements may include the following:
- Explore performance based (Form Based or Hybrid) zoning language.
- Consider incentives for creation of public/ private open/civic spaces.
- Consider incentives/requirements
for sustainable or green design practices in the downtown, specifically in the
floodplain area that may off set or improve stormwater requirements.
- Consider Façade Easements to protect significant architecture.
- Consider incentives for replacement of existing surface lots with stacked parking.
? Review and consider methods to be more business-friendly in the process of development and redevelopment within the designated downtown core:
- Provide background information and other resources for development work.
- Outline process and expectations.
- Consider ‘speed tracking’ process
to encourage developers/owners to invest in downtown. Sketch/concept plan to final plan.
- Consider reducing/removing parking requirements in the downtown area.
- Consider alternate funding/impact fee options for creation of shared parking facilities.
? Update Design Guidelines for downtown development and include:
- Façade Improvement Recommendations
- Streetscape improvements
- Lighting
- Signage
- Greening and Beautification – enhance the district aesthetically by encouraging the use of flower boxes, planters, etc.
Responsible Entity: Borough Council
The final two pages of this report are the results of a master planning exercise based on The Cities Book: A Journey Through the Best Cities in the World (Lonely Planet, March 2006).
The book outlines key data about the top 200 cities in the world.
The master planning exercise set forth a challenge - if Lititz were entry 201, what would be written about Lititz. The results of the exercise are presented here.
Downtown Lititz Master Plan
A1
Appendix
The Appendix to this report is extensive and contains all the supporting data and process-related
documentation necessary to accomplish a Downtown Master Plan. These documents are available on CD. A
detailed listing of the data included in the Appendix is presented here in addition to a summary of some key
data on land coverage and build out potential:
? Documentation from Delta Development Corporation
that includes:
- Summary of Findings and Observations
- Demographic & Economic Data - Lititz
Market
Table 1 - Population
Table 2 - Housing Units
Table 3 - Median Household Income
Table 4 - Occupation
Figure 1 - Population Density
Figure 2 - Annual Population Growth
(2007 - 2012)
Figure 3 - Average Household Income
Table 5 - Estimated Retail Spending by
Residents
Table 6 - Spending Potential Index
(Residents)
Table 7 - Estimated Workforce Spending
Table 8 - 2000 Educational Attainment
(Population 25+)
Table 9 - Labor Shed - Where Lititz
Workers Live
Community Tapestry Lifemode
Segmentation
Table 10 - Community Tapestry
Lifemode Groups - Three-Mile Radius
- Comparable Communities
Table 11 - Comparable Communities
- Most Frequently Found
Establishments
Table 12 - Comparable Communities
- Types of Dining Establishments
Table 13 - Comparable Communities
- Demographic Comparison
? Meeting Minutes from Master Plan committee
meetings
? Stakeholder Meeting Summaries
Land Cover Summary:
Land Use Type Existing Conditions Vision Plan Net Change
Building 23% 26% + 3%
Impervious 35% 23% - 12%
Open Space 42% 51% + 9%
Build Out Potential - (within the limits of the study area) - Parking Numbers:
Existing Parking Spaces 732 Spaces
Short Term Improvements:
• Consolidation of lots 180 Spaces
• Expansion of existing lots Net Increase
• New surface lots
Long Term Improvements: (Parking Structure(s))
• North Lane Structure (north side) – 5 levels 470 Spaces
• North Lane Structure (south side) – 4 levels 270 Spaces
• West Main Street- 3 levels 200 spaces
Total Net Parking build out potential 1852 spaces
Build Out Potential - (within the limits of the study area) - Building Area Numbers:
Existing Building Area
• First Floor Area
• Second Floor Area
Total:
670,395sf
529,605sf
1,200,000sf
Conceptual Breakdown:
• Zone with Residential Focus (Cedar to Water)
-Approx. 75,000sf/floor
-Assume average of 3 floors/building
First Floor:
25% Retail/Service= 25,000sf
75% Residential = 50,000sf
Second and Third Floors
All residential. 2 Floors @ 75,000sf/floor –
150,000sf total
• Remaining Area
-Approx. 107,000sf/floor per plan
Assume 4 floors average.
First Floor: Assume all as retail = 107,000sf
Second Floor: Assume 75% office = 80,250sf
25% Res. = 26,750sf
Third Floor: Assume 50% office = 53,500sf
50% Res. = 53,500sf
Fourth Floor: Assume 100% Res. = 107,000
TOTAL:
225,000sf
428,000sf
653,000sf
Summary of New Building Area by Use
• Residential: 387,250 sf
• Retail: 132,000 sf
• Office: 133,750 sf
Surrounded by Lancaster County farmland and the still- present influence of the Amish, Lititz stands apart as a community that offers something a little different.A more sophisticated retail setting in a comfortable and walkable downtown environment creates a desirable town that is the envy of all who are lucky enough to visit.
ANATOMY
Lititz is located in beautiful Lancaster County, at the crossroads of two state highways - routes 501 and 772 which, in town, are know as Broad Street and Main Street, respectively. Walking is the best way to get around and experience everything - shops, architecture, alleyways, side streets, the park, and the people.
PEOPLE
Although the median age of the residents of Lititz is 39, the average is more
reflective of the large population of retirees and children at opposite ends of the age scale than a large group of thirty- or forty- somethings.
TYPICAL CITIZEN
Those who live in Lititz have an innate love of this town. Although the town was settled as a closed Moravian community, Lititz now is home to an increasingly diverse group of well-educated, up-and- coming families and others who find great appeal in this walkable community
where you actually know your neighbors.
DEFINING EXPERIENCE
Take part in the longest continually running 4th of July celebration in the
United States, established in 1818. Musical performances, dance routines, fun, games, and of course, food, all lead up to the Queen of Candles crowning in the Park with over 7,000 candles lining Lititz Run and a spectacular fireworks display set to music - be sure to reserve your spot early!
Lititz 201
VITAL STATISTICS NAME: LITITZ
DATE OF BIRTH:1756 BY MORAVIAN SETTLERS
ADDRESS: UNITED STATES
HEIGHT: 122 M
POPULATION: 9,029
STRENGTHS
· historic
· walkable
· Lititz Springs Park
· great Main Street
· lots of special events
WEAKNESSES
· traffic congestion
· elusive parking
· little variety in cuisine
GOLD STAR
Easter Sunrise Service at Moravian Church, starting with the announcement by the Brass Choir and ending at God’s Acre
CITYSPEAK
· whether route 772 will ever get re-routed
· the number of ducks in the park or in the storm drains
· what will be the featured brew at Cask Ale Night
STARRING ROLE IN...
an impressive number of rock and roll concerts throughout the world.
IMPORT
· thousands of visitors
· people who love it so much, they have to live here
· students at Linden Hall
EXPORT
· Wilbur buds
· Sturgis pretzels
· Listerine
· rock n’ roll sound and stage sets
· Victor mouse traps
SEE the Moravian Church and also various preserved or restored 18th century buildings
EAT Wilbur buds and Sturgis pretzels
DRINK the featured brew at Cask Ale Night
DO stroll to the head end of Lititz Springs Park and discover the lions
WATCH the Queen of Candles pagentry and the 4th of July fireworks
BUY Moravian Stars
AFTER DARK listen to live music, visit the shops, and meet the locals at Lovin’ Lititz Every Second Friday
format adapted from The Cities Book, published by Lonely Planet
URBAN MYTH
In 1857, J.Augustus Beck added a carved lion’s head to Lititz Springs Park and is still present today. His original plan was to “incise all of the head, the shoulders and the forepaws of the king of the beasts. However, because
of the extreme hardness of the rock, which ruined his chisels, he had to abandon his original plans.” (Lititz 250, A Historical Anthology)
Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful committed citizens can change the world; indeed, it is the only thing that ever has.
Margaret Mead






