Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-15-2017 by Ord. No. 1585]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 3301.5(a) through (d) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. §
48301.5(a) through (d)], the codification of a complete body of legislation
for the Borough of Munhall, County of Allegheny, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles
and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 440,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as a single ordinance of the Borough of Munhall, which shall be
known and is hereby designated as the “Code of the Borough of Munhall,”
hereinafter referred to as the “Code.”
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued
in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by
the Borough Council of the Borough of Munhall, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Except as provided in § 1-4, Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not
affected by repeal, below, all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent
with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are
hereby repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15; provided, however,
that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any
valid legislation of the Borough of Munhall which is not in conflict with the
provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and effect.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 5-16-2012.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
§ 1-4 MUNHALL CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature changes. The following outdated terms have been
changed throughout the Code:
(1) “Justice of the Peace” or “District Justice” to “Magisterial District
Judge.”
(2) “Department of Environmental Resources” to “Department of
Environmental Protection,” where applicable.
(3) “Department of Community Affairs” to “Department of Community
and Economic Development.”
C. Outdated statutory references have been updated accordingly.
D. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with
the Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes
and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of
the Code specified in § 1-15.1
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
1. Editor’s Note: In accordance with § 1-6D, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: “Amended (added, deleted) 2-15-2017 by Ord. No.
1585.” Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 1-6 MUNHALL CODE § 1-10
1:6
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Borough Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances or resolutions
are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed,
held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the
Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after February 15, 2017.
§ 1-14 MUNHALL CODE § 1-15
1:8
ARTICLE II
General Penalty
[Adopted 4-2-2008 by Ord. No. 1528]
§ 1-16. Fines for violations of ordinances regulating building,
housing, property maintenance, health, fire codes, public safety
codes, water, pollution of water, air or noise.
Fines for violation of Borough ordinances are hereby established or
increased to the maximum amount allowable under the Borough Code
to the sum of $1,000 for each violation; this increase shall apply only
to ordinances regulating building, housing, property maintenance, health,
fire codes, public safety codes, water, pollution of water, air or noise and
conduct related thereto.
§ 1-17. Fines for other ordinances.
All ordinances not covered by the above classifications shall now provide for
a maximum fine of $600 for each and every violation, whether or not such
ordinance currently provides for a specific fine.
§ 1-18. Increase of fines by resolution.
Maximum fine amounts may be increased in the future by Borough Council
by simple resolution as allowable under the Borough Code.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:9
Chapter 7
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 350.
§ 1-18 MUNHALL CODE § 1-18
1:10
ARTICLE I
Sanitary Sewer Municipal Authority
[Adopted 9-20-2006 by Ord. No. 1507]
§ 7-1. Statutory authority.
The Council of the Borough of Munhall hereby signifies its intention to
organize an Authority under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities
Act of 1945 (the "Act").2
§ 7-2. Adoption of Articles of Incorporation.
The name of the proposed Authority is "Munhall Sanitary Sewer Municipal
Authority." In pursuance of said intention, the Articles of Incorporation of
the said Authority are hereby approved and adopted in the following form:
A. The name of the Authority shall be "Munhall Sanitary Sewer Municipal
Authority."
B. The said Authority is formed under the Municipality Authorities Act of
1945, as amended and supplemented.3
C. No other authority has been organized under the "Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945" or under the Act approved June 28, 1935, P.L.
463, or is in existence in and for said Borough of Munhall.
D. The name of the incorporating municipality is the Borough of Munhall,
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and the names and addresses of the
members of the Council of Munhall are as follows:
Name Address
John Tichon 261 Video Drive, Munhall
Jill Fleming-Salopek 4100 Fairfield Avenue, Munhall
Bernard Shields 3704 Sunset Drive, Munhall
Joseph Ballas 4135 Shady Avenue, Munhall
Robert Falce 3505 Trautman Street, Munhall
Michael Terrick 4400 Main Street, Munhall
Richard Votedian 609 13th Avenue, Munhall
E. The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of said Authority, each being a citizen of the Borough of Munhall,
a taxpayer or having a business in the Borough of Munhall as follows:
Name Address Term of Office
2. Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed
by Act 22 of 2001 (June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now the Municipality Authorities
Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
3. Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed
by Act 22 of 2001 (June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now the Municipality Authorities
Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:11
Patrick Campbell 4313 Superior Street,
Munhall
1 year
Fred Ehrhart 1607 Martha Street,
Munhall
2 years
Mario Pollice 218 Emerson Avenue,
Munhall
3 years
Anthony DeMartino 3005 Alberta Street,
Munhall
4 years
Michael Harkovich 1410 Ravine Street,
Munhall
5 years
The terms of the office of the first members of the Board of said
Authority shall commence on the date of appointment and shall be
computed from the first Monday in January of 2006, and all subsequent
appointees shall serve a term of five years.
§ 7-3. Appointment of members; terms.
The first members of the Board, named in the aforementioned Articles of
Incorporation, are hereby specifically appointed members of said Board for
the terms set after their respective names, commencing on the date of
appointment and computed from the first Monday in January 2006, and all
subsequent appointees shall serve a term of five years.
§ 7-4. Authorization to organize.
The President of Council of the Borough of Munhall is hereby authorized
and directed to execute said Articles of Incorporation, on its behalf, and
the Borough Secretary is hereby authorized and directed to affix thereto
and attest the seal of the Borough of Munhall. Said officers are further
authorized and directed to cause a notice of intention to file said Articles of
Incorporation to be published as required by law, and to file said Articles of
Incorporation together with a certified copy of this article and the required
proofs of publication with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and to take all such other action as they may deem necessary
or appropriate to organize said Authority.
§ 7-5. Purpose of Authority.
The purpose of projects of said Authority are as follows: to acquire, hold,
construct, finance, improve, maintain, operate, own and lease, either in
the capacity of lessor or lessee, sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof,
sewage treatment works, including works for treating and disposing of
industrial waste for the Borough of Munhall and for such other territory as
the Authority may be authorized by law to serve, and to do all activities and
to acquire all properties and assets useful in relation thereto.
§ 7-2 MUNHALL CODE § 7-5
1:12
Chapter 18
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firemen's Relief Association — See Ch. 23. Police Department — See Ch. 54.
§ 7-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-5
1:13

ARTICLE I
Volunteer Fire Department
[Adopted 5-19-1993 by Ord. No. 1360]
§ 18-1. Recognition.
The Borough of Munhall hereby recognizes the Munhall Bureau of Fire,
Munhall Volunteer Company Number 1, Munhall Volunteer Company
Number 2, Franklin Volunteer Fire Company Number 3, Park Volunteer
Fire Company Number 4 and Munhall Volunteer Fire Company Number 5
volunteer fire companies which have been organized by residents of said
Borough of Munhall. No other organization(s) dedicated to the fighting
of fires are authorized to operate within the Borough of Munhall except
for those acting under a mutual aid or other agreement approved by the
Council of the Borough of Munhall.
§ 18-2. Authority.
The Munhall Bureau of Fire, Munhall Volunteer Fire Company Number 1,
Munhall Volunteer Company Number 2, Franklin Volunteer Fire Company
Number 3, Park Volunteer Fire Company Number 4 and Munhall Volunteer
Fire Company Number 5 volunteer fire companies are hereby given all
power, so far as the Borough of Munhall has power to grant the same,
to enact such rules and regulations for the management and government
of individual members thereof as shall be necessary for the proper
maintenance and control of said volunteer fire companies. Neither the grant
of the aforesaid power nor the recognition set forth in § 18-1 shall be
construed as constituting the Munhall Bureau of Fire, Munhall Volunteer
Fire Company Number 1, Munhall Volunteer Fire Company Number 2,
Franklin Volunteer Fire Company Number 3, Park Volunteer Fire Company
Number 4 and Munhall Volunteer Fire Company Number 5 volunteer fire
companies as agents, departments or employees of the Borough of Munhall
except insofar as such effect is provided under the provisions of the Act
of June 2, 1915, P.L. 736, No. 338, known as the "Pennsylvania Workmen's
Compensation Act,"4 or the Act of November 26, 1978, P.L. 1399, No. 330,
known as the "Political Subdivision Tort Claims Act.5"
§ 18-3. Officers.
The members of Munhall Bureau of Fire, Munhall Volunteer Fire Company
Number 1, Munhall Volunteer Company Number 2, Franklin Volunteer Fire
Company Number 3, Park Volunteer Fire Company Number 4 and Munhall
Volunteer Fire Company Number 5 volunteer fire companies may elect from
their number such officers as may be provided by the bylaws of the fire
companies.
4. Editor's Note: See now Workers' Compensation Act, 77 P.S. § 1 et seq.
5. Editor's Note: The Political Subdivision Tort Claims Act, 53 P.S. 5311.101 et seq., was
repealed by 1980, Oct. 5, P.L. 693, No. 142, § 333. See now 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8501 et seq.
§ 18-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-4
1:15
§ 18-4. Control of equipment and funds.
All appropriations made by the Borough of Munhall to or for the use of said
fire companies, whether of money or property, and all equipment purchased
by the Borough of Munhall for the fire companies shall continue to be
the property of the Borough of Munhall. None of the fire apparatus or
equipment so belonging to the Borough of Munhall shall be permanently
removed from the Borough of Munhall without consent of the Council of the
Borough of Munhall thereto.
§ 18-4 MUNHALL CODE § 18-4
1:16
ARTICLE II
Extended Duties
[Adopted 4-30-1994 by Ord. No. 1369]
§ 18-5. Authorization of extended duties.
The Borough's Volunteer Fire Departments and their membership are
authorized by the Borough Council to perform the following in addition to
the normal fire-fighting, rescue and emergency medical duties:
A. Participation in drills, practices, training sessions and pre-fire planning
activities authorized by the Fire Chiefs and supervised by a qualified
instructor or a Fire Department officer.
B. Participation in community celebrations, ceremonial observances and
funerals for deceased firefighters or other public figures where such
attendance is deemed appropriate by the Fire Chiefs. Out-of-town
participation must have prior approval of the Borough.
C. Performing duties necessary to prepare the fire station for use as a
distribution center or a polling place for the primary and general
elections. This is extended to include like services performed at other
Borough or school district buildings.
D. Preparation for and responsible participation in parades, providing that
attendance has the prior approval of the Fire Department. Out-of-town
participation must have prior approval of the Borough.
E. Any public service functions performed for the welfare of the
community, including recovery of animals, as long as these activities
are responsibly supervised and are sanctioned by the Fire Department.
F. Any and all public safety activities undertaken by Fire Department
members to render care to the injured, prevent loss of life, provide
comfort and security to victims and limit or prevent damage to or loss of
property as circumstances may dictate.
G. Rendering assistance to police officers where such aid is specifically
requested or is done without request to protect the public welfare from
imminent danger, including fire/police duties.
H. Participation in fire-prevention activities, post-fire investigations, bomb
searches, evacuation drills and fire lane enforcement.
I. While participating in public programs to promote health and safety, to
enlist new members or solicit community support or conduct fundraising
activities so long as no compensation is being paid to the
member while engaged in the fund-raising activity, 100% of the
proceeds go to the Fire Department and so long as each activity is
sanctioned by the Fire Department.
§ 18-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-5
1:17
J. Safely and responsibly performing maintenance and remodeling work
on the Fire Department vehicle, building, grounds or equipment.
K. Such other duties necessary for the efficient operation of the volunteer
services as may, from time to time, be assigned by the Borough Council
and the officers of the Fire Department and as may be defined within
the constitution and bylaws of the Volunteer Fire Departments.
§ 18-5 MUNHALL CODE § 18-5
1:18
Chapter 23
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 18.
§ 23-1. Recognition of Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association.
§ 23-2. Certification to Auditor General.
The Borough Council shall annually certify to the Auditor General of the
Commonwealth, the name of the active associations and the percentage of
service they contribute to the protection of the Borough. Such certification
shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor General.
§ 23-3. Annual appropriation.
There is annually appropriated from the Borough Treasury all such sums
of money that may hereafter be paid into the Borough Treasury by the
Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes paid on
premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance of 1984 Act of
December 18, No. 205, 53 P.S. § 895.701 et seq., as hereafter amended,
supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania. Such monies received by the Borough Treasurer from the
State Treasurer shall be distributed to the duly recognized association
within 60 days of receipt. The funds shall be distributed on the basis of the
percentage of service established in the certification to the Auditor General
and with other provisions of the Act.
Chapter 36
MANAGER, BOROUGH
A. The following association member is hereby recognized as actively
engaged in providing fire protection and/or emergency services in the
Borough:
(1) Munhall Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association.
B. The above-named association has been formed for the benefit of its
members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or
permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
C. The above-named association of the Borough is designated the proper
association to receive such funds as are due and payable to the Borough
Treasurer by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania from the tax on
premiums from foreign fire insurance companies.
§ 18-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-1
1:19
§ 36-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Munhall Borough Manager Ordinance."
§ 36-2. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 1333 is hereby repealed in its entirety.
§ 36-3. Creation of position.
There is hereby created in Munhall Borough the position of Borough
Manager.
§ 36-4. Appointment; compensation.
The Manager shall be appointed by Borough Council and shall serve at the
pleasure of Council. The remuneration and benefits of the Manager shall be
established by Council from time to time by resolution.
§ 36-5. Residency requirements.
The Manager need not be a resident of the Borough at the time of
appointment, but must became a resident of the Borough within one year
following appointment.
§ 36-6. Duties.
The Manager shall have the following duties:
A. The Borough Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Borough and shall be responsible to Council for the administration of all
Borough affairs placed in the Manager's charge.
B. The Borough Manager shall direct and supervise administrative units,
offices and agencies, except as otherwise provided by law.
C. The Borough Manager shall attend all Council meetings and shall have
the duty to express his/her opinion on all matters coming before
Council, but shall have no vote.
D. The Borough Manager shall prepare and submit an annual budget and
capital expenditure program to Council and the Mayor.
E. The Borough Manager shall submit monthly reports to Council on the
finances and administrative activities of the Borough as of the end of
the preceding month; these reports shall be made available to the
public.
F. The Borough Manager shall prepare and submit such reports as Council
may require concerning the operations of Borough departments, offices
and agencies subject to the Manager's direction and supervision.
§ 36-1 MUNHALL CODE § 36-6
1:20
Chapter 46
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 310.
§ 46-1. Establishment of Board. [Amended 6-17-2016 by Ord. No.
1572]
There is hereby created a board to be known as the Munhall Borough Parks
and Recreation Board ("Board"). The Board shall be composed of "residents
of Munhall Borough."
§ 46-2. Appointment and terms of office.
Members of the Board shall be appointed by the Borough Council in
accordance with the following procedures:
G. The Borough Manager shall keep Council and the Mayor fully advised of
the financial condition and future needs of the Borough and make such
recommendations to the Council concerning the affairs of the Borough
as the Manager deems appropriate.
H. The Borough Manager shall monitor and record all payments,
obligations and receipts of and due the Borough so that payments are
timely made and are in accordance with the budget.
I. The Borough Manager shall be responsible to monitor all functions of
the Borough to determine that such activities are carried out in
conformance with the Borough Code and general municipal law.
J. The Borough Manager shall determine all needs and requirements of
the Borough and from time to time shall submit to Council a request for
such items and services needed by the Borough.
K. The Borough Manager shall serve as Secretary of the Borough, have all
the functions and duties as are prescribed to a Borough Secretary in the
Borough Code, and cause appropriate records to be made, preserved
and certified, as required by law or other action of Council.
L. The Borough Manager shall attest the execution of all instruments of
the Borough and shall record and preserve all ordinances enacted.
M. The Borough Manager shall further perform such other duties that may
be required by Council.
A. Board members shall serve for terms of five years, or until their
successors are appointed, except that members first appointed shall be
§ 36-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-2
1:21
§ 46-3. Service without pay.
Members of the Board shall receive no compensation for their services, but
may be reimbursed by the Borough for all expenses incurred in performing
their duties with proper and verifiable receipts of expenses incurred. All
expenses must be approved in advance by Borough Council.
§ 46-4. Advisory role.
The Board is to be advisory and shall coordinate its activities with the
elected officials, Borough Council, and other such local governmental
bodies through the office of the Borough Manager.
§ 46-5. Organization of Board.
The members of the Board shall elect a Chairperson and Secretary and
select all other necessary officers to serve for a period of one year. The
Board may adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of all business within
its jurisdiction and exercise powers and functions concerning parks and
recreation facilities as may be delegated to it by Borough Council.
§ 46-6. Authority of Board.
The Board shall have the following powers:
appointed so that the terms of not more than two members expire
annually. All persons appointed shall serve their full terms unless they
voluntarily resign or are removed by Borough Council in its sole
discretion. Vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of term
shall be for the unexpired term and shall be filled in the same manner
as original appointments.
B. Whenever possible, due consideration will be given to representation
from various geographic sections within the Borough, so that all
members shall not be from the same general area.
A. Identify the open space, recreation, park and trail needs of the
Borough.
B. Plan and supervise recreation programs approved by Borough Council.
C. Recommend plans, programs, and policies regarding the provision of
recreation and park services.
D. Advise Borough Council in the acquisition and development of
parklands.
E. Undertake recreation and park tasks as requested by Borough Council.
§ 46-2 MUNHALL CODE § 46-7
1:22
§ 46-7. Reporting.
The Board shall keep minutes of its meetings, which it shall submit to
Borough Council. The Board shall submit an annual report to Borough
Council, including an analysis of the adequacy and effectiveness of
community recreation areas, facilities and leadership. The Board will be
subject to an audit by the Borough Auditor annually.
§ 46-8. Annual budget.
The Board, at such times as directed by Borough Council, shall annually
submit for approval to the Borough Council a proposed budget for the
ensuing year, setting forth all proposed expenditures, revenues and
programs with sufficient justification. The Board shall not in any manner
obligate the Borough Council for any payment of any Borough funds until
the same is preapproved by Borough Council.
§ 46-9. Outside funding.
The Board may accept funds and donations from outside sources, but all
monies may only be used for Munhall Borough recreational purposes. Any
such funds or donations from outside sources shall be made payable to
Munhall Borough. The Board shall keep and maintain a record of all such
funds and donations from outside sources.
§ 46-10. Amendment by resolution. [Added 6-17-2016 by Ord. No.
1572]
Hereinafter all changes in terms, number of members and functions of the
Board and amendments to this chapter may be accomplished by Council by
simple resolution.
Chapter 49
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
389.
Zoning — See Ch. 440.
§ 49-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established for the Borough of Munhall a Planning
Commission which shall be known as the "Munhall Borough Planning
Commission."
§ 46-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-2
1:23
§ 49-2. Membership.
The Munhall Borough Planning Commission shall consist of nine members
who shall be appointed by Council from among eligible residents of the
Borough of Munhall as set forth in Section 205 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, Act No. 247 of 1968.6
§ 49-3. Appointment and terms of office.
Members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed for a term of four
years, or until a successor is appointed and qualified, except that the terms
of the members first appointed pursuant to the Act and this chapter shall be
as follows: three members for a term of four years; two members for a term
of three years; two members for a term of two years; and two members for
a term of one year.
§ 49-4. Powers and duties.
The power, authority, obligations and duties of the Munhall Borough
Planning Commission shall be as set forth in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code7 and as hereafter provided by the Council of
the Borough of Munhall.
§ 49-5. Compliance with Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
This chapter is enacted and intended to be in compliance with the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,8
and where the interpretation of terms or provisions of this chapter are not
in accordance with or in compliance with the provisions of said Act, the
provisions of said Act are intended to be adopted, resolved or enacted by
this chapter as fully as though incorporated, set forth and made part of this
chapter.
Chapter 54
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 18.
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10205.
7. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 49-2 MUNHALL CODE § 49-5
1:24
ARTICLE I
Officers
[Adopted 6-19-1980 by Ord. No. 1268]
§ 54-1. Establishment of rank.
There shall be established the rank of Assistant Chief of Police as a superior
officer in the Munhall Borough Police Department.
§ 54-2. Classifications of officers. [Amended 5-8-2002 by Ord. No.
1476]
The Munhall Borough Police Department shall consist of the following
classifications of officers:
§ 54-3. Order of authority.
The order of authority to be exercised by officers of the Munhall Police
Department shall be in the order as set forth in § 54-2.
A. One Chief of Police.
B. One Assistant Chief of Police.
C. The number of Captains shall be determined, from time to time, by
Borough Council in its sole discretion.
D. Sergeant: the number to be determined as authorized from time to time
by Council.
E. Patrolmen: the number to be determined as authorized from time to
time by Council.
§ 54-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-3
1:25

ARTICLE II
Mutual Police Protection
[Adopted 2-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1404]
§ 54-4. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Mutual Police Protection Ordinance."
§ 54-5. Authorization.
Munhall police officers are authorized to assist other municipalities in law
enforcement activities, and police officers from other municipalities are
authorized to assist Munhall police within the Borough under terms and
circumstances described herein.
§ 54-6. Mutual police assistance agreement.
The other municipality must have enacted an ordinance or resolution
similar in terms to this article and must have included and designated
Munhall Borough as a community with which it agrees to provide mutual
police assistance. Attached to this article is a list of such municipalities with
which Munhall Borough has such an agreement.9 Such list may be amended
from time to time by simple resolution of the Borough Council by adding or
deleting other municipalities.
§ 54-7. Officers authorized to approve mutual assistance.
In any municipality, the Chief of Police, officer in charge, Mayor or other
official designated from time to time by the governing body of such
municipality shall have the authority to take the necessary action to put into
effect or approve the mutual assistance described herein.
§ 54-8. Terms of assistance.
A. Munhall police shall have authority to render assistance to such
municipalities described in § 54-6 when an official described in § 54-7 of
such municipality requests such assistance and only with approval of
Munhall's official described in § 54-7. A Munhall official described in
§ 54-7 shall have authority to request police assistance from the
municipalities described in § 54-6 when such circumstances exist in the
exercise of reasonable discretion which indicate that such police
assistance is prudent and in conformance with appropriate police
procedures.
B. At all times every such police officer shall be deemed to be the
employee of his home municipality and shall not be deemed to be the
officer, agent, servant or employee of the receiving municipality for
9. Editor's Note: The list of municipalities participating in the mutual police protection
agreement is on file in the Borough office.
§ 54-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-8
1:27
§ 54-9. Rights, privileges and immunities.
This article shall not be deemed to enlarge or diminish the rights, privileges
or immunities established in the Municipal Police Jurisdiction Act.10 Such
police officers, while performing police duties in a receiving municipality,
shall have authority to make arrests when it is appropriate and to use and
exercise all police powers incident to the police action.
Workers' Compensation, Heart and Lung Act benefits or rights or for
any other purposes.
10.Editor's Note: See 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8953 et seq.
§ 54-8 MUNHALL CODE § 54-9
1:28
Chapter 62
RECORDS
§ 54-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-9
1:29

ARTICLE I
Open Records
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 62-1. General rule.
Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the Borough of Munhall shall make all
public records as defined by the Pennsylvania Open Records Law accessible
for inspection and duplication by a requestor in accordance with 65 P.S.
§ 67.101 et seq. A public record shall be provided to a requestor in the
medium requested if the public record exists in that medium; otherwise, it
shall be provided in the medium in which it exists, except for the provisions
in § 62-3B. Public records shall be available for access during the regular
business hours of the Borough. Nothing in this article shall provide for
access to a record which is not a public record.
§ 62-2. Request for access to public records.
§ 62-3. Borough's response to requests for access.
A. All requests for public records shall be in writing and shall be set forth
on the Borough Request Form, a sample of which is attached hereto as
Exhibit A incorporated herein by reference.11 The form shall include,
among other things, the requestor's contact information, date received
and specific records requested. Requests may be submitted in person or
by mail or fax.
B. Requests must be specific enough for the Borough to determine what
records are needed.
A. General rule. Upon receipt of a written request for access to a record,
the Borough shall make a good faith effort to determine if the record
requested is a public record and to respond as promptly as possible
under the circumstances existing at the time of the request, but shall
not exceed five business days from the date the written request is
received by the Borough. Except as set forth in Subsection B below, if
the Borough fails to send the response within five business days of
receipt of the written request for access, the written request for access
shall be deemed denied.
B. Exception.
(1) Upon receipt of a written request for access, if the Borough
determines that one of the following applies:
(a) The request for access request requires redaction of a public
record.
11.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough office.
§ 62-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-3
1:31
§ 62-4. Redaction.
If the Borough determines that a public record contains information which
is subject to access, as well as information which is not subject to access,
the Borough's response shall grant access to the information which is
subject to access and deny access to the information which is not subject to
access. If the information which is not subject to access is an integral part
of the public record and cannot be separated, the Borough shall redact from
(b) The request for access requires the retrieval of a record stored
in a remote location.
(c) A timely response to the request for access cannot be
accomplished due to bona fide and specific staffing limitations.
(d) A legal review is necessary to determine whether the record is
a public record subject to access under 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
(e) The requestor has not complied with the Borough's policy
regarding access to public records.
(f) The requestor refuses to pay applicable fee set forth in this
article.
(2) The Borough shall send written notice to the requestor within five
business days of the Borough's receipt of the request notifying the
requestor that the request for access is being reviewed, the reason
for the review and a reasonable date that a response is expected to
be provided. If the date that a response is expected to be provided
is in excess of 30 days, following the five business days allowed
under Subsection A above, the request for access shall be deemed
denied.
C. Denial. If the Borough's response is a denial of a written request for
access, whether in whole or in part, a written response shall be issued
and include:
(1) A description of the record requested.
(2) The specific reasons for the denial, including a citation of
supporting legal authority. If the denial is the result of a
determination that the record requested is not a public record, the
specific reasons for the Borough's determination that the record is
not a public record shall be included.
(3) The typed or printed name, title, business address, business
telephone number and signature of the public official or public
employee on whose authority the denial is issued.
(4) Date of the response.
(5) The procedure to appeal the denial of access under 65 P.S. § 67.101
et seq.
§ 62-3 MUNHALL CODE § 62-4
1:32
the public record the information which is not subject to access and the
response shall grant access to the information which is subject to access.
The Borough may not deny access to the public record if the information
which is not subject to public access is able to be redacted. Information
which the Borough redacts in accordance with this section shall be deemed
a denial under § 62-3C of this article.
§ 62-5. Final Borough determination.
§ 62-6. Judicial appeal.
§ 62-7. Fees.
A. Filing of exceptions. If a written request for access is denied or deemed
denied, the requestor may file exceptions with the Borough Manager/
Secretary within 15 business days of the mailing date of the Borough's
response or within 15 days of a deemed denial. The exceptions shall
state grounds upon which the requestor asserts that the record is a
public record and shall address any grounds stated by the Borough for
delaying or denying the request.
B. Determination. Unless the requestor agrees otherwise, the Borough
Manager/Secretary or his/her designee, shall make a final
determination regarding the exceptions within 30 days of the mailing
date of the exceptions. Prior to issuing the final determination
regarding the exceptions, the Borough Manager/Secretary or his/her
designee may conduct a hearing. The determination shall be the final
order of the Borough. If the Borough Manager/Secretary or his/her
designee determines that the Borough correctly denied the request for
access, the Borough Manager/Secretary or his/her designee shall
provide a written explanation to the requestor of the reason for the
denial.
A. Within 30 days of the denial by the Borough pursuant to § 62-3C of this
article, or of the mailing date of a final determination of the Borough
affirming the denial of access, a requestor may file a petition for review
or other document as might be required by rule of court with the Court
of Common Pleas of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, or bring an action
in the local Magisterial District. A requestor is entitled to a reasoned
decision containing findings of fact and conclusions of law based upon
the evidence as a whole which clearly and concisely states and explains
the rationale for the decisions so that all can determine why and how a
particular result was reached.
B. Notice. The Borough shall be served notice of actions commenced in
accordance with Subsection A of this section and shall have an
opportunity to respond in accordance with applicable court rules.
A. The Borough may charge the following fees for requests made for
access to public records:
§ 62-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-7
1:33
§ 62-8. Borough contact.
The person at the Borough to whom all record requests should be addressed
shall be:
Assistant Borough Secretary/Treasurer
Borough of Munhall
1900 West Street
Munhall, PA 15120
(412) 464-7310
(1) Postage. Fees for postage shall be the actual cost of mailing.
(2) Copying. Fees for duplication by photocopying, printing from
electronic media or microfilm, copying onto electronic media,
transmission by facsimile or other electronic means and other
means of duplication shall be the same as the per copy fee set forth
in the Borough's fee schedule, as amended from time to time, by
resolution of the Borough Council.
(3) Certification. The fee for official certification of copies, if an official
certification is requested by the requestor for the purpose of legally
verifying the public record, shall be in an amount as established,
from time to time, by resolution of Borough Council.
(4) Conversion to paper. If a public record is only maintained
electronically or in other non-paper media, duplication fees shall be
those imposed by Subsection A(2) of this section.
B. The Borough may waive the fees for duplication of a public record,
including, but not limited to, when:
(1) The requestor duplicates the public record.
(2) The Borough deems it is in the public interest to do so.
C. Prepayment. Prior to granting a request for access in accordance with
this article, the Borough may require a requestor to prepay an estimate
of the fees authorized under this section if the fees required to fulfill the
request are expected to exceed $100.
D. Limitations. Except as otherwise provided by statute, no other fees may
be imposed unless the Borough necessarily incurs costs for complying
with the request and such fees must be reasonable. No fee may be
imposed for the Borough's review of a record to determine whether the
record is a public record subject to access in accordance with 65 P.S.
§ 67.101 et seq.
§ 62-7 MUNHALL CODE § 62-9
1:34
§ 62-9. Regular business hours.
The regular business hours of the Borough shall be Monday through Friday,
from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
§ 62-10. Person designated to receive exceptions.
The individual at the Borough who shall receive and respond to exceptions
filed when a record is denied and the requestor disagrees with the denial
shall be the Borough Manager.
§ 62-11. Miscellaneous.
A. The Borough shall not ask for or require a purpose or motive for
requesting a particular record and shall not limit the number of public
records that may be requested.
B. If the record is only kept in electronic form, the Borough shall make it
available in paper on request.
C. The Borough will not create a record that does not exist or put a
document into a format that does not exist, except for Subsection B
above.
D. This article shall be posted prominently at the Borough municipal
building.
§ 62-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-11
1:35
Chapter 75
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 62-11 MUNHALL CODE § 62-11
1:36
ARTICLE I
Tax Collector's Commission
[Adopted 3-9-1961 by Ord. No. 1130; amended in its entirety
3-15-2017 by Ord. No. 1586]
§ 75-1. Payment of commission.
The compensation to be paid to the Tax Collector of the Borough of Munhall
for the collection of Borough taxes on and after January 1, 2018, shall be as
follows:
A. For all taxes collected at discount or at face, a commission of 1.5% of
the amount collected.
B. For all taxes collected after the date when a penalty shall be added
thereto, a commission of 2% of the amount collected.
§ 75-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-1
1:37

ARTICLE II
Mayor and Council Members
[Adopted 12-28-1973 by Ord. No. 1222]
§ 75-2. Salary of Mayor. [Amended 2-15-2017 by Ord. No. 1585]
The salary of the Mayor of the Borough of Munhall shall be $3,000 per
annum.
§ 75-3. Salary of Council members. [Amended 2-15-2017 by Ord.
No. 1585]
The salary of members of Council of the Borough of Munhall shall be $2,400
per annum.
§ 75-4. Compensation of Mayor and Council members.
The compensation of the Mayor and members of Council of the Borough
shall be payable from the general funds and revenue of the Borough of
Munhall.
§ 75-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-4
1:39
Chapter 88
VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE
§ 88-1. Creation.
There is hereby created, effective immediately, a Committee pursuant to the
Act providing for blighted vacant property removal (Urban Redevelopment
Law, June 23, 1978, P.L. 556, No. 94),12 consisting of at least four members
as specified by the Act and known as the "Vacant Property Review
Committee."
§ 88-2. Membership.
One member shall be a member of the Council of the Borough designated
by resolution of Borough Council. One member shall be a representative
of the Redevelopment Authority of Allegheny County as designated by said
Authority. One member shall be a representative of the Borough Planning
Commission, or appropriate similar entity, as designated by said
Commission. One member shall be designated by the chief executive officer
of the Borough.
§ 88-3. Terms.
The initial members of the Vacant Property Review Committee shall serve
for a term ending two years from the date of enactment of this chapter.
Thereafter, successors shall be appointed for terms of two years. Vacancies
shall be filled by the appointment of a member by the respective body or
officer authorized by the Act and this chapter to make appointments, and
members appointed to fill vacancies shall serve until the expiration of the
then remaining unexpired term.
§ 88-4. Power and authority.
The Vacant Property Review Committee shall have power and authority
to operate under the Act to provide for the designation, certification and
removal of blighted property as defined in the Act, to operate in conjunction
with and cooperate with the Redevelopment Authority of Allegheny County
in bringing about the acquisition, by the exercise of eminent domain or
otherwise, as authorized by the Act, and elimination of blighted property
within the Borough; and, to this end, said Committee shall have all power
and authority to do such acts and deeds as are necessary and appropriate
to carry out the goals of the Act and of this chapter.
§ 88-5. Notice of determination.
Notice of the determination by the Committee that a property is blighted
property within the meaning of the Act shall be given to the owner of
12.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1701 et seq.
§ 75-4 MUNHALL CODE § 88-5
1:40
the property or his agent, together with or including an order from the
Committee to the owner directing the elimination of the conditions, by
personal service of the Committee's notification upon the owner or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by posting a copy of the
Committee's resolution in a conspicuous place on the property. The owner
or his agent shall have the right to appeal from the Committee's
determination by filing a written notice of appeal with the Committee within
30 days after giving of such notice, in which event a hearing before the
Committee shall be scheduled.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 100
ADULT USES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 168. Zoning — See Ch. 440.
§ 88-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-5
1:41

ARTICLE I
Rationale and Findings
§ 100-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses
in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens
of the Borough of Munhall, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented
businesses within the Borough of Munhall. The provisions of this chapter
have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on
the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including
sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect
of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented
materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to
condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
§ 100-2. Findings and rationale.
Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented
in hearings and in reports made available to Council of the Borough of
Munhall, and on the findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions
incorporated in the following cases: City of Littleton v. Z. J. Gifts D-4.
L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books. Inc.,
535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000);
City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v.
American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre. Inc.,
501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue. 409 U.S. 109 (1972); NY. State
Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); World Wide Video of
Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben's
Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); Williams
v. Morgan, 478 F.3d 1316 (11th Cir. 2007); H&A Land Corp. v. City of
Kennedale, 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. 2007); Gammoh v. City of La Habra, 395
F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga. 107 F.3d (6th
Cir. 1997); and Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona, 490 F3.d 860 (11th
Cir., June 28, 2007), and based upon reports concerning secondary effects
occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not
limited to, Austin, Texas - 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Garden Grove,
California - 1991; Houston, Texas - 1983, 1997; Phoenix, Arizona - 1979,
1995-98; Chattanooga, Tennessee - 1999-2003; Los Angeles, California -
1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Spokane, Washington - 2001; St. Cloud,
Minnesota - 1994; Littleton, Colorado - 2004; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma -
1986; Dallas, Texas - 1997; Kennedale, Texas - 2005; Greensboro, North
Carolina - 2003; Amarillo, Texas - 1977; New York, New York Times Square
- 1994; the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the
Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of
Minnesota); the report of Louis W. Gentile, Gentile-Meinert & Associates,
for the Borough of Homestead, July 11, 2007; and the 1996 legislative
§ 100-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-2
1:43
findings and intent of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in connection with the regulation of adult-oriented
establishments reported at 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5501, the Council of the Borough
of Munhall finds:
A. Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are
associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects, including,
but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential
spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use
and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties,
urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation;
B. Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from sensitive land
uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses,
and should be separated from other sexually oriented businesses to
minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to
prevent an unnecessary concentration of sexually oriented businesses
in one area;
C. Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm
which the Borough of Munhall has a substantial government interest in
preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in
preventing secondary effects, which is the Borough of Munhall's
rationale for this chapter, exists independent of any comparative
analysis between sexually oriented and non-sexually oriented
businesses. Additionally, the Borough of Munhall's interest in
regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future
secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented
businesses that may locate in the Borough of Munhall. The Borough of
Munhall finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this
chapter are reasonable and are believed to be relevant to said
secondary effects.
§ 100-2 MUNHALL CODE § 100-2
1:44
ARTICLE II
Preambles
§ 100-3. Amendment and incorporation.
The preambles of Ordinance Nos. 1381 and 150913 are hereby amended to
add the findings and rationale, above. The whereas clauses are incorporated
in this chapter.14
13.Editor's Note: Said ordinances are included in Ch. 440, Zoning.
14.Editor's Note: The whereas clauses of Ord. No. 1527 are as follows: WHEREAS, sexually
oriented businesses require special supervision from the public safety agencies of the
Borough of Munhall in order to protect and preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the
patrons of such businesses as well as the citizens of the Borough of Munhall; and
WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Munhall finds that sexually oriented businesses,
as a category of establishments, are frequently used for unlawful sexual activities,
including prostitution and sexual liaisons of a casual nature; and WHEREAS, Munhall
Borough has in effect a comprehensive zoning plan and an ordinance regulating adult
entertainment; and WHEREAS, Ordinances numbered 1381 and 1509 are amended in
accordance with this chapter; and WHEREAS, there is convincing documented evidence
that sexually oriented businesses, as a category of establishments, have deleterious
secondary effects and are often associated with crime and adverse effects on surrounding
properties; and WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Munhall has reviewed the
findings and ordinances of the Borough of Homestead and the resulting official action;
and WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Munhall desires to minimize and control
these adverse effects and thereby protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry;
protect the citizens from crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve the character of
surrounding neighborhoods and deter the spread of urban blight; and WHEREAS, the
Borough of Munhall recognizes its constitutional duty to interpret, construe, and amend
its laws to comply with constitutional requirements as they are announced; and
WHEREAS, with the passage of any ordinance, the Borough of Munhall and the Council of
the Borough of Munhall accept as binding the applicability of general principles of
criminal and civil law and procedure and the rights and obligations under the United
States and Pennsylvania Constitutions, United States and Pennsylvania Statutes, the
Federal and Pennsylvania Rules of Civil and Criminal Procedure, United States and
Pennsylvania regulations, and decisions of United States and Pennsylvania Courts; and
WHEREAS, it is not the intent of this chapter to suppress any speech activities protected
by the United States Constitution or the Pennsylvania Constitution, but to enact
legislation to further the content-neutral governmental interests of the Borough of
Munhall, to wit, the controlling of secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses.
§ 100-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-3
1:45

ARTICLE III
Terminology
§ 100-4. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter and for Chapter 440, Zoning, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADULT USES — Includes any, some or all of the activities described below:
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY — A nightclub, bar, tavern,
restaurant, bottle club, or similar commercial establishment, whether
or not alcoholic beverages are served, regularly featuring (i.e., giving
special prominence to) persons who are nude, seminude or in a state of
nudity.
A.
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less
than fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with
less than fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola.
B.
SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY — The showing of the female
breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending
across the width of the breast at that point, or the showing of the
majority of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include
the lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any
portion of the cleavage of human female breasts exhibited by a bikini,
dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel, provided that
the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
C.
D. ADULT DANCING ESTABLISHMENTS — As defined below in Article V.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT — As defined in Chapter
440, Zoning, § 440-7, of the Code of the Borough of Munhall.
E.
§ 100-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-4
1:47

ARTICLE IV
Location Restrictions
§ 100-5. Prohibited locations.
No adult uses, described in the definitions in Article III above, shall be
permitted, and the exterior walls of any structure providing such use shall
not be located within 500 lineal feet of any residential district or the lot line
of any primary school, secondary school, place of worship, day-care center,
child nursery, library, existing dwelling not owned by the same owner as
the adult use, public park or lot marked on any official Borough map as a
proposed future park.
§ 100-6. Permitted locations.
Adult uses shall be permitted where presently allowed pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 440, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of Munhall.
§ 100-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-6
1:49

ARTICLE V
Adult Dancing Establishments
§ 100-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT DANCING ESTABLISHMENTS — Any business wherein employees,
agents, or independent contractors perform dance routines or adultoriented
dancing entertainment as characterized by an emphasis on the
exposure of specific anatomical areas. This definition shall include any
establishment whether or not it is licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board to serve alcoholic beverages.
§ 100-8. General requirements.
An adult dancing establishment shall observe the following requirements:
A. Any dancing which exposes to view by patrons or spectators on the
premises at any time the bare female breast below a horizontal line
across the top of the areola at its highest point, which shall include the
entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include
any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a
dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel,
provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part, is prohibited.
B. Any dancing which exposes to view by patrons or spectators on the
premises at any time the human genitals, pubic region, or cleavage of
the human buttock is prohibited.
C. Any dancing known as straddle dancing, lap dancing, face dancing, or
any similar type of dancing known by any other name in which an
employee, agent, or independent contractor, whether fully clothed or
not, uses any part of his or her body whether directly or through a
medium, to massage, rub, stroke, knead, caress or fondle the genitals
or pubic area of a patron, while on the premises, or the placing of the
genitals or pubic area of an employee, agent, or independent contractor
in contact with, or in approximate contact with, the face or any other
area of the body of a patron, while on the premises, is prohibited.
D. Any person engaged in displaying or exposing anatomical areas while
dancing is prohibited from simulating sexual activity with any patron,
spectator, employee, independent contractor or other person on the
premises of an adult dancing establishment.
E. No person in an adult dancing establishment shall engage in the display
of or exhibition of specific adult-oriented anatomical areas while
performing or dancing except while said person is positioned in or
occupying an entertainment area consisting of a platform or other
structure raised not less than 18 inches nor more than 36 inches above
the immediately surrounding main floor area and encompassing an area
§ 100-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-8
1:51
§ 100-9. Establishment of license and license fee.
§ 100-10. Qualifications for obtaining adult dancing establishment
license.
Every person or entity engaged in or having any interest in the operation
of an adult dancing establishment, before being issued a license, shall be
required to meet the following qualifications:
of at least 100 square feet, and while the person so displaying or
exhibiting is positioned not less than five feet from any patron or
spectator.
F. No spectator or patron shall be present in the entertainment area
defined above during the course of any performance or dancing
involving the display or exhibition of specific adult-oriented anatomical
areas.
G. No person maintaining, managing, owning or operating an adult
dancing establishment shall allow or permit the construction,
maintenance, or use of areas partitioned or screened from public view
that are designed to be occupied or are commonly occupied, alone or
together, by any person or persons on the premises of such
establishments for performances, private or otherwise, involving the
display of or exhibition of specific adult-oriented anatomical areas while
performing or dancing or to permit any employee or patron to violate
any provision of this chapter.
H. Nothing in this chapter pertaining to adult dancing establishments shall
be construed to permit or authorize any act or activities that are
prohibited by state law, and these sections are meant to be in addition
to any acts or activities that are so prohibited.
A. Every person who engages in operating an adult dancing establishment
as defined herein shall obtain a license to operate such an
establishment and pay to the Borough of Munhall a license fee in the
annual amount as established from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council. Such license must be renewed annually by
application of the person to whom the license was originally granted.
Said license fee may be amended by Council in the future by simple
resolution. Said license fee shall be used by the Borough of Munhall to
offset its expenses in exercising its police and regulatory powers
involving adult dancing establishments.15
B. Each application for an adult dancing establishment license shall be
accompanied by a photograph or drawing of any signs to be displayed
on the exterior of the establishment with an indication as to the
dimensions of the same.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-8 MUNHALL CODE § 100-10
1:52
§ 100-11. Permitted hours of operation.
Adult dancing establishments shall be permitted to operate between the
hours of 6:00 p.m. until 2:00 a.m. the following morning on Monday through
Saturday. Such establishments are prohibited from operating on Sundays
with the exception of the hours of 12:01 a.m. to 2:00 a.m.
§ 100-12. Suspension or revocation of license.
License suspension or revocation can occur upon:
A. Applicant must be free of convictions for the following: any felony; any
conviction related to prostitution; any conviction involving the
presentation, exhibition and/or performance of an obscene production;
and any conviction involving the maintenance of a nuisance in
connection with the same or similar business, within the last five years.
Applicant shall not have had any adult entertainment establishment
license revoked for cause within the last five years.
B. Applicant must submit to fingerprinting by the Borough of Munhall
Police Department or its designated representative.
C. Applicant's premises must meet all established health, zoning, fire,
building, plumbing, and International Codes and cannot provide direct
interior access to residential living quarters. Applicant shall file a floor
plan which clearly exhibits all entrances, exits, stairways and all rooms
in the building and their intended uses.
D. In the event applicant does not own the premises to be licensed, a copy
of the lease agreement between the applicant and the property owner
shall be submitted along with the application to the Borough.
A. Conviction of the licensee, his employees, agents or independent
contractors for any offense occurring on the licensed premises
involving or related to:
(1) The production, presentation, exhibition or performance of any
entertainment that is deemed to be obscene;
(2) Disorderly conduct;
(3) Maintenance of a nuisance in connection with the same or similar
business;
(4) Prostitution, solicitation for the purpose of prostitution or loitering
for the purpose of prostitution;
(5) The sale, transfer, possession or use of any controlled substance;
(6) The display or exhibition by an employee, agent, or independent
contractor in the establishment of less than completely and
opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, the cleavage of
the human buttocks, or any portion of the human female breast
§ 100-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-12
1:53
§ 100-13. Hearing on revocation or suspension of license.
When Munhall Borough Council has reasonable cause to believe that a
license should be revoked or suspended for any of the reasons listed above,
it shall notify the licensee, in writing, of the hearing date and time and
alleged charges. The notice to the licensee shall be mailed to the address
shown on the license. At the hearing, the evidence shall be transcribed.
Following the hearing, Munhall Borough Council shall make a decision
which will be reduced to writing and forwarded to the licensee. Upon
a decision by Munhall Borough Council to revoke or suspend a license
issued under this chapter, all business activity at that location shall cease
immediately for the period of suspension or revocation.
§ 100-14. Operation standards.
below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest
point, any part of the entire lower portion of the human female
breast, excluding cleavage;
(7) Any violation of any other section of this chapter;
(8) Any violation of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Code.
B. Noncompliance with any health, zoning, fire, building and/or plumbing
codes adopted by the Borough of Munhall.
C. The filing of a false application.
D. A conviction for permitting the on-premises sale or consumption of
alcoholic beverages in any adult dancing establishment that is not
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages.
E. Any illegal on-premises conduct by patrons that results in a criminal
conviction of such patron.
F. A violation by any licensee or his agents, servants, or employees for any
action or activity occurring in, on or at the premises covered by the
license in violation of any provision of this chapter or any other
ordinance of the Borough of Munhall, or of any criminal or penal statute
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania against gambling, disorderly
conduct or any other criminal or penal offense; a judgment of conviction
in any court of competent jurisdiction shall be conclusive evidence of
such violation.
G. The occurrence in, on or at the premises covered by the license of any
condition which is a nuisance or obnoxious to the morals and general
welfare of the public.
A. Dressing rooms shall be provided for all dancers and performers.
B. A barrier, including, but not limited to, a handrail, half-wall or other
similar device must be constructed that separates the performing area
from the patrons.
§ 100-12 MUNHALL CODE § 100-14
1:54
§ 100-15. Violations and penalties.16
Any person or entity convicted of a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before a competent authority, be sentenced to pay a fine
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the
Borough of Munhall, plus costs.
C. Employees shall not be permitted to loiter in an open doorway or
entrance of the licensed premises.
D. All doors to the licensed premises must be closed except for the limited
time necessary to allow for ingress and egress during the hours of
operation.
E. No person who has been convicted of any prostitution-related offense
within the last two years shall be employed.
F. Adult dancing entertainment activities or photographs of the same shall
not be displayed within any licensed premises in such a manner as to be
open to the general public view from outside the licensed premises.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-15
1:55

ARTICLE VI
Precedence of Interpretation
§ 100-16. Conflicts with other provisions.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, whenever the regulations of this
chapter are at variance with any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations,
ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the regulations of this chapter
shall prevail.
§ 100-17. Constitutional challenges.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, whenever any
regulation of this chapter is challenged as violating the United States
Constitution and/or the Pennsylvania Constitution, either facially or as
applied, the court shall, if at all possible under the circumstances, interpret
the regulation in a manner that avoids a conflict between the regulation and
the United States Constitution and/or the Pennsylvania Constitutions.
§ 100-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-17
1:57
Chapter 109
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 54. Fire prevention — See Ch. 214.
§ 109-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ACCIDENTAL FALSE ALARM — Any false alarm which is not an
intentional false alarm, as defined herein, or, not when an intrusion,
crime, fire or other emergency has actually occurred.
ALARM — A communication to the Police Department indicating that a
crime, fire or other emergency situation warranting immediate action
by the Police Department has occurred or is occurring.
ALARM DEVICE — A mechanical device designed to automatically
transmit an alarm by wire, telephone, radio or other means:
CENTRAL RECEIVING STATION — The alarm or control panel installed
in the police headquarters for the purpose of giving visual or audio
response to direct alarm devices.
DIRECT ALARM DEVICE — An alarm device, other than a telephone
dialer alarm device, designed to transmit an alarm directly to the Police
Department.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm to which the Police Department responds
resulting from the activation of an alarm device when a crime, fire
or other emergency warranting immediate action by the Police
Department has not in fact occurred.
INDIRECT ALARM DEVICE — An alarm device designed to transmit an
alarm to a person who is instructed to notify the Police Department of
the alarm.
INTENTIONAL FALSE ALARM — A false alarm resulting from the
intentional activation of an alarm device by an individual under
circumstances where that individual has no reasonable basis to believe
(1) Directly to the Police Department;
To a person who is instructed to notify the Police Department of the
alarm; or
(2)
To activate a bell or sounding device to be heard outside a building
which is intended to alert the police or others to the existence of a
crime, fire or other emergency situation warranting police action.
(3)
§ 100-17 MUNHALL CODE § 109-1
1:58
§ 109-2. Permits required.
that a crime, fire or other emergency warranting immediate action by
the Police Department has occurred or is occurring.
PERMIT HOLDER — A person to whom the Police Department has
issued an alarm device permit.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, incorporated
association or other similar entity.
TELEPHONE DIALER ALARM DEVICE — An alarm device designed to
automatically transmit a recorded message over regular telephone lines
directly to the Police Department or to a person who is instructed to
notify the Police Department of the alarm.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.
A. It shall be unlawful for a property owner, lessee of property or a person
otherwise occupying a premises outside of the Borough to put into
operation on his premises an alarm device which terminates at the
Borough's police headquarters or to allow such an alarm device to be
put into operation on his premises without first obtaining an alarm
device permit from the Police Department.
B. Application.
(1) In order to apply for an alarm device permit, a person must submit
an application to the Police Department stating:
(a) His name.
(b) His home and business addresses and the telephone number of
each.
(c) The location at which the alarm device will be installed and
operated.
(d) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two
individuals who have keys to the premises at which the alarm
device is located and who are authorized to enter the premises
at any time, but who do not reside at the premises at which the
alarm device is located.
(e) A general written description of the device other than
schematics.
(2) If the device is to be leased or rented from, or is to be serviced
pursuant to a service agreement by, a person other than the person
making application for an alarm device permit, the name, address
and telephone number of that person must be stated in the
application. In addition, each person submitting an application for
§ 109-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-2
1:59
an alarm device permit shall submit a signed statement in the
following form:
"I (We), the undersigned applicant(s) for an alarm device permit,
intending to be legally bound hereby, agree with the Borough that
neither I (we), nor anyone claiming by, through or under me (us),
shall make any claim against the Borough, its officials or agents,
for any damages caused to the premises at which the alarm device,
which is the subject of this application, is or will be located, if such
damage is caused by a forced entry to said premises by employees
of the Borough in order to answer an alarm from said alarm device
at a time when said premises are or appear to be unattended
or when in the discretion of said employees the circumstances
appear to warrant a forced entry."
(3) The Police Department shall furnish forms which any person
wishing to apply for an alarm device permit shall submit with his
application.
C. A person applying for an alarm device permit for a telephone dialer
alarm device, local sounding device, or an indirect alarm device shall
submit the required fee along with his application. The fee shall be fixed
pursuant to a resolution of the Borough Council.
D. The Police Department shall, within 10 weekdays from receipt of an
application for an alarm device permit, either grant an alarm device
permit to the applicant or notify the applicant, in writing, that his
application has been denied and the reason or reasons why it has been
denied.
E. An application for an alarm device permit may only be denied for the
following reasons:
(1) The application submitted by the applicant does not comply with
Subsection B or C of this section.
(2) The applicant's alarm device does not conform to the operational
standards set forth in § 109-3 of this chapter.
F. Notwithstanding the language contained in Subsection A of this
section, it shall not be unlawful for a person to continue to operate an
alarm device on his premises without an alarm device permit for a
period of 90 days after the effective date of this chapter, provided said
alarm device was in operation on the effective date of this chapter.
G. The Police Department shall have the power to revoke an alarm device
permit. An alarm device permit shall be revoked by notifying the permit
holder, in writing, that his alarm device permit has been revoked and
the reason or reasons why it has been revoked. Said written notice shall
be:
§ 109-2 MUNHALL CODE § 109-2
1:60
§ 109-3. Operational standards.
(1) Delivered personally to the permit holder, in which case the
revocation shall be effective immediately upon delivery.
(2) Mailed to the permit holder at his last known address by certified
mail, postage prepaid, in which case the revocation shall be
effective three days after mailing.
H. An alarm device permit may only be revoked for the following reasons:
(1) Failure of an alarm device to conform to the operational standards
set forth in § 109-3 of this chapter.
(2) Failure of a permit holder to pay a false alarm charge assessed to
him by the Police Department under the provisions of § 109-4 of
this chapter within 30 days of the mailing to him of a notice of the
assessment of a false alarm charge.
(3) The occurrence of more than 12 false alarms from an alarm device
during any calendar year.
(4) The occurrence of an intentional false alarm caused by the permit
holder or by an individual over the age of 15 who resides on the
premises where the alarm device is located.
(5) Failure of a permit holder with a direct alarm device to pay to the
Police Department installation or maintenance fees assessed to him
under § 109-5 of this chapter within 30 days of the due date thereof.
I. A person who has had his alarm device permit revoked under
Subsections G and H of this section may reapply for an alarm device
permit 45 days after the effective date of such revocation, provided that
if a person's alarm device permit was revoked for nonpayment of a false
alarm charge or for nonpayment of installation or maintenance fees, or
both, the Police Department shall deny said application unless such
charge or fee or both have been paid. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
person who has had his alarm device permit twice revoked on the basis
of an occurrence of an intentional false alarm may not reapply for an
alarm device permit for one year from the effective date of the second
revocation.
A. If an alarm device is designed to transmit a recorded message directly
to the Police Department, the duration of such recorded message shall
not exceed 60 seconds. The contents of the recorded message shall be
intelligible and in a format approved by the Police Department.
B. An alarm device need not contain a delay service which causes a delay
to occur between the time the alarm device receives a triggering
stimulus and the time the alarm device transmits an alarm.
§ 109-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-3
1:61
§ 109-4. False alarms.
C. A direct alarm device shall be designed to dial only specific telephone
numbers designated by the Police Department and to allow the permit
holder to abort the alarm signals.
D. A direct alarm device shall be designed so that it interfaces with the
central receiving station maintained by the Police Department.
E. If an alarm device is designed to cause a bell, siren or sound-making
device to be activated on or near the premises on which the alarm
device is installed at the time it gives an alarm, said alarm device shall
be designed to deactivate the bell, siren or other sound-making device
after 30 minutes of operation. Preexisting units must be modified for a
thirty-minute device unless said unit cannot be modified without
replacement.
F. All alarm devices shall meet the applicable standards of the
Underwriters Laboratories and/or the National Fire Protection
Association, and/or other recognized industry standards, and shall be
permitted under this chapter if in conformity thereto. An alarm device
which does not meet any of the above standards or for which there is no
recognized industry standard shall require the applicant for a permit to
submit evidence of the reliability or suitability of the alarm device. Any
permit issued for such an alarm device which does not conform to the
recognized standard shall be conditionally subject to satisfactory
performance of said alarm device after installation. The applicant for a
permit may be required to submit subsequent evidence of the reliability
and suitability of the alarm device.
G. The sensory mechanism used in connection with an alarm device must
be adjusted to suppress false indications of fire or intrusion, so that the
alarm device will not be activated by impulses due to transient pressure
change in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind noises such as the
rattling or vibrating of doors or windows, vehicular noise adjacent to
the premises, or other forces unrelated to genuine alarm situations.
H. The alarm device must be maintained by the permit holder in good
repair to assure reliability of operation.
A. Intentional false alarms. No permit holder or person shall create an
intentional false alarm.
B. Accidental false alarms. Any person or permit holder causing accidental
false alarms for any reason shall pay to the Borough a charge for each
and every false alarm to which the Police and/or Fire Departments
responds, in each calendar year, pursuant to a schedule of charges
established by resolution of the Borough Council.
C. False alarm occurrence. The Police Department, within 10 days from
the date of the false alarm, shall notify the permit holder of the alarm
device from which the false alarm emanated or other person causing
§ 109-3 MUNHALL CODE § 109-4
1:62
§ 109-5. Installation and maintenance fees for direct alarm
systems.
said false alarm that a false alarm charge is due and the amount
thereof. Such notice shall be in writing and mailed to the permit holder
or person causing said false alarm at his last known address by regular
mail, postage prepaid. Failure of the Police Department to mail notice of
assessment of a false alarm charge within 10 days from the occurrence
of a false alarm shall preclude the Borough from assessing a false alarm
charge for said false alarm.
D. False alarm charge. A charge shall be due and payable at the office of
the Police Department 30 days from the date of the mailing of the notice
of assessment of the charge.
E. Failure to pay charge. Failure of a permit holder to pay a false alarm
charge on or before the date due shall subject such permit holder to
revocation of his alarm device permit under § 109-2H of this chapter.
F. Failure of others to pay charge. Failure of a person causing a false
alarm, other than a permit holder, to pay a false alarm charge on or
before the date due shall constitute a violation of this chapter, and shall
subject said person to the penalties set forth in § 109-11 hereof.
A. A permit holder who has a direct alarm device which is connected to a
central receiving station at Police Department headquarters shall be
required to pay to the Borough a fee for the connection of his direct
alarm device to the central receiving station and a yearly fee for the
maintenance of the central receiving station.
B. The fee for connection of a direct alarm device to a central receiving
station at Police Department headquarters shall be set pursuant to a
resolution of the Borough Council, plus the actual cost of interface into
the central receiving station for each such connection.
C. In addition, a permit holder who has a direct alarm device shall pay a
yearly fee for the maintenance of the central receiving station. This
maintenance fee shall be determined by the Borough Council on an
annual basis each July by prorating the maintenance costs among the
number of permit holders at that time using the central receiving
station, regardless of how long a permit holder has been connected to
the central receiving station. The Police Department shall annually
notify each permit holder who has a direct alarm device of the amount
of the assessment for maintenance of the central receiving station.
Such notice shall be in writing and mailed to the permit holder at his
last known address by regular mail, postage prepaid. The maintenance
fee shall be due and payable at the office of the Police Department 30
days from the date of the notice of assessment of the maintenance fee.
D. The fee for connection of a direct alarm device to a central receiving
station shall be due and payable at Police Department headquarters at
§ 109-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-5
1:63
§ 109-6. Change in location of Police Department.
If the location of the headquarters of the Police Department should change
at any time, the Borough shall not be responsible for any cost incurred by
permit holders or other persons because of said change in location.
§ 109-7. Testing.
No person shall conduct or test any alarm device without first obtaining
permission from the Police Department. Where the equipment is keyed
through an intermediary, no such permission is necessary unless the alarm
or signal is to be relayed to the central receiving station.
§ 109-8. Liability of municipality.
The issuance of any permit shall not constitute acceptance by the Borough
of any liability to maintain any equipment, to answer alarms, nor otherwise
render the Borough liable to any person for any loss or damage relating to
the alarm system or procedure.
§ 109-9. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be functions of the
Borough and shall include the following:
the time an alarm device permit is issued to an applicant for such a
permit. The Police Department shall not issue an alarm device to an
applicant until such fee is paid.
E. The Police Department shall not in any way be obligated to provide or
continue to provide a central receiving station facility or facilities for
direct alarm devices, provided that, if the Police Department decides to
discontinue operation of a central receiving station facility, it shall
notify all permit holders serviced by said facility.
F. Failure of a permit holder to pay a yearly fee for the maintenance of the
central receiving station to which his direct alarm device is connected
within 30 days of the date said payment is due shall be subject to the
disconnection of his direct alarm device from the central receiving
station and to the revocation of his alarm device permit under § 109-2H
of this chapter.
A. Authority to accept or reject a permit application or revoke a permit
because of a misrepresentation or false statement contained in any
application for a permit, failure to correct any deficiencies in equipment
or operation of an alarm device after receipt of due notice from the
Borough, or not meeting other conditions and specifications of this
chapter.
B. Authority to order the disconnection of an alarm device until such
device is made to comply with operational standards set forth herein,
§ 109-5 MUNHALL CODE § 109-9
1:64
§ 109-10. Right to appeal.
Whenever, under the provisions of this chapter, the Police Department is
empowered to make a decision with respect to the installation, operation or
maintenance of any alarm device, or with respect to the denial or revocation
of any permit relating thereto, any applicant for a permit or permit holder
aggrieved by such decision may, within 10 days following the decision,
file a written appeal therefrom with the Borough Council of the Borough,
whereupon the Borough Council shall promptly conduct a hearing within
30 days of the appeal petition and affirm, modify or reverse the decision
appealed from. The decision of the Borough Council shall be final.
§ 109-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the
Borough of Munhall, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 112
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 310. Tobacco and tobacco products — See Ch. 401.
but only when evidence of failure to comply with said standards
imposes a burden upon the Borough as a result of false alarms.
C. Authority, at reasonable times and upon written notice, to enter upon
any premises within the Borough to inspect the installation and
operation of an alarm device.
§ 109-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-11
1:65

ARTICLE I
Consumption in Public
[Adopted 2-19-1981 by Ord. No. 1271]
§ 112-1. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent, purpose and scope of this article to regulate activities on and
use of public highways, streets, roads, sidewalks, playgrounds, ball fields,
public property or public rights-of-way within the Borough, together with
other properties within the Borough of Munhall open to the general public
to prevent nuisances to the residents of the Borough in the use of such areas
and consistent with the enjoyment of such property within the Borough of
Munhall and the right of the general public to the quiet enjoyment of public
facilities.
§ 112-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this § 112-2 unless the context clearly indicates
a different meaning.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Alcohol of any degree of proof originally
produced by distillation of any fermented liquid generally produced for
beverage purposes and shall include malt or brewed beverages and wine.
COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE — Any establishment for the sale of goods or
services.
DOOR — A door of solid construction capable of diminishing the sound
emanating from a business and prohibiting light. A screened or half door,
commonly known as a "dutch door" does not fall within the definition of
door.
PROPERTY OPEN TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC — Open space public
property owned by any other political subdivision of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, parking lots of commercial enterprises, entry roads, parking
lots and open spaces of multiple dwelling property, churches and schools,
and/or cemetery property.
§ 112-3. Drinking on public property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and prohibited for any person as a pedestrian or within
a vehicle to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage or to possess
an open container of alcoholic beverage in or upon any public property
or property open to the general public which shall include, but not be
limited to, highways, streets, roads, sidewalks, rights-of-way, playgrounds,
ball fields, parking lots or entryways within the Borough of Munhall.
§ 112-4. Business hours provisions.
It shall be unlawful and prohibited for any owner, proprietor, employee
or agent of any commercial enterprise, including shop, store, tavern,
§ 112-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-4
1:67
restaurant or other place of business to permit or allow any door of entry or
exit to stand ajar during business hours.
§ 112-5. Nuisance declared.
The doing of the unlawful and prohibited acts in §§ 112-3 and 112-4 is
declared a nuisance.
§ 112-6. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine as provided in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of Munhall, plus costs, and,
in default of the payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this
article continues or each section of this article which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.17
B. All fines collected from the enforcement of this article shall be remitted
to the Borough for use in the general fund.
C. In addition to the penalty provisions herein, the alcoholic beverage or
container shall be seized and impounded.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 112-4 MUNHALL CODE § 112-6
1:68
Chapter 116
AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 116-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Munhall Borough Amusement Tax
Ordinance."
§ 116-2. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
§ 116-3. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and
phrases used in this chapter or in an application for license of video or
mechanical devices shall have the meaning given to them in this section:
APPLICANT — Any individual, partnership or corporation who seeks to
obtain a license for a video or mechanical amusement device under this
chapter.
APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OF VIDEO OR MECHANICAL DEVICE —
The document filed by an applicant requesting a permit to possess in the
Borough of Munhall any video or mechanical amusement device, jukebox
or pool table and/or other electronic device, device, machine or apparatus
whatsoever, for the playing of games and amusement.
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and the plural the
singular.
B. Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future tense.
C. Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
D. The word "shall" is always mandatory and is not discretionary.
E. The word "may" is permissive.
F. The Borough intends to favor the public interest as against any private
interest.
G. The headings prefixed to sections and other divisions of this chapter
shall not be considered to control but may be used to aid in the
construction thereof.
H. General words shall be construed to take their meanings and be
restricted by preceding particular words.
§ 112-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-3
1:69
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Any restaurant, bar, tavern, retail,
manufacturing, wholesale, institutional, educational, religious,
governmental or other nonresidential establishment, store or business,
whether or not in operation.
GAMBLING DEVICE — Any device, machine or apparatus used for the
playing of poker, blackjack, keno, bingo or other casino games by the
insertion therein of any coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token.
ILLEGAL GAMBLING DEVICE — Any device, machine or apparatus used for
the playing of poker, blackjack, keno, bingo, slots or other casino gambling
games by the insertion therein of any coin, currency, metal disc, slug or
token which has or has been modified to have a knockoff or knockdown
switch or other capability for erasing or eliminating playing credits.
JUKE BOX — Any device, machine or apparatus which plays recorded music,
whether by record, tape, compact disc or other means, by the insertion
therein of any coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token.
OWNER — Any individual, partnership or corporation who is the lawful
owner of any video or mechanical amusement device for which a license is
sought under this chapter.
POOL TABLE — Any device or apparatus upon which is played the games
of eight-ball, billiards, pool, snooker or other similar games for which a fee
is charged, whether or not such device is operated through the insertion of
coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token.
PROPRIETOR — Any individual, partnership or corporation who owns,
leases or maintains the business establishment in which any video or
mechanical amusement device is placed for the use, patronage, recreation
or amusement of the public or persons in or about the business
establishment.
VIDEO OR MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any device, machine
or apparatus used for the playing of games or otherwise used for the
purpose of amusement or entertainment by the insertion therein of any
coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token, including, but not limited to, claw
machines, electric or electronic dart boards, pinball machines and video
games.
§ 116-4. License required.
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall at any time
have in his possession within the Borough of Munhall any device or
mechanical amusement device, jukebox or pool table for the playing of
games and amusement without first having procured a license therefor as
hereinafter provided in this chapter.
§ 116-5. Application for license.
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity desiring to procure a license
as required in § 116-4 of this chapter shall apply therefor, in writing, to
§ 116-3 MUNHALL CODE § 116-5
1:70
the Borough Secretary. Such application shall set forth the following
information:
§ 116-6. Persons ineligible for licenses.
The Borough shall not issue a license of video or mechanical devices to any
person who:
A. The name and residence of the person, firm, partnership or corporation
applying for the license.
B. The name and residence of the owner of each jukebox, pool table or
video or mechanical amusement device to be licensed.
C. The name and residence of the proprietor of the business establishment
in which each jukebox, pool table or video or mechanical amusement
device is to be located, used or installed.
D. If the owner of the business establishment is not the applicant, then the
applicant shall set forth the length of the time for which the premises
has been leased and whether applicant is a citizen of the United States.
E. The manufacturer, name of machine, serial number, type and fee for
each machine, video or mechanical device, pool table, jukebox or
apparatus to be located on the premises, installed or used.
F. A verification by the applicant, owner and proprietor that the facts set
forth in the application are true and correct to the applicant's, owner's
and proprietor's personal knowledge, information or belief and that any
false statements therein are made subject to the penalties of the Crimes
Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904, relating to unsworn falsification to
authorities.
G. That the applicant has been provided a copy of this chapter and that the
applicant has read and agrees to be bound by all terms and provisions
hereof.
H. That a license does not sanction or condone the use or possession of any
illegal gambling device, whether illegal per se or as modified.
I. That the Borough shall notify the appropriate law enforcement officials
of the use or possession of per se modified or other illegal gambling
devices, whether or not such devices are licensed.
J. That the Borough shall immediately revoke the license of any device
illegally used or possessed, either per se or as modified.
K. That the illegal use or possession of an unlawful gambling device, either
per se or as modified, may result in a criminal prosecution by Borough
or other law enforcement officials.
A. Is not a citizen of the United States.
B. Is not 21 years of age.
§ 116-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-6
1:71
§ 116-7. Conditions for issuance.
No license shall be granted until a period of 10 days shall have elapsed from
the date of application during which time the Borough Secretary may, at his/
her discretion, investigate the facts set forth in the application. A license
shall not be issued unless the applicant acknowledges:
§ 116-8. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize, license or permit
any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been
judicially determined to be a gambling device, either per se or as modified,
or in any way contrary to law or that may be contrary to any future laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States of America.
§ 116-9. License fees.19
C. Has been found guilty of or accepted accelerated rehabilitative
disposition for possessing or using a video or mechanical amusement
device in violation of the Crimes Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania,18 within three years of the date of application.
A. That obtaining or displaying a Borough license does not sanction,
authorize or permit the use or possession of an illegal gambling device,
either per se or as modified.
B. That the Borough shall notify the appropriate law enforcement officials
of the use or possession of per se modified or other illegal gambling
devices, whether or not such devices are licensed.
C. That the Borough shall immediately revoke the license of any video or
mechanical device illegally used or possessed, either per se or as
modified.
D. That if the applicant or licensee illegally uses or possesses an unlawful
gambling device, either per se or as modified, he may be prosecuted by
Borough or other law enforcement officials.
E. That if the Borough Secretary has reasonable grounds to believe that a
particular video or mechanical device is illegal, either per se or as
modified, the Borough Secretary shall not issue a license for said
device.
A. No license shall be issued until the following named fees shall have
been paid by the applicant to the Borough Secretary for each and every
device to be installed or used:
(1) For each jukebox in an amount to be established, from time to time,
by resolution of Borough Council.
18.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 116-6 MUNHALL CODE § 116-9
1:72
§ 116-10. Issuance and display.
Upon the payment of the license fee provided by this chapter, and if the
application fully complies with this chapter, the Borough Secretary shall
issue a disc, plate or sticker setting forth the number of the license for
each machine so licensed and said disc, plate or sticker shall be attached
and fastened to the respective machine or device so that the same may
be clearly observable and readable. All discs, plates or stickers issued by
the Borough for video and mechanical amusement devices shall state that
the video or mechanical amusement device is for amusement purposes only,
that it is not a gambling device and that only games and not money may be
won on the machine or device.
§ 116-11. Inspection.
The Borough or its agents may, during regular business hours, conduct
inspections of any business establishment where any video or mechanical
amusement device licensed under this chapter is located, installed, placed
or used to ensure compliance with this chapter.
§ 116-12. Revocation, debarment and contraband declaration.
(2) For each pool table in an amount to be established, from time to
time, by resolution of Borough Council.
(3) For each video or mechanical amusement device in an amount to be
established, from time to time, by resolution of Borough Council.
B. The above annual fees paid shall be a license until December 31 of each
year except, however, should any such device be installed after July 1 of
any year and an application therefor is made after such date, then in
such event, the license fee for that particular year, until December 31,
shall be as follows:
(1) For each jukebox in an amount to be established, from time to time,
by resolution of Borough Council.
(2) For each pool table in an amount to be established, from time to
time, by resolution of Borough Council.
(3) For each video or mechanical amusement device in an amount to be
established, from time to time, by resolution of Borough Council.
A. In the event any applicant, owner or proprietor falsifies any information
on an application for license of video or mechanical devices or violates
this chapter, the Borough shall immediately revoke all licenses issued
under this chapter to such applicant, owner or proprietor.
B. Moreover, in the event an owner of a video or mechanical amusement
device or a proprietor of a business establishment is convicted of
possessing or using a video or mechanical amusement device in
violation of the Crimes Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
§ 116-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-12
1:73
§ 116-13. Prohibition of suggestion or promise of nonprosecution.
Because the Borough intends to prosecute the illegal possession or use of
unlawful gambling devices, no Borough employee or agent may promise,
suggest or insinuate, either expressly or by implication, that the applicant,
licensee, proprietor or owner, who either illegally possesses to use a per se
modified or other illegal gambling devices, shall not be prosecuted.
§ 116-14. Violations and penalties.20
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the
Borough of Munhall, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter which
shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 123
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 310.
Borough shall revoke each license issued to such person, as an
applicant, owner or proprietor.
C. Additionally, the Borough shall not issue a license of video or
mechanical devices to any person who has been found guilty or
accepted rehabilitative disposition for possessing or using a video or
mechanical amusement device in violation of the Crimes Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, within three years of the date of
application.
D. Any video or mechanical amusement device used or possessed in
violation of the Crimes Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or
this chapter, may be deemed contraband and forfeited in accordance
with the provisions set forth in 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6501(d) (relating to
scattering rubbish).
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 116-12 MUNHALL CODE § 116-14
1:74
ARTICLE I
Animal Defecation
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 123-1. Animal defecation on public and private property
restricted.
No person, having possession, custody or control of any animal, shall
knowingly or negligently permit any dog or other animal to commit any
nuisance, i.e., defecation or urination, upon any gutter, street, driveway,
alley, curb or sidewalk in the Borough, or upon the floors or stairways of
any building or place frequented by the public or used in common by the
tenants, or upon the outside walls, walkways, driveways, alleys, curbs or
stairways of any building abutting on a public street or park, or upon the
grounds of any public park or public area, or upon any private property
other than the property of the owner of such animal.
§ 123-2. Disposal of animal feces.
Any person having possession, custody or control of any dog or other animal
which commits a nuisance, i.e., defecation or urination, in any area other
than the private property of the owner of such dog or other animal, as
prohibited in § 123-1, shall be required to immediately remove any feces
from such surface and either:
§ 123-3. Dogs accompanying blind or handicapped persons
exempted.
The provisions of §§ 123-1 and 123-2 hereof shall not apply to a guide
dog accompanying any blind persons, or to a dog used to assist any other
physically handicapped person.
§ 123-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of
Munhall, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues or each section of this article which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Carry same away for disposal in a toilet.
B. Place same in a nonleaking container for deposit in a trash or litter
receptacle.
§ 123-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-4
1:75

ARTICLE II
Feeding Pigeons
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 123-5. Feeding of pigeons prohibited.
The feeding of wild pigeons by depositing food on the public rights-of-way or
to place or cause to be placed, throw or let fall intentionally or negligently,
accumulate or maintain, upon any private property, any food, seed, birdseed
or any other liquid or organic matter upon which pigeons will feed or
accumulate is prohibited. The placing of birdseed only in a bird feeder shall
not be a violation of this section.
§ 123-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of
Munhall, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues or each section of this article which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 123-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-6
1:77

ARTICLE III
Animal Nuisances
[Adopted 11-18-2015 by Ord. No. 1574]
§ 123-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context in which the word
is used clearly indicates otherwise:
ANIMAL — Any dog, cat, domesticated animal or nondomesticated animal.
BOROUGH — Borough of Munhall.
DOG LAW — The statute found at 3 Pa.C.S.A. § 459.101 et seq.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person employed by the Borough whose
duty it is to preserve peace or to make arrests or to enforce any law,
including policemen, auxiliary policemen, the Code Enforcement officer or
the Zoning Officer.
FARM ANIMAL — An animal other than a dog or cat which is normally and
usually found on a farm.
FERAL ANIMAL — An unowned free-roaming cat, dog or reptile which is
not a farm animal that is partially socialized or unsocialized to humans and
tends to resist contact with humans.
KENNEL, LICENSED — A kennel licensed and approved in accordance with
the Dog Law.
KENNEL, UNLICENSED — Real property being utilized by the controller or
occupant thereof for the housing of animals for payment, fee, income, profit,
compensation or commercial purposes.
NUISANCE — Shall include the following:
An animal or animals shall be considered a nuisance for habitually
trespassing upon or damaging either private or public property, or
annoying or harming lawful users or occupants thereof.
A.
Any activity or nonactivity which produces or causes directly or
indirectly excessive noise, continuous noise, pollution, or offensive
odors which cause inconvenience or damage to others.
B.
Any disturbance which shall interfere with or deprive the peace, quiet,
rest or sleep of any person within the Borough.
C.
D. The operation of an unlicensed kennel.
Any violation of the Pennsylvania Dog Law shall be deemed to be a
nuisance under this article.
E.
It shall be a nuisance for an occupant or controller of property to have
custody of, to harbor or to permit a dog, cat, domestic animal or a
nondomesticated animal to run at large.
F.
§ 123-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-7
1:79
PERSON — A natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
RUNNING AT LARGE — An animal upon any public highway, street, alley,
park or any other public land or upon property of another person other than
the owner and not being firmly secured by means of a collar and chain or
other device so that it cannot stray or not being accompanied by or under
the reasonable control of a natural person shall be deemed to be running at
large.
STRAY CAT — Any cat whose owner or keeper from time to time allows the
cat to run at large off of the property of the owner or keeper.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or driven upon any highway, street, road or alley except
devises used exclusively upon rails or tracks.
§ 123-8. Nuisances not permitted.
No person shall allow or permit a nuisance to occur or to take place on
property under his control or elsewhere, as defined herein.
§ 123-9. Unsanitary nuisance; exemptions.21
§ 123-10. Running at large.
Any other acts or conduct held or found to constitute a nuisance at
common law or by any court of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
G.
A. No person shall allow any animal owned by him or under his control to
defecate on any sidewalk, walkway or the property of another without
immediately cleaning it up.
B. Any vision or mobility-impaired person who relies upon a dog
specifically trained for such purpose shall be exempt from compliance
with this section.
A. No person shall permit any animal owned by him or under his
supervision or control to run at large at any time.
B. Any police officer or enforcement officer is hereby authorized and
empowered to seize and detain any animal which is found running at
large in the Borough, or upon any property other than the property of
the owner of such animal, and unaccompanied by the owner when such
police officer or enforcement officer is in immediate pursuit of such
animal.
C. The provisions of this section shall apply to all animals found running at
large in violation of this section, irrespective of payment for or issuance
of any license in respect to the animal involved.
21.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 123, Art. I, Animal Defecation.
§ 123-7 MUNHALL CODE § 123-10
1:80
§ 123-11. Impounding.
Any police officer or enforcement officer of the Borough is hereby
authorized to seize and detain any animal running at large in violation
of § 123-10 or any animal concerning which reliable information has been
received that such animal has been running at large. Any animal so seized
shall be held by the Borough for 48 hours in a shelter as defined in § 123-12,
at the owner's expense. Immediate notice of such seizure, either personally
or by certified mail or email, with return receipt requested, shall be given
to the person in whose name the license, if any, was issued, or his agent,
to claim such animal within 48 hours after receipt hereof. In the event that
the animal does not bear a proper license tag, immediate notice, either
personally or by certified mail or email return receipt requested, shall be
given to the person, or his agent, known to be the owner of such animal. The
owner or claimant of an animal so detained shall pay a penalty of $50 to the
Borough, together with a charge as set forth from time to time by resolution
of the Borough Council per day for room and board or daily charge of the
shelter where the animal is kept, whichever amount is greater. No animal
shall be returned to the owner or claimant until said penalty and expense or
charges shall be paid.
§ 123-12. Disposition of any unclaimed animal.
If, after 48 hours of such notice as set forth in § 123-11, such animal has
not been claimed, the police officer or enforcement officer shall convey
the animal to a shelter, animal rescue, or foster care. No licensed animal
shall be adopted, sold or otherwise disposed of unless such licensed animal
remains unclaimed five days after notification, evidenced by obtaining a
return receipt if notified by certified mail or email. Where the owner or
agent of an unlicensed animal is not known, the police officer or
enforcement officer shall convey such animal to a shelter, animal rescue,
or foster care. No animal shall be sold for the purpose of vivisection or
research or be conveyed in any manner for such purposes.
§ 123-13. Transportation of animals.
No person other than a person actually working a dog or other animal for
agricultural purposes shall transport or carry on any public highway, street,
road or alley such dog or other animal, unless such dog or animal is safely
enclosed within the motor vehicle or protected by a container, cage, cross
tether or other device to prevent the dog or animal from falling from, being
thrown from, out of or jumping from said motor vehicle.
D. Borough Council is hereby empowered and authorized to engage the
services of a qualified and suitable person to enforce the provisions of
this Ordinance.
§ 123-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-14
1:81
§ 123-14. Unattended animal.
No person shall leave a dog or other animal in any unattended motor vehicle
without adequate ventilation, sanitary conditions or in such a manner as
to subject the dog or other animal to extreme temperature which may
adversely affect the health or safety of the dog or animal.
§ 123-15. Responsibilities of cat owners regarding stray cats.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any cat to permit such cat to run free
outside the residence of its owner or keeper unless such cat has been:
§ 123-16. Feeding of stray or feral cats.
It shall be unlawful for any person to continue to feed stray or feral cats
where such feeding causes a nuisance to neighbors or creates a condition
contrary to the health, safety, and welfare of the community.
§ 123-17. Violations and penalties.
§ 123-18. Cumulative remedies.
The provisions of this article, as far as they are the same as those of
ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this article, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances.
A. Neutered or spayed to prevent procreating;
B. Immunized against rabies in compliance with Pennsylvania law; and
C. Appropriately "tipped" on the left ear to signify that it has been
neutered/spayed and immunized.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be charged
with a summary offense and shall be fined for each offense not less than
$100 nor more than $500 and all costs of prosecution for the first
offense, or be imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both.
B. Each day there is a violation may count as a separate violation.
§ 123-14 MUNHALL CODE § 123-18
1:82
Chapter 144
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 168.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 214.
Grass, weeds and other vegetation — See Ch.
248.
Solid waste — See Ch. 373.
§ 144-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Open Burning Ordinance."
§ 144-2. Applicability.
This chapter applies to all outdoor burning and open burning within the
Borough of Munhall except for the following:
§ 144-3. Restrictions on permitted open burning.
Open burning of wood, trees, logs, brush and/or stumps shall only be
permitted in compliance with the following:
A. It shall not apply to grilling or cooking food using charcoal, wood,
propane or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances in an
appropriate container or fireplace.
B. It shall not apply to burning for the purpose of generating heat in a
stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating device within a building used
for human or animal habitation.
C. It shall not apply to the use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, gasoline
or kerosene in a device intended for heating, construction or
maintenance activities.
A. Only clean, dry wood products may be burned.
B. Burning shall only be permitted in an approved outdoor rated fireplace,
fire pit, chimney or fifty-five gallon drum.
C. No burning shall be permitted between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., prevailing time.
D. All burning and fires must be no less than 15 feet distant from the
nearest structure.
E. All outdoor burning shall be attended at all times by an individual not
younger than 18 years of age.
§ 123-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-3
1:83
§ 144-4. Open burning of refuse prohibited.
Refuse shall include any waste material, including building supplies,
garbage, grass and leaves. It shall not include trees, logs, brush, stumps,
and other vegetative matter.
§ 144-5. Authority of Fire Marshal.
The Fire Marshal shall have the power to prohibit open burning if such
burning is contrary to the provisions of this chapter or the 2006
international Fire Code.
§ 144-6. Violations and penalties.22
Any person or entity found to be in violation of this chapter shall be subject
to a civil fine as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the
Code of the Borough of Munhall for each violation.
F. Adequate means of fire extinguishment must be immediately available
at all times when outdoor burning is taking place.
G. Burning at construction sites having a valid building permit for the
purpose of providing warmth shall only be permitted if the weather is at
or below 32° F. and said burning shall only take place in a fifty-five
gallon drum suitable for containing such fire.
H. Persons utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be responsible for
all fire suppression costs and any other liability resulting from damage
caused by the fire.
I. All allowed open burning shall be conducted in a safe, nuisance-free
manner, when wind and weather conditions minimize adverse effects
and do not create a health hazard or a visibility hazard on roadways,
railroads or airfields. Open burning shall be conducted in conformance
with all local and state fire protection regulations and the 2006
International Fire Code.
J. No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk or
on the ice of a lake, pond, stream, body of water or on any public
property.
K. No person shall be permitted to create or permit an open fire on
property unless he/she has the legal right to possession of that property.
L. The Fire Marshal or other authorized officer, agent, employee or
representative of the Borough of Munhall who presents credentials may
inspect any property for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 144-3 MUNHALL CODE § 144-7
1:84
§ 144-7. Appeals.
Any person or entity aggrieved by a decision of the Fire Marshal shall have
the right of appeal to the Munhall Borough Code Enforcement Board.
Chapter 150
CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE
§ 150-1. Filing complaints.
The proper Council members of the Borough of Munhall, in particular,
the President of the Borough Council or his designate and the Borough
Manager or his designate shall be empowered to file any and all complaints
or challenges with the Federal Communications Commissions or any other
federal agency established under federal legislative enactments dealing
with the reasonableness of rates of any cable television service company
operating within the Borough of Munhall with respect to the rates charged
by said company for programming, services, installation and rental of
equipment for said service.
§ 150-2. Certification to regulate rates and enforce standards.
The President of the Borough Council or his designate and the Borough
Manager or his designate are further authorized and directed to file all
necessary certification and application materials with the Federal
Communication Commission and to take all other actions required to certify
the Borough of Munhall as an entity with full authority under the Cable
Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 to regulate
rates and to enforce standards for cable television service, installation and
equipment involving any cable company operating within the jurisdiction
and territorial limits of the Borough of Munhall. The Borough Council
is hereby designated as the body empowered to regulate said rates and
conduct all other regulatory actions under federal legislation. Further, the
Borough Council may function as a committee of not less than three
members subject to final approval of the full Borough Council.
§ 150-3. Retention of expert advice.
The aforementioned officers of the Borough of Munhall are further directed
to retain such expert advice and opinion from the Borough Solicitor or from
any other specialist operating in the field to assist them in carrying out
their duties both with regard to the filing of complaints with the Federal
Communications Commissions as to the rates being charged presently in
the Borough of Munhall, as well as to assist them in establishing the
necessary procedures for review and evaluation of any rates standards that
may be imposed by cable television companies in the Borough with regard
to their service, installation and equipment, and to otherwise carry out the
mandate included herein to file the necessary certification and application
§ 144-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-3
1:85
materials with the Federal Communications Commission so as to permit
regulation of such rates.
§ 150-4. Compliance.
The proper officers of the Borough are authorized, directed and mandated
to carry out the above, and to otherwise comply fully with all legislative
requirements to enable the Borough to regulate rates, where applicable,
and to file complaints, where appropriate, with regard to matters involving
the delivery of cable television services within the Borough including the
rates for service, installation and equipment.
Chapter 157
CANVASSING AND SOLICITING
§ 157-1. Registration and identification card.23
§ 157-2. Submission of application.
A. No person, association, partnership, firm or corporation shall, either
directly or indirectly, sell goods, wares, merchandise, magazines,
periodicals, books or other personal property by canvassing or
soliciting, or solicit or canvass for contribution, in the Borough of
Munhall without first having registered with the Police Department and
obtained an identification card from the Borough.
B. Persons or organizations engaged in door-to-door canvassing on
religious or political subjects, or distributing religious political
handbills shall be exempt from the registration requirements of this
chapter. All such persons, however, shall carry official identification,
such as a driver's license, upon his or her person at all times and shall
exhibit it upon request of any person to whom the peddler is attempting
to solicit.
A. Any person desiring to engage in canvassing and soliciting shall submit
a written application to the Police Department on a form to be furnished
by the Borough, accompanied by two photographs (two inch by three
inch minimum) of himself, taken within six months prior to the date of
the application.
B. The applicant shall state in such written application his name, age, sex,
home address, business address, name and address of employer, if any,
what he desires to canvass and solicit for, the length of time he wishes
to engage in this work, the make and type of vehicle, if any, he will use,
its registration number, the driver registration number, certificate of
automobile liability coverage and whether he has ever been convicted
of a felony, misdemeanor or a crime of any kind.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 150-3 MUNHALL CODE § 157-2
1:86
§ 157-3. Refusal to issue license or permit.
Promptly upon receiving any application for a permit to canvass or solicit
within the Borough of Munhall, the Chief of Police shall cause such
application and applicant to be thoroughly investigated by the Police
Department of the Borough of Munhall. In the event that such investigation
should indicate that the granting of such permit would or might be injurious
to the public interest, or to the public health, safety or morals, the Chief
of Police shall have, and is hereby given, the power and authority to issue
such license or permit. In any instance where the Chief of Police should
deem it necessary or advisable to secure and check the fingerprints of
any such applicant, refusal of such applicant to voluntary furnish such
fingerprints shall constitute, in and of itself, sufficient and valid ground for
refusal to issue such license. The Chief of Police will issue to the applicant
an identification card (to which one of the applicant's photographs will be
affixed) within 10 days from the date of filing of the application.
§ 157-4. Compliance with standards of conduct. [Amended
9-15-1983 by Ord. No. 1290]
Every person to whom an identification card has been issued shall in the
conduct of his activity comply with the following standards of conduct.
C. In addition thereto, the application shall contain the signature of the
employer as well as of the applicant and shall contain therein the
stipulation and agreement on the part of the employer, in consideration
of the issuance of such license or permit, to become liable for any and
all acts of such solicitor while within the Borough of Munhall in
violation of law or otherwise. Such employer liability shall be construed
to have no application to bona fide charitable organizations.
D. An identification card will not be issued to any person who has been
convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or crime of any kind involving more
turpitude, and such person shall not be allowed to engage in canvassing
and soliciting in the Borough of Munhall.
E. An identification card will be valid for the balance of the calendar year
in which it is issued. Such card may not be transferred from one person
to another and shall be considered a personal permit or license.
A. He shall carry his identification card at all times and exhibit it upon
request to any police officer, ordinance officer of the Borough or to any
other person upon whom he shall call or with whom he shall talk.
B. He shall not permit any person to have possession of his identification
card and shall immediately report its loss to the Borough Police
Department. He shall not cause or permit his identification card to be
altered or defaced in any way.
§ 157-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-4
1:87
§ 157-5. Revocation of license.
Any identification card may be revoked by the Chief of Police if the holder
fails to comply with the standards of conduct contained in § 157-4 hereof,
or any of them, or ascertainment by the Chief of Police that the holder has
made a false statement in his application.
§ 157-6. Exceptions.24
C. He shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling without the
invitation or permission of the occupant and shall immediately leave
any premises upon request of the occupant.
D. He shall engage in canvassing and soliciting between the hours of 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, legal holidays being
excepted therefrom. Such activities at any other time being hereby
expressly declared unlawful.
E. He shall not be guilty of any false pretense or misrepresentation and,
particularly, he shall not represent his identification to be an
endorsement of himself, or his goods or services, or of the goods or
services of his employer.
F. He shall immediately surrender his identification card to the Borough of
Munhall Chief of Police upon revocation thereof.
A. No license fee shall be charged:
(1) To farmers selling their own produce.
(2) For the sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the
owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any
charitable or philanthropic purpose.
(3) To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products or milk and milk products.
(4) To children under the age of 18 years who take orders for and
deliver newspapers, greeting cards, candy, bakery products and the
like, or who represent the Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts or similar
organizations.
(5) To the seeking or taking of orders by insurance agents or brokers
licensed under the insurance laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(6) To a person who has complied with the provisions of the Solicitation
of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act, 10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq., as
hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 157-4 MUNHALL CODE § 157-6
1:88
§ 157-7. Registration fee.25
Every person engaged in canvassing and soliciting in the Borough of
Munhall and not exempted from the requirements of this chapter shall
pay a registration fee, in an amount as established from time to time
by resolution, per person and an additional fee, also in an amount as
established from time to time by resolution, for each motor vehicle
registered to be used in canvassing and soliciting. Provided, however, no
license fee shall be required for religious proselytizing, anonymous political
speech or the distribution of hand bills.
§ 157-8. Violations and penalties.26
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine as provided in Chapter 1,
Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of Munhall, plus
costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this
chapter continues or each section of this chapter which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 165
CODE ENFORCEMENT
(7) For taking orders for merchandise, by sample, from dealers or
merchants for individuals or companies who pay a license or
business privilege tax at their chief place of business.
B. But all persons exempted hereby from the payment of the license fee
shall be required to register with the Police Department and obtain a
license without fee, provided any person dealing in one or more of the
above-mentioned exempted categories, and dealing with other goods,
wares or merchandise not so exempted, shall be subject to the payment
of the license fee fixed by this section for his activities in connection
with the sale of goods, wares and merchandise not in such exempted
categories. Provided, further, the Police Department may similarly
exempt from payment of the license fee, but not from registering with
him, persons working without compensation and selling goods, wares
or merchandise for the sole benefit of a nonprofit corporation. Provided,
further, every license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
be issued on an individual basis to any person or persons engaging in
such business; every individual shall obtain a separate license, issued to
him in his name, and the license fee hereby imposed shall be applicable
to every such individual license, except that a representative of a
charitable organization may obtain licenses for the applicants.
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 157-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-1
1:89
§ 165-1. Option to enforce.
The Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) of the Borough shall have the option
to enforce violations of ordinances as set forth herein in addition to all
remedies provided by law.
§ 165-2. Authority; violations and penalties.
§ 165-3. Repealer.
Any ordinance or parts of ordinances in conflict with any provision of this
chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. If any portion
of this chapter is held to be illegal or unconstitutional, then it is the intent
of Borough Council that it would have enacted the balance of this chapter
irrespective of such invalid portion.
§ 165-4. When effective.
This chapter will take effect immediately.
Chapter 168
CONSTRUCTION CODES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Contractors — See Ch. 173.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 214.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 227.
Occupancy permits — See Ch. 299.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
389.
Junked and abandoned vehicles — See Ch.
419.
Zoning — See Ch. 440.
A. The CEO shall have the authority to file and provide to the offending
party a written notice of violation advising of the nature of the violation,
date of violation and what remedies must be taken, if any. Such notice
shall further advise the offending party that he/she/it may plead guilty,
pay a fine of $25 payable to the Borough within 10 days of the notice
and remedy a continuing violation within 10 days. The notice must also
advise that the Borough may file further action with the District
Magistrate if the offender fails to pay the fine prescribed and/or fails to
remedy a continuing violation. If the offending party fails to pay the fine
and remedy a continuing wrong within 10 days, the CEO may file a
complaint with the District Magistrate.
B. If any party commits the same violation a second time within one year
of the first such violation, the fine shall be increased to $35.
C. The fines and time requirements established in Subsections A and B
may be amended and revised by Council at any time by simple
resolution.
§ 165-1 MUNHALL CODE § 165-4
1:90
ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement of Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 4-21-2004 by Ord. No. 1491]
§ 168-1. Election to administer and enforce.
The Borough of Munhall hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35
P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended, from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 168-2. Adoption and incorporation by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 to
405, as amended, from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the Municipal Building Code of Munhall Borough.
§ 168-3. Methods of enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within the Borough of Munhall
shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the Board
of Supervisors of Munhall Borough, from time to time, by resolution:
§ 168-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors of Munhall Borough in conformity with the requirements of the
relevant provisions of the code, as amended, from time to time, and for the
purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration
is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board
of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
A. By the designation of an employee of the Borough of Munhall to serve
as the Municipal Code Official to act on behalf of Munhall Borough;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of Munhall Borough;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of the Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of the Act on behalf of Munhall
Borough;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 168-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-5
1:91
§ 168-5. Effect on previous ordinances.
§ 168-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Borough of Munhall for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this article and the code shall be
established by the Board of Supervisors by resolution, from time to time.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by Munhall Borough on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal
or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force and
effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended, from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this article and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby amended to
conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Borough of
Munhall not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 168-5 MUNHALL CODE § 168-6
1:92
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 11-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1532]
§ 168-7. Adoption of codes.
As of the effective date of this article, the following enumerated standard
codes, except as noted below, are adopted to be in full force and effect in
the Borough of Munhall:
§ 168-8. Appeals procedure.
For each code enumerated above, the appeals procedure shall be to the
Munhall Borough Hearing Appeals Board as defined and prescribed in
Chapter 214, Fire Prevention, Article III, Fire Inspections;27 the appeals
provision of each code is deleted and not hereby adopted.
§ 168-9. Amendment of codes.
Hereinafter, when any of the standardized codes enumerated above are
amended or revised, such amendment shall become the law of Munhall
Borough without further action by Borough Council.
A. 2006 International Building Code;
B. 2006 International Residential Code for One-Family and Two-Family
Dwellings;
C. 2006 International Mechanical Code;
D. 2006 International Fire Code;
E. 2006 International Fuel Gas Code;
F. 2006 International Energy Conservation Code;
G. 2006 International Existing Building Code;
H. 2006 International Property Maintenance Code;
I. International Code Council Electrical Code Administrative Provisions;
J. 2006 ICC Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities.
27.Editor's Note: See §§ 214-29 and 214-30.
§ 168-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-9
1:93
Chapter 173
CONTRACTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 168.
§ 168-9 MUNHALL CODE § 168-9
1:94
ARTICLE I
Hours of Work
[Adopted 8-19-1998 by Ord. No. 1428]
§ 173-1. Purpose.
Borough Council finds that the Borough is largely residential and that
there are significant numbers of families residing within the Borough. The
prevailing sense and attitude in the Borough is that nocturnal and weekend
work activity should be restricted or reduced for the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the community.
§ 173-2. Hours.
It is hereby ordained that no agent or contractor shall conduct outside
construction work on any day prior to 7:00 a.m. or after dusk.
§ 173-3. Permission to conduct outside construction.
It is further ordained that no agent or contractor shall conduct outside
construction work on Sundays unless given written permission by the
Borough Manager in advance of such work. The granting of such permission
shall be solely within the Borough Manager's discretion, but the following
factors shall be utilized as guidelines:
§ 173-4. Violations and penalties.28
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of Munhall.
A. The urgency of the need to complete the work.
B. The contractor's dependence on weather conditions in completing the
work.
C. The nature of the work to be completed as related to its potential to
disrupt and interfere with the residents of the Borough.
D. Such other factors as may be relevant.
28.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 173-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-4
1:95
Chapter 179
CURFEW
§ 179-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Curfew Ordinance."
§ 179-2. Intention.
It is declared to be the intent of Borough Council that this chapter was
enacted in accordance with community standards prevailing in the
community relating to the conduct of minors on streets and public places at
night. It is found by Borough Council that this chapter is in the furtherance
of family responsibility and for the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Borough of Munhall and those traveling through or visiting
within the Borough of Munhall.
§ 179-3. Purpose.
Borough Council further finds that there is a need for updating of the
present Curfew Ordinance in the Borough in order to curb and minimize
juvenile delinquency.
§ 179-4. Prevailing sense and attitude.
Borough Council further finds that the Borough is largely residential and
that there are significant numbers of senior citizens within the Borough.
The prevailing sense and attitude in the Borough is that nocturnal activities
should be restricted or reduced for the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the community and to reduce the potential for crime and
serious risk of injury to immature persons.
§ 179-5. Parental guidance.
Borough Council further finds that parental guidance in the Borough
demands that parents be responsible for their children, be apprised and
cognizant of where they are at any given time and that adherence to the
standards expressed in this chapter meet with community standards.
§ 179-6. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CURFEW and CURFEW TIME — Shall be deemed to be that time of day or
night when minors may not be on public streets or places as set forth in this
chapter.
MINORS — Persons under the age of 18 years.
§ 173-4 MUNHALL CODE § 179-6
1:96
PARENTS — Persons having legal custody of a minor as a natural or adopted
parent, as legal guardian, as one who stands in loco parentis or one to whom
legal custody has been given by order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
REMAIN — To stay behind, to tarry or to stay unnecessarily upon the streets
or public places and shall be deemed to include congregating in groups of
persons and shall include interacting minors. A group shall be deemed to
exist where four or more persons exist and are interacting together in any
specific area. "Remain" shall further be intended to include where minors,
as defined herein or groups of minors interacting as defined herein, are
using the streets for purposes which would not be ordinary or usual, such
as for mere passage. It is not intended that this chapter be defined to be an
ordinance which is prohibitive so as to prohibit the mere presence of minors
on streets. Exceptions are defined herein when the presence of minors on
the streets is valid. However, it is the intent of this chapter to define and
prohibit the loitering or remaining behind type of activity of minors, which
activity is not a reasonable use of streets for the purposes for which streets
are ordinarily intended.
STREET — A way or place open to use by the public as a matter of right for
purposes of vehicular or for pedestrian travel. This term shall include the
entire legal right-of-way, including, but not limited to, traffic lanes, curbs,
sidewalks and grassy areas adjacent to the legal right-of-way.
TIME OF NIGHT — Prevailing standard of time during any part of the year
whether it be Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time.
YEAR OF AGE — The number of chronological years which a person has at
a specific point in time. The year of age shall continue from one birthday
until, but not including, the day of the next birthday. Hence, one is 17 years
of age until the date of birth of his 18th birth date.
§ 179-7. Curfew times. [Amended 9-15-2010 by Ord. No. 1550]
There is hereby ordained to be a curfew in the Borough of Munhall for
persons 17 years of age and under. After the curfew time, it shall be
unlawful for any person 17 years of age or under to be or remain upon
the streets or public places within the Borough of Munhall at night during
the period of time commencing at 10:00 p.m. and ending at 6:00 a.m.,
prevailing time.
§ 179-8. Exceptions.
A. There are hereby created certain exceptions to the curfew rules
provided in the immediately foregoing section. Under the
circumstances described in the following subsections, it shall not be
deemed to be a violation of this chapter for a minor to be or to remain
upon public streets or places:
(1) When accompanied by a parent of a minor.
(2) When accompanied by an adult authorized by the parent of such
minor and deemed to take the place of the parent in accompanying
§ 179-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-8
1:97
the minor for a designated period of time and for a designated
purpose and area.
(3) When exercising First Amendment Rights protected by the United
States Constitution, i.e., freedom of religion, freedom of speech or
right of assembly. Proof of such bona fide endeavor to exercise said
constitutional rights shall be evidenced by the minor having
previously delivered to the office of the Chief of Police of the
Borough at the municipal building a statement regarding the
activities to be conducted, the time they are to be conducted and
demonstrating the purposes of the presence of the minor following
the curfew regulatory time. Said statement shall be signed by the
parent or guardian of the minor and shall state the date, time and
place when the minor will be upon the public streets exercising
these constitutional rights.
(4) In case of reasonable necessity which shall be deemed to exist only
when the minor's parent has communicated to the Borough Police
Station telephone operator a recital of the facts establishing such
reasonable necessity. The reasonable necessity must include the
times, area, purpose and points of origin and destination.
(5) When the minor is on public streets or public ways immediately
adjacent to the minor's residence.
(6) When returning home by a direct route and within one hour of the
termination of any school activity, religious or other voluntary
association. For this exception to apply there must have been prior
written notice to the Borough police indicating the place, times to
be covered, dates, name of the organization and supervisor of the
organization. Said notice must be submitted and signed by the
parent or guardian of the minor. Written notice shall not be
necessary for local school sports events.
(7) When authorized by special permit to be issued by the Borough
Chief of Police or his representative. The Borough Chief of Police or
his representative shall be authorized to issue permits when
requested by a parent or guardian specifying the date, time, place
and purposes of the trip. This exception shall be applicable for
school activities, voluntary associations and necessary trips during
the prohibited periods of time.
(8) When the minor carries a certified employment card demonstrating
that he is employed and that his employment necessitates his being
out later than the curfew. The employment card shall set forth the
name of the employer, the minor's name, address, description so as
to enable the police officer to reasonably identify the minor, the
nights that he or she is to be employed and the time when the
minor shall cease his employment. An employment card shall only
be valid for a three-month duration and must be renewed if
employment continues.
§ 179-8 MUNHALL CODE § 179-8
1:98
§ 179-9. Parental responsibility.
It shall hereinafter be unlawful for any parent or person having legal
custody of a minor child to knowingly permit or to inefficiently control or
to allow such minor to be or remain upon any Borough street or public
place under circumstances not constituting an exception to this chapter
or to otherwise permit a minor to remain upon a public street or place in
violation of this chapter. "Knowingly" would include actual knowledge which
a parent would have or which should be reasonably be expected to have
concerning the whereabouts of minor in that parent's legal custody. It is
the purpose of this chapter to prevent neglectful or careless parents from
violating community standards and the standards of parental responsibility
by providing an objective test. It shall not be a defense to a violation of this
chapter that a parent was indifferent or did not endeavor to ascertain the
whereabouts of his minor children.
§ 179-10. Police procedures.
(9) When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This
shall be deemed to constitute normal travel. Exempted is all
interstate travel through Munhall Borough by any person.
B. All written applications and permits provided in this section shall
contain a description of the minor so as to enable police officers to
reasonably identify the minor, the minor's address, parents' names and
phone number.
C. The foregoing exceptions shall be several. If any of the same shall not
be valid, then it is intended that the balance of the exceptions shall have
been enacted irrespective of said invalid exceptions. In addition, if a
court should find that any exceptions are to narrow or too broad, it is
the intent of the Borough Council that it would have enacted the
exceptions in accordance with the court's opinion as to render the same
reasonable and valid.
A. Any police officer of the Borough, upon finding or having his or her
attention called to any minor on the streets in circumstances which
would indicate a prima facia violation of this chapter, shall take the
minor to the Borough Police Station. The police shall thereupon notify
the parents of the minor to call for said minor. The police are instructed
and directed by this chapter to interrogate the parents of the minor. The
purpose of this interrogation shall be to determine all relevant facts and
to determine whether or not the presence of the minor is valid or not. In
the absence of convincing evidence, such as birth certificate, driver's
license, etc., the Borough hereby relies upon the judgment of the police
officer on duty as having the best and final judgment for determining
the age of the minor.
B. Following the apprehension and call to the minor's parents, the police
officer shall make a written report to the Chief of Police. A report
§ 179-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-10
1:99
§ 179-11. Violations and penalties.
regarding the minor's activities shall be retained by the Chief, who shall
be responsible for retaining all of said records.
C. When a parent has been called to take charge of a minor and the
appropriate information ascertained and recorded, the minor shall be
released into the custody of the parent. If a parent cannot be located or
fails to take charge of the minor, then the minor shall be released to
juvenile authorities. However, the police shall have discretion to release
juveniles so taken to neighbors, relatives or other persons who police
may reasonably believe will be responsible and have the ability to be
responsible for the minor pending the availability or arrival of a parent.
D. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the Chief of Police shall send a
certified letter to the parents and the minor advising them that
subsequent violations will result in full enforcement of this chapter.
A. Parents. If, after the first warning provided in the immediately
preceding section, a minor commits a second violation of this chapter, it
shall be treated as a first offense by the parent. For such parental
offense, the parent, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $100 plus costs and, for each subsequent offense
by a parent, the fine shall be increased by an additional $25. The
Magisterial District Judge, upon finding a parent guilty, shall sentence
the parent to pay such fine and costs and, in default of payment of said
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
B. Minors. Any minor who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
more than three times shall be reported by the Chief and shall be taken
to the juvenile authorities for the purpose of having said minor deemed
to be incorrigible and delinquent. The Chief of Police is hereby
authorized to institute proceedings to have the minor declared to be
incorrigible and delinquent.
C. It is also deemed to be a summary violation for a minor to violate this
chapter and it shall be punishable as follows:
(1) For the first violations by a minor, the provisions hereinabove
prevailing shall apply.
(2) For each and every subsequent violation, it may be deemed to be a
summary offense and the police are hereby authorized to prosecute
the same before the Magisterial District Judge having jurisdiction.
(3) For each such offense by the minor, the Magisterial District Judge
shall hereby be authorized to impose a fine up to the amount of
$100, and, for the second and further offenses, an additional $25
for each subsequent offense.
(4) The Magisterial District Judge, upon a finding of guilty, shall
sentence the minor to pay such fine and costs of prosecution and,
§ 179-10 MUNHALL CODE § 179-11
1:100
Chapter 203
(RESERVED)
Chapter 209
FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS
§ 209-1. Use of fire insurance proceeds.
upon failure or refusal, shall have authority to direct that the child
be taken to the Juvenile Court of Allegheny County.
D. Borough officials may institute action under Subsections B and/or C
without limitations.
A. No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter "insurer")
doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim
of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the
Borough where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the structure
under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the insurer is furnished by the
Borough Treasurer with a certificate pursuant to Section 508(b) of the
Insurance Company Law of 1921, as amended by Act 98 of 1992 and Act
93 of 1994 (collectively, the "Act") and unless there is compliance with
the procedures set forth in Section 508(c) and (d) of the Act.29
B. Municipal claims or expenses.
(1) Where there are delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user
charges against the property ("municipal claims"), or there are
expenses which the Borough has incurred as a cost for the removal,
repair or securing of a building or other structure on the property
(collectively "municipal expenses"), the Assistant Secretary-
Treasurer of the Borough shall immediately render a bill for such
work, if he has not already done so. Upon written request of the
named insured specifying the tax description of the property, the
name and address of the insurer and the date of receipt by the
insurer of a loss report of the claim, the Treasurer shall furnish a
certificate within 14 working days after the request, to the insurer,
a certificate (or at his discretion an oral notice confirmed in
writing) either:
(a) Stating that there are no unpaid municipal claims or municipal
expenses against the property; or
(b) Specifying the nature and amount of such claims or expenses,
accompanied by a bill for such amounts.
29.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 179-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-1
1:101
(2) Taxes, assessments, penalties and user charges shall be deemed
delinquent for this purpose if a lien could have been filed for such
claims under applicable law. Upon receipt of a certificate and bill
pursuant to Subsection B(1)(b) of this section, the insurer shall
transfer to the Treasurer an amount from the insurance proceeds
sufficient to pay such sums prior to making payment to the named
insured, subject to the provisions of Subsection C hereof.
C. When all municipal claims and municipal expenses have been paid
pursuant to Subsection B of this section, or where the Treasurer has
issued a certificate described in Subsection B(1)(a) indicating that
there are no municipal claims or municipal expenses against the
property, the insurer shall pay the claim of the named insured;
provided, however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured
and the insurer equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of
liability on all fire policies covering the building or structure, the
following procedures must be followed:
(1) The insurer shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
Treasurer, in the aggregate, $2,000 for each $15,000 of such claim
or fraction thereof.
(2) If at the time a loss report is submitted by the insured, such insured
has submitted to the insurer, with a copy to the Borough, a
contractor's signed estimate of the cost of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure in an amount less than the
amount calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the
insurer shall transfer to the Treasurer from the insurance proceeds
the amount specified in the estimate. If there is more than one
insurer, the transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all
insurers insuring the building or other structure.
(3) Upon receipt of the above-described portion of the insurance
proceeds, the Treasurer shall do the following:
(a) Place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely as
security against the total municipal expenses anticipated by
the Borough to be required in removing, repairing or securing
the building or structure as required by this chapter. Such
costs shall include, without limitation, any engineering, legal
or administrative costs incurred by the Borough in connection
with such removal, repair or securing or any proceedings
related thereto; and
(b) Mail to the named insured, at the address received from the
insurer, a notice the proceeds have been received by the
Borough and that the procedures under this subsection shall
be followed.
(c) After the transfer, the named insured may submit to the
Borough a contractor's signed estimate of the cost of
removing, repairing or securing the building or other
§ 209-1 MUNHALL CODE § 209-1
1:102
§ 209-2. Limits of liability.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to make an insurance company,
association or exchange liable for any amount in excess of proceeds payable
under its insurance policy or for any other act performed pursuant to
this chapter or to make this Borough, any Borough official, a municipality
or public official an insured under a policy of insurance or to create an
obligation to pay delinquent property taxes or unpaid removal liens or
expenses other than as provided in this chapter.
§ 209-3. Insurance company rights reserved.
An insurance company, association or exchange making payment of policy
proceeds under this chapter for delinquent taxes or structure removal liens
or removal expenses incurred by the Borough shall have a full benefit of
such payment, including all rights of subrogation and of assignment.
§ 209-4. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to deter
the commission of arson and related crimes, to discourage the
abandonment of property and to prevent urban blight and deterioration.
structure, in which event the Treasurer shall, if such estimate
is deemed by the Treasurer to be reasonable, return to the
insured the amount of the funds transferred to the Borough
in excess of that required to pay the municipal expenses,
provided the Borough has not commenced to remove, repair
or secure the building or other structure, in which case the
Borough will complete the work.
(d) Pay to the Assistant Secretary-Treasurer, for reimbursement to
the Borough general fund, the amount of the municipal
expenses paid by the Borough.
(e) Pay the remaining balance in the fund (without interest) to the
named insured upon receipt of a certificate issued by the
Assistant Secretary-Treasurer that the repair, removal or
securing of the building or other structure has been completed
in accordance with all applicable codes and regulations of the
Borough.
(f) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of
the Borough to recover any deficiency in the amount of
municipal claims or municipal expenses recovered pursuant to
this chapter, or to insurance proceeds, by an action at law or in
equity to enforce the codes of the Borough or to enter into an
agreement with the named insured with regard to such other
disposition of the proceeds as the Borough may deem
responsible.
§ 209-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-5
1:103
§ 209-5. Notification of Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development.
The Secretary of the Borough shall transmit a certified copy of this chapter
promptly to the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development.
§ 209-6. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or insurer who violates the
provisions of this chapter or who shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements hereof shall be sentenced, upon conviction thereof, to a fine
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the
Borough of Munhall, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day on which
an offense shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 214
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 18.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 109.
Construction codes — See Ch. 168.
Occupancy permits — See Ch. 299.
§ 209-5 MUNHALL CODE § 209-6
1:104
ARTICLE I
Rapid Entry Systems
[Adopted 7-16-2003 by Ord. No. 1486]
§ 214-1. Purpose.
Council of the Borough of Munhall determined that the health, welfare and
safety of the citizens of the Borough of Munhall are promoted by requiring
certain structures to have a key lock box installed on the exterior of the
structure to aid the Munhall Volunteer Fire Bureau in gaining access to or
within a structure when responding to calls for an emergency service, and
to aid access into or within a building that is secured or is unduly difficult
to gain entry due to being either unoccupied or the occupants are unable to
respond.
§ 214-2. Key lock box system.
§ 214-3. Installation.
A. The following structures shall be equipped with a key lock box at or
near the main entrance or such other location as required by the Fire
Code Officer, Munhall Fire Marshal or Bureau Fire Chief:
(1) Commercial or industrial structures.
(2) Multifamily residential structures that have restricted access
through locked doors, but have a common corridor for access to the
living units.
(3) Schools, whether public or private.
(4) Governmental structures and nursing care facilities, unless the
building is staffed or open 24 hours.
B. All new construction subject to Subsection A shall have a key lock box
installed and operational prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.
All structures in existence on the effective date of this article and
subject to Subsection A shall have 12 months from enactment date of
this article to have a key lock box installed and operational.
C. The type of key lock boxes to be implemented within the Borough shall
be a Knox-Box® brand system or such other rapid entry system of
comparable quality which has been specifically authorized, in writing,
by the Fire Marshal or Bureau Fire Chief as being an acceptable
substitution for the Knox-Box® brand system.
A. All Knox-Boxes®, or its approved substitute, shall be installed to the left
side of the main business door.
B. All Knox-Boxes®, or its approved substitute, shall be flush mounted 60
inches from the ground to the center of the entry if possible.
§ 214-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-3
1:105
§ 214-4. Maintenance.
The operator of the building shall immediately notify the Borough of
Munhall's Fire Marshal or Fire Chief and provide the new keys when a lock
box is changed or re-keyed. The key to such lock shall be secured in the
Knox-Box®.
§ 214-5. Contents of lock box.
The contents of the lock box are as follows:
§ 214-6. Fire Department responsibilities.
§ 214-7. Exceptions to requirement to install a key lock box system.
The following structures are exempt from the mandate to install a key lock
box system:
C. In the event that the rapid entry box system cannot be installed at the
aforesaid location and/or height, the Munhall Fire Marshal or Bureau
Fire Chief may designate, in writing, a different location and
installation specifications.
D. All Knox-Boxes®, or its substitute, shall have a tamper switch installed
in the building which has an intrusion/burglar alarm.
E. All realty and/or property with an electronic security gate shall have the
Knox-Box® installed outside of the gate.
F. The Munhall Fire Marshal or the Borough Fire Chief must approve any
changes in the installation.
A. Keys to locked points of ingress or egress, whether on the interior or
exterior of such buildings.
B. Keys to all mechanical rooms.
C. Keys to all locked electrical rooms.
D. Keys to elevator and their control rooms.
E. Keys to fire alarm panels.
F. Keys (special) to reset pull stations or other fire protective devices.
G. Keys to any other areas as requested by the Borough of Munhall's Fire
Marshal or Munhall Borough Fire Chief.
A. No Fire Department personnel shall carry a Knox-Box® key.
B. All Knox-Box® access keys shall be installed in a Knox-Box® Sentra-Loc
system installed in the fire apparatus.
§ 214-3 MUNHALL CODE § 214-7
1:106
§ 214-8. Violations and penalties.30
Any person, entity or corporation who violates any provision of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of
Munhall, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues or each section of this article which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Single-family structures and multifamily structures that do not meet the
definition set forth in § 214-2A(2).
B. Structures that have twenty-four-hour, three-hundred-sixty-five-day onsite
security personnel, or have other personnel on site.
C. Businesses that are open and staffed 24 hours, 365 days per year
(which may include, but are not limited to, nursing homes, hospitals,
police stations, etc.).
D. Rental storage facilities where there is a single lock on the separate
storage pods that are renter supplied; provided, however, the entry
security gate(s) will require a Knox-Box® if electronically controlled, or
locked with a master key issued by the landlord to all tenants.
E. Any facility not having an automatic fire alarm system.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 214-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-8
1:107

ARTICLE II
Fire Protection Systems
[Adopted 5-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1520]
§ 214-9. Jurisdiction.
The Munhall Bureau of Fire and the Munhall Building Code Official Office
shall be the authority having jurisdiction (hereinafter called "AHJ") in
relation to this article.
§ 214-10. Fire alarm systems required.
§ 214-11. Sprinkler systems required.
§ 214-12. Fire suppression systems required.
Fire suppression systems shall be required in any commercial kitchen range
hood and deep fryer. Such systems shall be installed, tested and maintained
in accordance with National Fire Protection Association standard (NFPA).
§ 214-13. Standards for installation of systems.
§ 214-14. Review and approval.
A. All new and existing commercial occupancies, schools, health-care
facilities, skilled-nursing facilities and places of assembly shall be
required to install a fire alarm system with a minimum of smoke
detection and/or heat detection.
B. Any residential occupancy with three or more units shall be required to
install a fire alarm system with a minimum of smoke detection.
A. All new commercial occupancies over 6,000 square feet shall be
required to install a fire protection sprinkler system.
B. Any commercial occupancy that is over 6,000 square feet that
undergoes a fifty-percent renovation shall be required to install an
automatic fire sprinkler system.
A. The minimum standards for the installation of automatic detection and
suppression systems shall be based on the appropriate NFPA National
Fire Protection Association standards.
B. If National Fire Protection Association standards do not apply to
devices or equipment, the minimum standard maintained shall be that
of the factory manufacturing the equipment or devices.
A. All new construction and upgrades to existing fire protection systems
must be approved by the AHJ.
§ 214-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-14
1:109
§ 214-15. Central monitoring station for fire alarm systems.
All fire alarm systems shall report to a central monitoring station that shall
dial the Munhall Borough emergency dispatch number to alert the Fire
Department of an emergency. All alarms shall dial the Munhall Borough
Emergency Dispatch center before notification of any key holders or
occupancy contacts.
§ 214-16. Maintenance and testing of fire protection systems.
§ 214-17. Private fire hydrants.
In addition to inspection, testing and maintenance of fire protection
systems, private fire hydrants shall be flow tested, flushed and lubricated
annually as stated in the National Fire Protection Association standards for
water based fire protection systems.
§ 214-18. Permits and fees.
B. Plans for all proposed fire protection, suppression and detection
systems shall be submitted to Munhall Borough for review by the
Munhall Bureau of Fire and the Building Code Official.
C. Munhall Borough and the AHJ shall only review and approve prints or
plans that have been stamped with approval by a certified professional
fire protection engineer.
D. It shall be the responsibility of the person submitting prints or plans to
have any Changes suggested by the AHJ approved and stamped by a
certified fire protection engineer. The prints/plans shall be resubmitted
to the AHJ for final approval.
E. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to submit as-build
drawings to Munhall Borough after completion of the project.
A. All fire protection detection and suppression systems shall be regularly
inspected, tested and maintained in accordance with the appropriate
National Fire Protection Association standards. The Munhall Bureau of
Fire and the Munhall Borough Code Officer shall only witness
inspection and testing being performed. It is recommended that a
qualified fire protection contractor perform any inspection, testing and
maintenance of fire protection systems.
B. A copy of all inspection and testing information shall be forwarded to
the Munhall Bureau of Fire office by the owner/occupant.
C. A representative from the Munhall Bureau of Fire or the Munhall Code
Officer shall witness all testing of newly installed fire protection
systems. New installation must be approved by the AHJ in order to be in
compliance with the Munhall Borough Fire Protection Code. Any
regular inspection/testing of existing fire protection systems should be
witnessed by the AHJ when available.
§ 214-14 MUNHALL CODE § 214-18
1:110
§ 214-19. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
A. Regular inspection and testing shall be performed based on appropriate
National Fire Protection Association standards. All inspection and
testing of fire protection systems shall be performed only after
receiving a Munhall Borough permit.
B. Fees for permits for new installation of or upgrades to existing fire
protection systems shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council. Such fees shall be paid to Munhall Borough before
the start of any work. A Munhall Borough permit shall be issued by the
Borough Code Officer to the applicant. The fee amount shall be based
upon the estimated total cost of the service.31
C. The fee for a permit for inspection/testing of fire protection systems
shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council
and shall be good for one calendar year. "Systems" include fire alarm,
fire sprinkler, fire pump, etc.32
D. A representative of the Munhall Bureau of Fire or Munhall Borough
Code Official shall witness, when available, all inspection and testing of
fire protection systems. Fees for the on-site witness by the Munhall
Borough Code Official shall be billed for on an hourly basis at the
prevailing rate set forth by Munhall Borough.
A. A fine of $200 shall be assessed to any property that does not perform
regular inspection and testing of fire protection systems in accordance
with appropriate National Fire Protection Association standards. Fines
will double every month until such property is in compliance with
Munhall Borough ordinances.
B. A fine of up to $500 shall be assessed to any property that does not
maintain fire protection systems in proper working order. A period of 30
days will be given to any location to effect repairs to fire protection
systems after either the Fire Department or the Building Code Official
has been made aware of deficiencies. Fines shall double every month
until repairs have been made and the systems conform to the
appropriate fire protection standards.
C. A fine of up to $500 shall be imposed for any property that does not
comply with Munhall Borough fire protection ordinances. Fines can
double every month until the property is made to comply with Munhall
Borough fire protection ordinances.
D. The AHJ shall have the authority to revoke the occupancy permit of any
property that is shown or documented to have any of the following
conditions:
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 214-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-19
1:111
(1) Unsafe conditions in relation to any known fire protection code or
standard.
(2) Unsafe conditions that would place occupants in danger or inhibit
egress from a structure.
(3) Conditions that are determined to be a health or life safety hazard.
(4) Unsafe structural condition that would pose a hazard to occupants
or any person.
E. The AHJ shall issue, in writing, a written warning and list of safety
violations to a property owner. A property owner will have a period of
10 working days to effect corrections or repairs after a violation has
been identified. If after 10 days the violation has not been resolved, the
AHJ will have the option to impose fines of up to $500. All fines can
double each week until the safety issues have been resolved.
F. All fines shall be imposed by the Munhall Borough Code Official and
done so at the request of the Munhall Bureau of Fire.
G. Any location that transmits more than two false alarms in a sixty-day
period shall be subject to a fine of $150. "False Alarm" is defined as any
activation of a fire alarm system for no apparent reason.
H. Any location that transmits more than two nuisance alarms in a sixtyday
period shall be subject to a fine of $300 per occurrence. "Nuisance
alarm" is defined as an alarm from any property that activates the fire
alarm system due to a reoccurring condition such as burnt food, excess
dust or system deficiencies.
§ 214-19 MUNHALL CODE § 214-19
1:112
ARTICLE III
Fire Inspections
[Adopted 11-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1533]
§ 214-20. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to implement and assure compliance with the
2006 International Fire Code in Chapter 168, Construction Codes, Article
II, Adoption of Standards, of the Code of the Borough of Munhall.
§ 214-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAUSE — The Fire Marshal has received reliable information that a
condition exists in the Borough which is or may be in violation of the code. It
shall also include circumstances which would reasonably lead one to believe
that a fire has occurred or where there is a fire in a structure.
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION — A document to be issued by the Fire
Marshal following a fire inspection where he has found no deficiencies
which may reasonably endanger personal safety or property and where he
has found no fire hazards or violations of the code.
CODE — The 2006 International Fire Code.
EMERGENCY — Circumstances which exist which allow one to reasonably
conclude that there is an imminent threat to safety due to a fire hazard.
FIRE HAZARD — Any condition, whether in a structure or not, which
presents a danger of a fire or which is contrary to the code.
FIRE MARSHAL — The Munhall Borough Fire Chief and Deputies as they
may be appointed from time to time by Borough Council to enforce the
terms of this article and others relating to fires, fire prevention and to
enforce the code.
INSPECTION — To physically go upon the land and into any structure for
the purpose of determining whether or not there are violations of the code
or a fire hazard.
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Includes all structures of any nature
which are not residential, including commercial, multiunit apartments,
condominiums and industrial properties.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Includes single-family dwellings and
apartment buildings containing three or less residential units.
STRUCTURE — Any building, edifice, improvement or construction on land,
whether permanent or temporary, whether in use or not, whether occupied
or not.
§ 214-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-22
1:113
§ 214-22. Enforcement.
Borough Council shall from time to time appoint persons to act as Fire
Marshal and Deputies to enforce the code, and to carry out other duties
as set forth herein. Such appointees shall serve at the pleasure of Council.
In addition to the Fire Marshal, the Code Enforcement Officer, Building
Inspector or any authorized police officer are authorized to enforce the
terms of this article, related fire ordinances and the code. Collectively, when
the Office of Fire Marshal is used herein, it shall include the other officers
and persons identified in this section.
§ 214-23. Inspections.
The Fire Marshal shall have the authority to inspect any structure or go
upon any land in the Borough for the purpose of determining whether such
structure or land is in compliance with the code, or if there is cause as
defined herein. Moreover, a fire inspection is mandatory upon the transfer
of ownership of nonresidential property or land with a structure thereon by
deed, will, intestate succession, or entering into a lease for a term longer
than five years.
§ 214-24. Occupancy.
No Building Inspector, Borough Secretary, Manager, Code Enforcement
Officer or other Borough official shall issue an occupancy permit to any
owner, prospective owner or occupant of land with a structure thereon
which must undergo a fire inspection as mandated herein and which has
not received a satisfactory certificate of inspection. Moreover, it shall be
unlawful for any owner, tenant or occupier of land to occupy or permit the
occupancy of a structure where such structure has not been inspected when
required to be inspected under the terms of this article, or if it has been
inspected, it has not received a satisfactory certificate of inspection.
§ 214-25. Fire Marshal's authority.
The Fire Marshal shall have the authority to enforce the terms of this article
and the code, or any successor law or other ordinance relative to fire or
fire prevention. Such authority shall extend to ordering the elimination of
fire hazards or the abatement of practices which he finds, in his discretion,
to be fire hazards pursuant to the code, whether such conditions are in a
structure or not. The Fire Marshal is authorized to make forms to carry out
his duties and appeals under this article. In the event of an emergency, the
Fire Marshal shall have the authority to go upon any land for the purpose of
alleviating or removing the cause of an emergency.
§ 214-26. Search warrant.
In the event the Fire Marshal determines, in his discretion, that a structure
or land should be inspected, he shall make a reasonable effort to locate the
owner or occupier of the land and make a demand to inspect the land. If
the owner or occupier cannot be located, refuses or fails to accommodate
§ 214-22 MUNHALL CODE § 214-26
1:114
the Fire Marshal, the latter shall have the authority to apply for a search
warrant from the Magisterial District Judge or such other authority
authorized to issue search warrants. Borough police officers are authorized
to assist and accompany the Fire Marshal when he carries out his search
with a warrant.
§ 214-27. Fees.
Fees levied by the Borough of Munhall for fire inspections shall be paid to
the Borough. A certificate of inspection shall not be issued until the fee is
first paid to the Borough Secretary. Fees may be adjusted from time to time
by Borough Council by resolution and shall be set so that they will defray
the cost of conducting inspections and the administration of this article.33
§ 214-28. Appeals.
Any person or entity aggrieved by a decision of the Fire Marshal may, within
30 days of the decision, file an appeal to the Hearing Appeals Board of
Munhall Borough in writing by delivering the same to the Borough Manager
at the Borough Building, and paying the applicable appeal fee.
§ 214-29. Appeals Board.
The Board shall be composed of three residents of the Borough selected
by Council at its sole discretion and shall serve at the pleasure of Council.
They shall be selected in accordance with the code. The Board shall sit as
an adjudicatory body pursuant to the Local Agency Law.34
§ 214-30. Violations and penalties.35
Any person or entity found to be in violation of this article shall be subject to
a civil fine as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code
of the Borough of Munhall for each violation. If a hazardous condition is not
remedied after being ordered to be so remedied by the Fire Marshal, each
day shall be a separate violation.
33.Editor's Note: The initial schedule of specific fee amounts, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
34.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et seq. and 751 et seq.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 214-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-30
1:115
Chapter 221
FIREWORKS
§ 221-1. Scope.
The manufacture of fireworks is prohibited within the Borough. The display
or discharge of fireworks shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 221-2. Permit required.
A permit shall be obtained from the Borough Secretary for the display or
discharge of fireworks.
§ 221-3. Permit applications.
Application for permits shall be made, in writing, at least 15 days in advance
of the date of the display or discharge of fireworks. The possession, use and
distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful under the terms
and conditions approved with the permit and for that purpose only. A permit
granted hereunder shall not be transferable, nor shall any such permit be
extended beyond the dates set out therein.
§ 221-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREWORKS — Includes any combustible or explosive composition, or any
substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose
of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion,
deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols,
toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, the type
of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers,
torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, sparklers or other devices of like
construction and any device containing any explosive substance, except that
the term "fireworks" shall not include auto flares, paper caps containing not
in excess of an average of 0.25 grain (16.2 mg) of explosive content per cap,
and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of such caps,
the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
§ 221-5. Display and discharge.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to store, or use or
explode any fireworks, except as provided in the rules and regulations
issued by the fire official for the granting of permits for supervised
public displays of fireworks by the Borough, fair associations,
amusement parks and other organizations.
B. Every such display shall be handled by a competent operator approved
by the Borough Secretary. The fireworks shall be arranged, located,
§ 214-30 MUNHALL CODE § 221-5
1:116
§ 221-6. Insurance for display.
The permittee shall furnish a bond in an amount deemed adequate by the
Borough Secretary but not less than $500,000, conditioned for the payment
of all damages which may be caused either to a person or persons or to
property by reason of the permitted display, and arising from any acts of the
permittee, the permittee's agents, employees or subcontractors.
§ 221-7. Disposal of unfired fireworks.
Unfired fireworks and trash that remain after the display is concluded shall
be immediately disposed of in a safe manner approved by the Borough
Secretary.
§ 221-8. Seizure of fireworks.
The fire official shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the
expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for display,
stored, or held in violation of this chapter.
§ 221-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the
Borough of Munhall, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 227
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 168.
Grading and excavating — See Ch. 243.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 350.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 379.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
389.
Zoning — See Ch. 440.
discharged or fired in a manner that, in the opinion of the Borough
Secretary, will not be a hazard to property or endanger any person.
§ 221-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-9
1:117

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 227-1.01. Authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the Borough of Munhall does hereby
order as follows.
§ 227-1.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-1.01
1:119

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 227-2.01. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 227-2.02. Applicability.
§ 227-2.03. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 227-2.04. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the Chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 227-2.05. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Munhall unless a permit
has been obtained from the floodplain administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
§ 227-2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-2.05
1:121
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Munhall or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 227-2.05 MUNHALL CODE § 227-2.05
1:122
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 227-3.01. Designation of floodplain administrator.
§ 227-3.02. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough of Munhall.
§ 227-3.03. Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator.
A. The Borough Manager is hereby appointed to administer and enforce
this chapter and is referred to herein as the floodplain administrator
The floodplain administrator may: (A) fulfill the duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations; (B) delegate duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical
personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees; or (C)
enter into a written agreement or written contract with another agency
or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these
regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another
entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to
the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR
59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated floodplain administrator, the floodplain
administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Chief Executive Officer.
A. The floodplain administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the floodplain administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);36 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the floodplain administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
36.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.; 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.; and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.,
respectively.
§ 227-3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-3.03
1:123
§ 227-3.04. Application procedures and requirements.
D. During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the floodplain administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the floodplain administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the floodplain administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Council for whatever
action it considers necessary.
G. The floodplain administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
H. The floodplain administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the floodplain administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain administrator/
manager.
J. The floodplain administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the floodplain
administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of Munhall. Such
application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
§ 227-3.03 MUNHALL CODE § 227-3.04
1:124
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the floodplain administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the floodplain
administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
§ 227-3.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-3.04
1:125
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood; and floodway area (see § 227-4.02A) when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the base flood elevation at any point.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an AE Area/District without floodway (see
§ 227-4.02B) when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point within the
community.
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of flood proofing measures which have
been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 227-5.03F, Storage, and § 227-5.04, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 227-5.03F and 227-5.04 which
§ 227-3.04 MUNHALL CODE § 227-3.04
1:126
§ 227-3.05. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the floodplain administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the floodplain administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 227-3.06. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the floodplain administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g. Planning Commission, Municipal Engineer,
etc.) for review and comment.
§ 227-3.07. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the floodplain administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the floodplain administrator. Requests for
any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant
to floodplain administrator for consideration.
§ 227-3.08. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the floodplain administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
are intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in
§ 227-5.04 during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the floodplain administrator.
§ 227-3.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-3.08
1:127
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit and the date of
its issuance, and shall be signed by the floodplain administrator.
§ 227-3.09. Start of construction.
§ 227-3.10. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The issuance of development
permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
floodplain administrator to approve such a request and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the floodplain administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the floodplain
administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
§ 227-3.08 MUNHALL CODE § 227-3.10
1:128
§ 227-3.11. Appeals.
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the floodplain
administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine to
Borough of Munhall, of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 plus
costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions
are hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by
the Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the floodplain
administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the floodplain administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and any
other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
§ 227-3.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-3.11
1:129

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 227-4.01. Identification.
§ 227-4.02. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of Borough of Munhall, classified as special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated
September 26, 2014, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study; and
(2) Any community-identified flood hazard areas.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by Borough of Munhall and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
§ 227-4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-4.02
1:131
§ 227-4.03. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change
to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the
date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA
of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting technical or
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
(2) AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE
zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which
base flood elevations have been provided but no floodway has been
determined.
(a) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development would not, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
(b) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site.
D. In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only
by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
§ 227-4.02 MUNHALL CODE § 227-4.03
1:132
scientific data. See § 227-5.01B for situations where FEMA notification is
required.
§ 227-4.04. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Borough of Munhall and any party
aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Council. The
burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 227-4.05. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 227-4.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-4.05
1:133

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 227-5.01. General.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments:
any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within
the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone
AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than
one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or relocation of a
stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges), the
applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 227-5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-5.01
1:135
§ 227-5.02. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or substantial
improvements shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained for new
construction or substantial improvements in the identified floodplain area
in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions
apply:
D. Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 227-4.02C of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa.Code (Chapters 401
through 405 as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a non-residential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
§ 227-5.01 MUNHALL CODE § 227-5.02
1:136
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 227-4.02C of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have their lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
(4) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the abovereferenced
standards.
(5) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405 as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Enclosed areas below the lowest floor (including basements) are
prohibited.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement, as
defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will
cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from
the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer.
Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
§ 227-5.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-5.02
1:137
§ 227-5.03. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill.
(1) Within any identified floodplain area, the use of fill shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria
in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply. If fill is used, it
shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
§ 227-5.02 MUNHALL CODE § 227-5.03
1:138
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to,
and approved by the floodplain administrator; and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
#348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages, and The
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 277-5.04, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
§ 227-5.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-5.03
1:139
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
§ 227-5.03 MUNHALL CODE § 227-5.03
1:140
§ 227-5.04. Development which may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described
in Subsection A, below, shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained in
accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions
apply: (§ 227-5.04B, C, and D.)
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Secs. R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and
Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances, shall be
subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
§ 227-5.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-5.04
1:141
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
C. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any
identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential
structure of the kind described in § 227-5.04A, above, shall be elevated
to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation and built in accordance with §§ 227-5.01, 227-5.02, and
227-5.03.
D. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind described in
§ 227-5.04A above, shall be built in accordance with §§ 227-5.01,
227-5.02, and 227-5.03, including:
(1) Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
(3) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992), or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
§ 227-5.04 MUNHALL CODE § 227-5.05
1:142
§ 227-5.05. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 227-5.06. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
B. Within any floodway area/district, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
C. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
D. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
(4) Have all ductwork and utilities including HVAC/heat pump elevated
to the regulatory flood elevation.
E. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 "International
Residential Building Code" or the "U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto and 34 Pa. Code
Chapter 401 through 405 shall apply.
F. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34
Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the proposed unit(s) installation.
§ 227-5.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-5.07
1:143
§ 227-5.07. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
A. Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(3) Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in
§ 227-5.06.
§ 227-5.07 MUNHALL CODE § 227-5.07
1:144
ARTICLE VI
Activities Requiring Special Permits
§ 227-6.01. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall be
prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a special permit has
been issued by the Borough of Munhall:
§ 227-6.02. Application requirements for special permits.
Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. A written request including a completed permit application form.
B. A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(3) All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways, and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types
and construction, and elevations;
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
§ 227-6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-6.02
1:145
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and
man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity
or development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and information
concerning the flow of water including direction and velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and any
other improvements; and
(8) Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the base flood;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(5) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways including existing and proposed grades; and
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
E. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
adequately designed to protect against damage from the base
flood;
§ 227-6.02 MUNHALL CODE § 227-6.02
1:146
§ 227-6.03. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the Borough of
Munhall the following procedures shall apply in addition to those of Article
III:
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a base flood, including a statement concerning
the effects such pollution may have on human life;
(4) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on base flood elevation and flows;
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the base flood elevation and the effects such materials and
debris may have on base flood elevation and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's Planning Module for Land Development;"
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166;37 and
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base
flood.
A. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the Borough of Munhall Planning
Commission and Borough of Munhall engineer for review and comment.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, the Borough of Munhall
shall notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect the
application is deficient.
37.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.302.
§ 227-6.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-6.03
1:147
§ 227-6.04. Special technical requirements.
C. If the Borough of Munhall decides to disapprove an application, it shall
notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If the Borough of Munhall approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent information,
with the Department of Community and Economic Development, by
registered or certified mail, within five working days after the date of
approval.
E. Before issuing the special permit, the Borough of Munhall shall allow
the Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days,
after receipt of the notification by the Department, to review the
application and decision made by the Borough of Munhall.
F. If the Borough of Munhall does not receive any communication from the
Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
G. If the Department of Community and Economic Development should
decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the Borough of
Munhall and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the
disapproval, and the Borough of Munhall shall not issue the special
permit.
A. In addition to the requirements of Article V of this chapter, the following
minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed development
requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between any of the
following requirements and those in Article V of this chapter or in any
other code, ordinance, or regulation, the more restrictive provision
shall apply.
B. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall
be designed, located, and constructed so that:
(a) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either the
structure itself, or to any of its equipment or contents below
the BFE.
(b) The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(c) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the base flood.
§ 227-6.03 MUNHALL CODE § 227-6.04
1:148
(2) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
C. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Borough of Munhall and the Department of Community
and Economic Development.
§ 227-6.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-6.04
1:149

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 227-7.01. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 227-7.02 shall apply.
§ 227-7.02. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in
BFE.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within AE Area/District without floodway that would, together with all
other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa. Code,
as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
E. Within any Floodway Area/District (see § 227-4.02A), no new
construction or development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
F. Within any AE Area/District without floodway (see § 227-4.02B), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured
50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
G. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
H. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 227-7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-7.02
1:151

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
NOTE: If a municipality has a Zoning Hearing Board (ZHB), applications
for a variance regarding floodplain provisions, whether or not they are
amended into the municipality's zoning code, must be acted on by the
Zoning Hearing Board following MPC procedures for ZHB hearings,
decisions, etc. See MPC 909.1(a)(5). If a municipality does not have a ZHB,
they must establish a process by which to consider variance requests.
§ 227-8.01. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Borough of Munhall may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 227-8.02. Variance procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough of Munhall in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 227-3.11 and the following:
A. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any
increase in the BFE.
B. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that would,
together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase
the BFE more than one foot at any point.
C. Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements pertaining specifically to development regulated by
special permit (or prohibited activities) (Article VI) or to development
which may endanger human life (§ 227-5.04).
D. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary
to provide relief.
E. In granting any variance, the Borough of Munhall shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the
objectives of this chapter.
F. Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough of Munhall shall notify the
applicant in writing that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
§ 227-8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-8.02
1:153
(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
G. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough of Munhall shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the variance will:
(a) Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
(b) Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public,
or conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances
and regulations.
H. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the Borough of Munhall. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual report
to the FEMA.
I. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent annual chance flood.
NOTE: In granting a variance, municipalities are held to the standard
provided in 44 CFR 60.6. If a variance is granted erroneously, a
municipality remains liable for failing to meet the minimum standards
of the National Flood Insurance Program.
§ 227-8.02 MUNHALL CODE § 227-8.02
1:154
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 227-9.01. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 227-9.02. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
§ 227-9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-9.02
1:155
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 227-9.02 MUNHALL CODE § 227-9.02
1:156
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study, but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See §§ 227-4.01 and 227-4.02 for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after September 17, 2014, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started before
September 17, 2014, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the
permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days
of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
§ 227-9.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-9.02
1:157
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated April 24,
1981, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated April 24, 1981,
whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with
the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks/subdivisions and
substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such development is
located in all, or a designated portion of a floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck,
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 227-9.02 MUNHALL CODE § 227-9.02
1:158
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
§ 227-9.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-9.02
1:159
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
§ 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be
in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 227-9.02 MUNHALL CODE § 227-9.02
1:160
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 227-10.01. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on September 17, 2014 and shall remain
in force until modified, amended or rescinded by Borough of Munhall,
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
§ 227-10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-10.01
1:161
Chapter 243
GRADING AND EXCAVATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 168.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 227.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 379.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
389.
Zoning — See Ch. 440.
§ 243-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Munhall
Grading Ordinance."
§ 243-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
persons, to protect property and promote the public welfare by regulating
and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use, location
and maintenance of grading, excavation and fill.
§ 243-3. Definitions.
Wherever used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Munhall.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Munhall Building Inspector,
pursuant to the provisions of the Munhall Borough Building Code as is then
in force.38
ENGINEER — The appointed Engineer of the Borough of Munhall.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated, or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new
location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
GRADE — The elevation of the existing ground surface at the location of any
proposed excavation or fill.
GRADING — Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include
the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GRADING PERMIT — Any permit required under § 243-5 of this chapter.
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 168, Construction Codes.
§ 227-10.01 MUNHALL CODE § 243-3
1:162
PERSON — A natural person but shall also include a partnership or
corporation and their heirs, successors and assigns.
SITE — A lot, tract or parcel of land or a series of lots, tracts or parcels of
land, joined together, where grading work is continuous and performed at
the same time.
§ 243-4. Scope.
New grading, excavations and fills or changes, additions, repairs or
alterations made to existing excavations and fills shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter, except that this chapter shall not apply to work
in a public street or alley or a Borough park, playground, or recreation area
or on other public property.
§ 243-5. Permits required.
No person shall commence or perform any grading, excavation or fill
without first having obtained a grading permit from the Building Inspector
with the approval of the Borough Engineer. A separate grading permit shall
be required for each site. One permit may cover both an excavation and any
fill made on the same site. A grading permit will not be required, however,
in the following situations, but in all other respects, the provisions of this
chapter shall apply:
A. An excavation which does not exceed three feet in vertical depth at its
deepest point measured from the natural ground surface or cover an
area of more than 1,000 square feet. This exception shall not affect the
applicability of this chapter to or the requirements off a grading permit
for any fill made with the material from such excavation, unless such fill
is within the exception of Subsection B.
B. A fill which does not exceed 10 cubic yards of material on any one site
and a fill which does not exceed three feet in vertical depth at its
deepest point measured from the natural ground surface and does not
cover an area of more than 1,000 square feet, provided that the
surfaces of such fills do not have a slope at any point steeper than five
horizontal to one vertical.
C. An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a
building, swimming pool or underground structure authorized by a
building permit and excavation of a driveway between a building site
and the street; provided, however, that a permit is required for
excavation of a driveway between the building site and the street when
conditions such as excessive cut or fill make such permit necessary.
This exception shall not affect the applicability of this chapter to or the
requirement of a grading permit for any fill made with the material from
such excavation unless such fill is within the exception of § 243-5B. A
grading permit shall not be required for the temporary stockpiling on
the same site of the material from such excavation.
§ 243-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-5
1:163
§ 243-6. Application.
Every applicant for a grading permit shall file a written application therefor
with the Building Inspector. Such application shall:
D. A single-family house site where the maximum gradient between
property lines or the maximum excavation of fill (exclusive of the
situations referred to in § 243-5C hereof) do not exceed the grades or
quantities set forth in the following table:
Single-Family House
Site
(square feet)
Maximum
Gradient Without
Permit
Maximum
Excavation of Fill
without Permit
(cubic yards)
Less than 6,0000 12 in 100 feet 75
From 6,000 to 10,000 15 in 100 feet 100
From 10,000 to 18,000 15 in 100 feet 200
From 18,000 to 30,000 15 in 100 feet 250
Over 30,000 20 in 100 feet 250
A. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot,
block, tract or street address, or similar description which will readily
identify and definitely locate the proposed work.
B. Be accompanied by plans and specifications prepared by a registered
engineer, including: a contour map showing the present contours of the
land and the proposed contours of the land after completion of the
proposed grading and a plan showing cross sections of the proposed cut
or fill on fifty-foot intervals which show the method of benching both cut
and/or fill, however, under no circumstances shall there be less than
three cross sections for each property involved under said permit; a plot
plan showing the location of the grading, boundaries, lot lines,
neighboring streets and alleys, buildings, trees over eight inches in
diameter two feet above the ground, and sufficient dimensions and
other data to show the location of all work; description of the type and
classification of the soil; details and location of any proposed drainage
structures and pipes, walls and cribbing; nature of fill material and such
other information as the Engineer may require to carry out the
purposes of this chapter. All plans shall be dated and bear: the name
and seal of the registered professional engineer who prepared the
same; name of the applicant; and the owner of the land. Plans shall be
submitted in triplicate.
C. State the estimated dates of the starting and completion of the grading
work.
D. State the purpose for which the grading application is filed.
§ 243-5 MUNHALL CODE § 243-6
1:164
§ 243-7. Permit fees; work completion guarantee. [Amended
9-18-1996 by Ord. No. 1399]
§ 243-8. Expiration of permit.
Every grading permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void
if the work authorized by such permit had not been commenced with six
months or is not completed within one year from the date of issue, provided
that the Engineer may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence
that unusual difficulties have prevented the work being started or competed
within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time, and
provided further that the application for the extension of time is made
before the date of expiration of the permit.
§ 243-9. Denial of permit; appeal.
E. The Engineer may waive the requirement of any or all plans and
specifications listed above if he finds that the information on the
application is sufficient to show that the work will conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
A. Before issuing a grading permit, the Borough Building Inspector shall
collect a permit fee in an amount as established from time to time by
resolution.39
B. Before issuance of a grading permit, the applicant shall post a bond,
with corporate surety, or other approved security as set forth in
§ 243-12C(4) of this chapter in an amount 25% of the estimated cost of
the work to guarantee the completion of said work, including slope
treatment and drainage, contemplated by the permit. In the event that
the applicant will move or grade so much land or area that a formal
agreement will be required by the Council of the Borough of Munhall,
then said agreement will be prepared by the applicant at his own cost
and expense, and must be approved as to form and content by the
Borough Solicitor.
A. Where, in the opinion of the Engineer, the work as proposed by the
applicant is likely to endanger any property or any street or alley, he
shall deny the grading permit. In determining whether the proposed
work is likely to endanger property, or streets or alleys, or create
hazardous conditions, the Engineer shall give due consideration to, but
shall not be limited to, possible saturation by rains, earth movements,
runoff of surface waters and subsurface conditions such as the
stratification and faulting of rock, and the nature and type of the soil or
rock.
B. The Borough Council shall consider promptly appeals from the
provisions of this chapter or from the determinations of the Engineer,
and the Council may consider alternate methods, standards or
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 243-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-9
1:165
§ 243-10. Inspections.
§ 243-11. Standards for excavations.
materials proposed by the applicant. Any applicant or permit holder
shall have the right to appeal to any court of competent jurisdiction
from any decision or determination of the Borough Council.
A. The Engineer shall, when requested, make the inspections hereinafter
required and shall either approve that portion of the work which has
been completed or notify the permit holder wherein the same fails to
comply with the provisions of this chapter. Where it is found by
inspection that the soil or other conditions are not as stated or shown in
the application, the Engineer may refuse to approve further work until
approval is obtained for a revised grading plan conforming to the
existing conditions.
B. Plans for grading work, approved by the Engineer, shall be maintained
at the site during the progress of the grading work until the work has
been approved.
C. The permit holder shall notify the Engineer in order to obtain
inspections in accordance with the following schedule and such
notification shall be made by the permit holder at least 24 hours before
the inspection is to be made:
(1) Initial inspection: when work on the excavation or fill is about to be
commenced.
(2) Rough grading: when all rough grading has been completed.
(3) Drainage facilities: when drainage facilities are to be installed and
before such facilities are backfilled.
(4) Special structures: when excavations are complete for retaining
and crib walls and when reinforcing steel is in place and before
concrete is poured.
(5) Final inspection: when all work, including the installation of all
drainage and other structures, has been completed.
D. If, at any stage of the work, the Engineer shall determine by inspection
that the nature of the formation is such that further work as authorized
by an existing permit is likely to endanger any property or streets, or
alleys, or create hazardous conditions, the Engineer may require, as a
condition to allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable safety
precautions be taken as the Engineer considers advisable to avoid such
likelihood of danger. Safety precautions may include, but shall not be
limited to, specifying a flatter exposed slope, construction of additional
drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction, curbing or walls.
§ 243-9 MUNHALL CODE § 243-11
1:166
§ 243-12. Standards for fills.
A. No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in slope than 1 1/2
horizontal to one vertical, except under one or more of the following
conditions:
(1) The excavation is located so that a line having a slope of 1 1/2
horizontal to one vertical and passing through any portion of the
cut face will be entirely inside a line three feet inside the property
lines of the property on which the excavation is made.
(2) The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently stable
to sustain a slope of steeper than 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical
and a written statement of a civil engineer, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion
control, to that effect is submitted to the Engineer and approved by
him. The statement shall state that the site has been tested and
inspected and that the deviation from the slope specified above will
not result in injury to persons or drainage to property.
(3) A retaining wall or other approved support designed by a
registered engineer and said design approved by the Engineer is
provided to support the face of the excavation.
B. The Engineer may require an excavation to be made with a cut face
flatter in slope than 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical if he finds the
material in which the excavation is to be made unusually subject to
erosion, or if other conditions exist which, under applicable engineering
practice, made such flatter cut slope necessary for stability and safety.
C. Excavations adjacent to any footing, foundation, or structure shall not
extend below the angle of repose or natural slope of the soil under the
nearest point of same unless such footing, foundation or structure is
first properly underpinned or protected against settlement.
D. Before commencing any excavation which will in any way affect an
adjoining property or structures thereon, the person making or causing
the excavation to be made shall notify, in writing, the owners of
adjoining buildings not less than 30 days before such excavation is to be
made that the excavation is to be made. Adjoining properties and
structures shall be protected as provided in the Borough of Munhall
Building Code as is then on file in the Officer of Building Inspector (see
also Chapter 168 of this Code), and/or required by the Engineer.
A. No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface steeper in slope
than 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical, except under one or more of the
following conditions:
(1) The fill, in the opinion of the Engineer, is located so that settlement,
sliding, or erosion of the fill material will not result in property
damage or be a hazard to adjoining property, streets, alleys or
buildings.
§ 243-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-12
1:167
§ 243-13. Slope treatment; ground covering.
In order to prevent erosion, the permittee shall be required to provide
adequate ground covering of such kind and character as may be approved
(2) A written statement from a civil engineer, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion
control, certifying that he has inspected the site and that the
proposed deviation from the slope specified above will not
endanger any property or result in property damage, is submitted
to and approved by the Engineer.
B. The Engineer may require that the fill be constructed with an exposed
surface flatter than 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical if he finds that under
the particular conditions such flatter surface is necessary for stability
and safety.
C. Whenever a fill is to be made of materials other than clean soil or earth,
the grading permit shall be subject to the following additional
limitations and requirements:
(1) The fill shall be completed within a reasonable length of time, the
said time limit to be determined by the Engineer and to be specified
on the grading permit.
(2) Clean soil or earth shall be placed over the top and exposed
surfaces of the fill to a depth sufficient to effectively conceal all
materials, other than clean soil or earth, within the fill. When the
fill is other than clean soil or earth, the Engineer may require clean
soil or earth to be placed over the top and exposed surfaces of the
fill to a depth sufficient to conceal all materials at the end of each
day's operations.
(3) No fill of any kind shall be placed over trees, stumps or other
material which would create a nuisance or be susceptible to
attracting rodents, termites or other pests.
(4) No grading permit shall be issued for the filling of materials other
than clean soil or earth until a faithful performance bond in the
amount of at least 10% more than the Engineer's estimated cost of
adequately covering such fill with clean soil or earth has been
furnished to the Borough. Such bond shall be executed by a
corporate surety, as well as by the principal, and shall be subject to
the approval of the Borough Solicitor as to form. The bond shall
insure to the benefit of the Borough and be conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the work required under the terms and
conditions of the grading permit to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
In lieu of said bond, a cash deposit in the said amount may be made
with the Borough Secretary, or with a bank or trust company,
approved by the Borough Solicitor, which shall act as escrow agent.
§ 243-12 MUNHALL CODE § 243-13
1:168
by the Engineer. The ground covering shall be either grass, crown vetch or
other approved variety of vegetation.
§ 243-14. Standards for compaction of fills and benching.
All fills shall be compacted to provide stability of material and to prevent
undesirable settlement. The fill shall be spread in a series of layers, each not
exceeding 12 inches in thickness, and shall be compacted by a sheepsfoot
roller or other approved method after each layer is spread. The Engineer
may require tests or other information if, in his opinion, the conditions or
materials are such that additional information is necessary. Where fills are
placed on slopes of 5% or more, benching of the surface shall be required
and indicated on the cross-sections.
§ 243-15. Drainage.
Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent any surface waters from
damaging the cut face of an excavation or the sloping surface of a fill.
Excavated slopes of more than eight feet in vertical height at slope
gradients in excess of 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical shall have terraces or
benches at their base with a width equal to one-half the height of the cut.
The bench shall be back sloped at a grade of 5% to trap loose material and
runoff water. The Engineer shall require such drainage structure or pipes to
be constructed or installed which are necessary to prevent erosion damage
and to satisfactorily carry off surface waters. All drainage provisions shall
be of such design as to carry surface waters to the nearest practical street,
storm drain, or natural watercourse approved by the Engineer as a safe
place to deposit and receive such waters.
§ 243-16. Maintenance.
The owner of any property on which an excavation or fill has been made
shall maintain in good condition and repair all retaining walls, cribbing,
drainage structures, fences, ground cover, and other protective devices as
established by permit, and further the continued use of said area shall be
contingent upon the maintenance and upkeep, satisfactory to the Borough
and subject to such further conditions as the Borough may prescribe from
time to time. The certificate of completion therefor may, at any time, be
revoked by the Borough Council upon the recommendation on the Borough
Engineer and/or Street Commissioner that the conditions of the permit
are not being observed and that conditions exist that prejudice the health,
safety and welfare of any person, persons or property. Before such
revocation, the Engineer shall first give written notice to the permit holder
and to the owner of the property involved, specifying the defective condition
and stating that unless such defective condition is remedied, the certificate
may be revoked. If the defective condition is remedied, the certificate shall
not be revoked. Such conditions shall be corrected within 30 days of notice
to the owner to correct same.
§ 243-17. General requirements.
§ 243-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-17
1:169
§ 243-18. Grading certificates of completion.
§ 243-19. Violations and penalties.
A. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be at least three feet from
property or right-of-way lines of streets in order to permit the normal
rounding of the edge without encroaching on the abutting property. A
fence not less than four feet in height, of the design approved by the
Building Inspector and the Engineer, shall be placed at the top of all
cuts or fill slopes in excess of 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical. Before a
grading permit is issued, a bond shall be required as provided in § 243-5
of this chapter, to guarantee the protection of steep slopes.
B. The owner of a property shall be responsible to protect and clean up
lower properties of silt and debris washing from his property as a result
of the regrading of his property.
C. In order to prevent the denuding of the landscape, wherever
practicable, large trees and other natural features constituting
important physical, esthetic and economic assets to existing or
impending suburban development shall be preserved.
A. If, upon final inspection of an excavation or fill, it is found that the work
authorized by the grading permit has been satisfactorily completed in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, a grading certificate
covering such work and stating that the work is approved shall be
issued to the permit holder by the Engineer.
B. The Borough shall have the power to revoke any grading certificate
whenever if finds that the work covered by the certificate has been
materially extended or altered, without permit so to do, or that any
retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures, fences, or other
protective devices shown on the approved plans and specifications
submitted for a permit have not been maintained in good order and
repair.
C. Before such revocation, the Engineer shall first give written notice to
the permit holder and to the owner of the property involved, specifying
the defective condition and stating that unless such defective condition
is remedied, the certificate may be revoked. If the defective condition is
remedied, the certificate shall not be revoked. Such conditions shall be
corrected within 30 days of notice to the owner to correct same.
A. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any
grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or
in violation of any provisions of this chapter.
B. When written notice of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter has been served by the Engineer on any person, such violation
shall be discontinued immediately.
§ 243-17 MUNHALL CODE § 243-19
1:170
§ 243-20. Remedies.
In case any work is performed by any person in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, the proper office of the Borough, in addition to
other remedies, may institute in the name of the Borough any appropriate
action or proceeding, whether by legal process or otherwise, to prevent
such unlawful work and to restrain or abate such violation.
Chapter 248
GRASS, WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 144.
Construction codes — See Ch. 168.
Trees — See Ch. 408.
§ 248-1. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent, purpose and scope of this chapter to regulate permissive
growth of ragweed and/or other species of noxious weeds, grass or other
vegetation detrimental to the health and comfort of the residents and
visitors of the Borough of Munhall.
§ 248-2. Nuisance declared.
No person, firm or corporation, owning or occupying any property within
the Borough of Munhall shall permit any grass, weeds or any vegetation
whatsoever, not edible or planted for some useful or ornamental purpose, to
grow or remain upon such premises so as to exceed a height of 12 inches,
or to throw off any unpleasant or noxious odor, or to conceal any filthy
deposit or to create or produce pollen. Any grass, weeds or other vegetation
growing upon any premises in the Borough of Munhall in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants
of the Borough.
C. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the
Borough of Munhall, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day
that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate
offense.40
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 243-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-3
1:171
§ 248-3. Removal, trimming or cutting.
The owner of any premises, as to vacant premises or premises occupied by
the owner, and the occupant thereof, in case of premises occupied by other
than the owner thereof, shall provide for the removal, trimming or cutting
of all grass, weeds, or other vegetation growing or remaining upon such
premises in violation of the provisions of § 248-2 of this chapter.
§ 248-4. Publication of notice.
The Borough shall cause to be published in the regular newspapers of the
Borough once during the month of April of each year hereafter, a notice
declaring such growth as is described in § 248-2 of this chapter to be a
nuisance and dangerous to the public health, and ordering same to be
removed, cut or otherwise abated to meet with the specifications provided
for same in § 248-2 of this chapter, wherever such growth is found within
the Borough.
§ 248-5. Authorization to give notice.
The Borough Council, or any officer or employee of the Borough designated
thereby for the purpose, is hereby authorized to give notice, by personal
service or by registered United States mail, to the owner, occupant or agent
thereof, as the case may be, of any premises whereon grass, weeds or other
vegetation is growing or remaining in violation of the provisions of § 248-2
of this chapter; directing and requiring such owner, occupant or agent to
remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation, so as to conform to the
specifications of this chapter, within five days after issuance of such notice.
In case any person, firm or corporation shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply
with such notice, within the time stated therein, the Borough authorities
may remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation to the specified
restriction of § 248-2 of this chapter, and the cost thereof, together with any
additional penalty authorized by the law, may be collected by the Borough
from such person, firm or corporation, in the manner provided by law.
§ 248-6. Destruction and removal of nuisance.
Whenever the owner, occupant or agent thereof of any land on which such
grass, weeds or vegetation grow in violation of § 248-2 of this chapter is
unknown or cannot be found, the Borough shall give notice of the order to
destroy and remove such weeds, grass or vegetation, by posting a copy of
such order conspicuously on the property wherein the nuisance or growth
exists. If such notice is not complied with five days after posting of same,
the Borough shall cause the property to be entered upon and the nuisance
of grass, weed or other vegetation to be destroyed and removed.
§ 248-7. Submission of statement.
Within 15 days after abating the nuisance as herein provided, the Borough
Council shall prepare and submit to the Borough Solicitor a statement,
including the following:
§ 248-3 MUNHALL CODE § 248-7
1:172
§ 248-8. Filing of municipal claim.
Based upon the statement furnished by the Borough Council as herein
provided, the Solicitor of the Borough of Munhall shall prepare and file in
the name of the Borough of Munhall a municipal claim as provided by law
against the land (hence, owners thereof) from which the weeds, grass or
vegetation were destroyed and the nuisance abated.
§ 248-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-27-2003 by Ord. No.
148841]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the
Borough of Munhall, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Provided, each day's
violation shall constitute a separate offense, and notice to the offender shall
not be necessary in order to constitute an offense.
§ 248-10. Exceptions. [Added 7-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1388]
A. The name of the registered owner of the land on which the nuisance
existed.
B. A description of the property before entering; after nuisance
abatement.
C. When and how notice provided for herein was given, together with a
copy of said notices.
D. Dates of commencement and completion of work by the Borough to
abate the nuisance.
E. Kind and character of work done and expense incurred thereby.
A. This chapter shall apply to all areas in the Borough with only the
following exceptions:
(1) Undeveloped property which is situated more than 200 feet away
from the nearest residence.
(2) Steep slope areas having a grade equal to or greater than three to
one slope (three equals horizontal distance and one equals vertical
distance).
B. Notwithstanding the above-listed exclusions, all properties in the
Borough must be mowed and otherwise maintained in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and shall not be hereby excluded for a
minimum distance of 50 feet from any street right-of-way.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-10
1:173
Chapter 255
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 18. Fire prevention — See Ch. 214.
§ 248-10 MUNHALL CODE § 248-10
1:174
ARTICLE I
Reimbursement for Cleanup
[Adopted 4-21-1995 by Ord. No. 1359]
§ 255-1. Authority to clean up hazardous materials.
The Borough of Munhall, through its various emergency services, is
authorized to clean up or abate or cause to be cleaned up or abated the
effects of any hazardous materials or substances deposited upon or into
properties or facilities within the Borough or having a direct or identifiable
effect on persons or property within the Borough or having a direct or
identifiable effect on persons or property within the municipal boundaries
of the Borough of Munhall, including, but not limited to, traffic control,
evacuation, relocation, substance monitoring, establishment of medical care
facilities and all other costs incurred in the mitigation of the emergency
situation; and any person or persons, partnership, corporation or
corporations who intentionally or accidentally or negligently cause such
deposit shall be liable for all costs incurred by the Borough of Munhall as
a result of such cleanup or abatement activity. The remedy provided by
this article shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by other
laws or ordinances of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, all acts of the
government of the United States under SARA Title III and the Borough of
Munhall.
§ 255-2. Definitions. [Amended 11-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1533]
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any substance or material in a quantity or
form which, in the determination of the Fire Marshal or his authorized
representative, poses an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health
or safety of persons or property or the ecological balance of the
environment and shall include, but not be limited to, such products as
gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables, corrosives or
materials listed in the hazardous substances list of the SARA Title III, 40
CFR 355 (§§ 302 and 304), "List of Extremely Hazardous Materials." The
conditions described herein shall be deemed to include fire.
§ 255-3. Costs.
For purposes of this article, costs incurred by the Borough of Munhall
emergency services shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Recovery shall be expanded to include any expenses incurred by any
Munhall Borough Volunteer Fire Department in acting to abate the
problems cited in this article, and including a fire. [Added 11-19-2008
by Ord. No. 1533]
A. Actual labor.
§ 255-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-3
1:175
§ 255-4. Recovery of costs.
B. Costs of Borough personnel, including worker's compensation benefits.
C. Fringe benefits.
D. Administrative overhead.
E. Costs of equipment operation.
F. Costs of special fire extinguishment agents used.
G. Cost of any contracted labor and materials.
H. Recovery of the same expenses incurred by Munhall Borough Volunteer
Fire Departments. [Added 11-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1533]
A. The authority to recover costs under this article shall not include actual
fire suppression services which are normally or usually provided by the
Bureau of Fire.
B. The recovery shall include fire suppression expenses as may be
incurred by any Munhall Borough Volunteer Fire Department. [Added
11-19-2008 by Ord. No. 1533]
§ 255-3 MUNHALL CODE § 255-4
1:176
Chapter 282
MUNICIPAL CLAIMS AND LIENS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 394.
§ 282-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Municipal Claim and Tax Collection
Ordinance."
§ 282-2. Additional charges on delinquent obligations.
Hereinafter, for every delinquent claim, charge, tax, assessment, levy or
obligation owed to the Borough, there shall be added to such claim,
charges, tax, assessment, levy or obligation (hereinafter referred to as
"delinquencies") reasonable attorney's fees, charges and expenses incurred
in the collection process. All attorney's fees will be charged subsequent to
proper notification to taxpayers of the intent to impose attorney's fees on
said delinquencies. Such additional attorney's fees, charges and expenses
shall be collected in addition to such interest and penalties as are allowed
by law. The cost, charges and reasonable attorney's fees shall further be
collected in the same manner and with the full authority as other municipal
claims of any nature and shall be deemed to be a municipal claim and
collectable and liened as such.
§ 282-3. Schedule of fees.
Such fees shall be reasonable and the same are hereby established in a
fee rate as attached hereto and made a part hereof as Schedule A.42 Said
schedule of fees is hereby deemed reasonable, fair and necessary in order
to allow the Borough to collect those sums that are due and owing. This
schedule may be amended by resolution.
§ 282-4. Collection.
Any person or entity empowered to collect sums on behalf of the Borough
is directed to add such fees as are incurred to the extent allowed and set
forth on Schedule A. Such sums collected pursuant to this chapter shall be
in addition to any tax, municipal fee, penalty, interest, costs or fees already
part of the delinquencies by operation of law or ordinance.
42.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-5
1:177
§ 282-5. Attorney's fees.
Attorney's fees incurred to the extent set forth in Schedule A shall be added
to all unpaid delinquencies of any nature arising or imposed subsequent
to the date of adoption of this chapter or which become delinquent or are
redetermined to be delinquent subsequent to this date. Prior to the time
when such fees are added to the delinquencies, the delinquent tax and
garbage fee collector shall first give the delinquent account holder such
notice as required by law. The delinquent tax and garbage fee collector or
other collector shall so notify the delinquent account holder by sending such
notice to the delinquent account holder's last known address by mailing
notices in the manner prescribed by the Act 20 of 2003, enacted August 14,
2003, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., as amended.
§ 282-6. Authority to engage attorneys.
The designated delinquent tax and garbage fee collector for the Borough
is hereby authorized and given the discretionary authority to engage
attorneys of the designated delinquent tax and garbage fee collector, or any
511 tax account or any other attorney, to pursue any claims or to defend
against any action that the delinquent tax and garbage fee collector or 511
tax collector deems appropriate.
§ 282-7. Delinquent accounts; costs.
This chapter relates to costs incurred in collection of delinquent realty
tax, delinquent garbage, and delinquent 511 accounts. Any account that is
not paid on or before the due date is hereby declared to be a delinquent
account. The costs of collection that are to be assessed to the delinquent
account holder, and to be paid by the delinquent account holder, are to
be paid directly to the designated Borough's collector of delinquent realty
taxes, delinquent garbage fees and 511 taxes and shall be kept by the
aforesaid collector and/or the attorneys who prosecute the claims as
payment for the fees of collection. Any cost prepaid by the Borough that
is recovered from the delinquent account holder shall be reimbursed to
the Borough from the monies that were recovered from and paid by the
delinquent account holder or from the proceeds of any sheriff sale or
judgment.
§ 282-8. Severability.
If a final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction holds any provisions
of this chapter, or the application of any provision of this chapter to any
circumstances, to be illegal or unconstitutional, the other provisions of this
chapter, or the application of such provision to other circumstances, shall
remain in full force and effect. The intention of the members of Council is
that the provisions of this chapter shall be severable and that this chapter
would have been adopted if any such illegal or unconstitutional provisions
had not been included.
§ 282-5 MUNHALL CODE § 282-9
1:178
§ 282-9. Repealer.
Any ordinance or parts of any ordinance or resolutions conflicting with the
provisions of this chapter are rescinded insofar as the conflict exists.
Chapter 291
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 168. Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
389.
§ 291-1. Building numbering system adopted.
The survey, plan and system for the numbering of houses and buildings
prepared by the Borough Engineer, a copy of which is attached hereto and
made a part hereof, is hereby approved and adopted.43
§ 291-2. Responsibility for numbering buildings.
On and after the passage and approval of this chapter, it shall be the duty
of each and every owner, trustee, lessee, agent and occupant of each and
every house, building or other structure in the Borough to cause the same
to be numbered in accordance with this chapter, and the system and plan
hereby adopted and approved.
§ 291-3. Requirements for numbers.
A. The number shall be placed in a conspicuous place on or over each front
door, on the front transom bar, front transom glass or front show
window, over or on either side of the entrance, the same number to be
of paint, metal or enamel, and at least three inches in height, the color
of the numbers to be in contrast to the immediate background, and
shall be so placed as to be in full view from the opposite side of the
street.
B. It shall be unlawful to cover any house number with any sign, drapery,
or other obstruction tending to conceal such number and all old
numbers shall be removed from any house, building or other structure
when a new number has been assigned, and when so directed by the
Borough Engineer.
C. The Borough Engineer is hereby authorized to require the numbering
and renumbering of any house, building or other structure in
accordance with this chapter.
43.Editor's Note: The survey plan and system for numbering of houses and buildings is on file
at the Borough office.
§ 282-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-4
1:179
§ 291-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the
Borough of Munhall, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 299
OCCUPANCY PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 168.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 214.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
389.
Zoning — See Ch. 440.
§ 299-1. Occupancy permit required.
No dwelling, house, apartment or other living quarters or commercial
establishment may be occupied, when previously vacated, until such time
until the owner or his agent has secured an occupancy permit to be issued
by the Building Inspector.
§ 299-2. Application.
The application for the occupancy permit shall disclose the following
information:
§ 299-3. Inspection.
No permit shall be issued until such time as the premises are deemed to be
in a livable and habitable condition after inspection by the Health Officer,
A. Address of the premises.
B. Name and address of the owner.
C. Name of tenant.
D. Number of rooms.
E. Bathroom facilities.
F. General condition of the premises.
G. The application shall also disclose the names and occupations of all
occupants.
§ 291-4 MUNHALL CODE § 299-3
1:180
Fire Chief, Building Inspector, and/or such other persons as the Council may
require from time to time.
§ 299-4. Fees.44
The application for the approval of such occupancy and permit shall be
accompanied by a fee, as established from time to time by resolution
of the Borough Council, for residential purposes and for commercial
establishments. If further inspection is required by the Health Officer, Fire
Chief, Building Inspector or other such officers as the Council may require,
an additional fee, as established from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council, per resident inspection and per commercial inspection
will be required before the occupancy permit is granted.
§ 299-5. Violations and penalties.45
Any person, firm, association, corporation or business enterprise violating
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of
Munhall, for any building, apartment, dwelling, house or other living
quarters or commercial establishment which is occupied without a permit
and, in default of the payment of the fine and costs, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days for each violation of this
chapter.
Chapter 310
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 112.
Animals — See Ch. 123.
Canvassing and soliciting — See Ch. 157.
§ 310-1. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent, purpose and scope of this chapter to regulate activities
on and within all Borough playgrounds, parks, ball fields and recreation
areas, as well as the parking lots and spectator areas servicing such areas
(hereinafter referred to as "recreational areas") consistent with the
enjoyment of such facilities and to prevent nuisances to the residents of the
Borough in the use of such recreational areas, or in the enjoyment of private
property adjacent to or in the vicinity of such area.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 299-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2
1:181
§ 310-2. Prohibited acts.
No person, except employees of the Borough or contractors retained by
the Borough, or those authorized by the Borough and conducting Borough
business, shall make any changes or erect any improvement, injure, deface,
disturb, befoul or in any manner destroy or cause to be destroyed any part
of a recreational area or any improvements or facilities erected thereon.
§ 310-3. Operating policy.
§ 310-4. Authorization.
The Borough Council or its designated representative is hereby authorized:
A. Permitted uses. Recreational areas are deemed for the use of the public
by residents of the Borough of Munhall. Group activities shall be limited
to groups, a majority of which are residents of Munhall, pursuant to the
procedures contained in this chapter.
B. Group activity. Whenever any Munhall group, association, or
organization desires to use a recreational area for a particular purpose,
a representative of said group, association, or organization shall first
obtain a permit for such use in designated areas from the Borough
Council or its designated representative. The Borough Council may
adopt an application form to be used by the applicant which may
require an indemnity bond or other security to protect the Borough
from any liability of any kind or character and to protect Borough
property from damage. The Borough Council or its designated
representative shall grant the permit if it appears that the group,
association, or organization meets all of the conditions contained in the
application.
C. Fees. The Borough Council shall have the authority to issue a fee
schedule for permits, set the amount of deposits, and prescribe
conditions under which deposits are collected or forfeited. Such
revenue shall be used for recreational area purposes within the general
fund.
A. To designate the areas and the time during which the various
recreational activities and uses of a recreational area shall be
conducted.
B. To prescribe regulations for the use of a recreational area.
C. To prescribe regulations for the granting of permits or reservations for
a recreational area.
D. To establish and set from time to time such schedule of permit and
activity fees as it may reasonably determine to be necessary to defray
the costs of issuing permits, use, and monitoring the particular activity
involved, subject to review and approval by the Borough Council.
§ 310-2 MUNHALL CODE § 310-5
1:182
§ 310-5. Regulations.
A. Gambling. Gambling is prohibited in a recreational area.
B. Merchandising, advertising and signs. No person shall, in a recreational
area:
(1) Offer for sale any article or thing, nor place any stand, cart or
vehicle for the display of any such article or thing except under the
authority of the Borough Council or its designated representative
by application and permit.
(2) Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any
article or service for sale or hire.
C. Time restrictions. Except by permit granted upon group application
only, no person or group shall be permitted in any recreational area
during the following periods of time:
(1) From November 1 through April 30, from the period of 7:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m., prevailing time, except in those areas lighted by the
Borough where the period shall be 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. in the
period August 31 through April 30.
(2) From May 1 through October 30, from the period 9:00 p.m. through
6:00 a.m., prevailing time, except in those areas lighted by the
Borough where the period shall be 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. in the
period May 1 through August 31.
D. Personal conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person in a recreational
area to:
(1) Disturb the peace or use profane or obscene language.
(2) Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act.
(3) Commit any assault, battery, or engage in fighting.
(4) Carry, possess, or drink any alcoholic beverage, including beer or
wine.
(5) Bring any animal within a recreational area that is not leashed and
under the control of the owner.
(6) Bring or ride any type of bicycle, motorcycle or other motor vehicle
on a playing field or pedestrian walkway.
(7) Carry, possess, or use any firearm, club, or any instrument which
can injure or harm.
(8) Violate the time restrictions by entering upon a recreational area
as set forth in this § 310-5C.
(9) Violate any rule for the use of a recreational area made or approved
by the Borough Council.
§ 310-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5
1:183
§ 310-6. Administration.
The Borough Council and agents designated by it shall administer the
provisions of this chapter, including the establishment and collection of
fees, preparation of application forms, issuance and revocation of permits,
promulgation of rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this
chapter and all other decisions relative thereto. The Borough Police and/or
the Mayor shall have the authority to cause acts in violation of this chapter
to be terminated, or to expel the perpetrators of such acts from the area,
or to call the Borough Police to arrest and detain such violators or to file a
complaint for such violation with a Magisterial District Judge.
§ 310-7. Violations and penalties.46
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be, upon
conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine as provided in Chapter 1, Article
II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of Munhall, plus costs, and,
in default of payment said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 30 days. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 310-8. Additional penalties.
Where such violator has removed, destroyed, damaged or defaced or
befouled a recreational area or the facilities thereon, the cost of
maintenance, repair or replacement shall be charged to such person or
group in addition to any fine or penalty imposed in § 310-7. Further use of
recreation and park facilities may be denied to violators of this chapter, in
addition to the imposition of fines or costs.
§ 310-9. Seizing and impounding of alcoholic beverages.
In addition to the penalty provision herein, any alcoholic beverage as
described in § 310-5D(4) brought onto a recreational area shall be seized
and impounded without further liability to the Borough.
§ 310-10. Collection of fines and penalties.
All fines and penalties collected from the enforcement of this chapter shall
be remitted to the Borough for use in the general fund.
(10) Prevent any person from using a recreational area or interfere with
such use in compliance with this chapter and the rules applicable to
such use.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 310-5 MUNHALL CODE § 310-10
1:184
Chapter 333
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 168.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 214.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 227.
Grass, weeds and other vegetation — See Ch.
248.
Solid waste — See Ch. 373.
Street and sidewalks — See Ch. 385.
Zoning — See Ch. 440.
§ 310-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-10
1:185

ARTICLE I
General
§ 333-1. Purpose; scope; declaration of policy and findings.
It is the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the Council of the Borough
of Munhall, in order to protect and promote the public health, safety and
welfare of its citizens, to establish rights and obligations of owners and
occupants relating to the rental of certain dwelling units in the Borough of
Munhall and to encourage owners and occupants to maintain and improve
the quality of rental housing within the community. It is also the policy of
the Borough that owners, managers and occupants share responsibilities
to obey the various codes adopted to protect and promote public health,
safety and welfare. As means to those ends, this chapter provides for a
system of inspections; issuance and renewal of occupancy license; and
sets penalties for violations. This chapter shall be liberally construed and
applied to promote its purposes and policies. In considering the adoption of
this chapter, the Borough of Munhall makes the following findings:
§ 333-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Munhall, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
CODE — Any code or ordinance adopted, enacted, and/or in effect in and
for the Borough of Munhall concerning fitness for habitation or the
construction, maintenance, operation, occupancy, use or appearance of any
premises or dwelling unit. Included within, but not limited by, this definition
are the following which are in effect as of the date of enactment of this
chapter: BOCA Basic Building Code; BOCA Basic Property Maintenance
Code; BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code; National Electrical Code; Chapter
227, Floodplain Management; Chapter 248, Grass, Weeds and Other
Vegetation; Chapter 385, Streets and Sidewalks; Chapter 373, Solid Waste;
and Chapter 440, Zoning; and any duly enacted amendment or supplement
to any of the above and any new enactment falling within this definition.
A. There is a greater incidence of violations of various codes of the
Borough at residential properties where owners of rental property do
not reside in the Borough than at owner-occupied residential properties
or family-occupied residential rental properties.
B. There is a greater incidence of problems with the maintenance and
upkeep of residential properties where owners do not reside in the
Borough than at owner-occupied residential properties or familyoccupied
residential rental properties.
C. There is a greater incidence of disturbances which adversely affect the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood at residential properties where
owners do not reside in the Borough than at owner-occupied residential
properties or family-occupied residential rental properties.
§ 333-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-2
1:187
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The duly appointed Code Enforcement
Officer(s) having charge of the Office of Code Enforcement of the Borough
of Munhall, and any assistants or deputies thereof. In appropriate
circumstances this is intended to include police.
COMMON AREA — In multiple unit dwellings, space which is not part of
a regulated rental unit and which is shared with other occupants of the
dwelling whether they reside in regulated dwelling units or not. Common
areas shall be considered as part of the premises for purposes of this
chapter.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT — Any form of conduct, action, incident or
behavior perpetrated, caused or permitted, by any occupant or visitor of
a regulated dwelling unit that is so loud, untimely (as to hour of the day),
offensive, riotous, or that otherwise disturbs other persons of reasonable
sensibility in their peaceful enjoyment of their premises such that a report
is made to police and/or to the Code Enforcement Officer complaining of
such conduct, action, incident, or behavior. It is not necessary that such
conduct, action, incident or behavior constitute a criminal offense, or that
criminal charges be filed against any person in order for a person to have
perpetrated, caused, or permitted the commission of disruptive conduct,
as defined herein. Provided, however, that no disruptive conduct shall be
deemed to have occurred unless the Code Enforcement Officer or police
shall investigate and made a determination that such did occur, and keep
written records, including a disruptive conduct report, of such occurrence.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT — A written report of disruptive conduct
on a form to be prescribed therefor, to be completed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or police, as the case may be, who actually investigates
an alleged incident of disruptive conduct and which shall be maintained by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
DWELLING — A building having one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms within a dwelling and
forming a single unit and used for living and sleeping purposes, having its
own cooking facilities and a bathroom with a toilet and a bathtub or shower.
GUEST — A persons on the premises with the actual or implied consent of
an occupant.
LANDLORD — One or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested
all or part of the legal title to the premises, or all or part of the beneficial
ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises,
including a mortgage holder in possession of a regulated rental unit (same
as owner).
MANAGER — An adult individual designated by the owner of a regulated
rental unit under Article II, § 333-4. The manager shall be the agent of
the owner for service of process and receiving notices or demands and to
perform the obligation of the owner under this chapter and under rental
agreements with occupants.
§ 333-2 MUNHALL CODE § 333-2
1:188
MULTIPLE-UNIT DWELLING — A building containing two or more
independent dwelling units, including, but not limited to, double houses,
row houses, townhouses, condominiums, apartment houses, and conversion
apartments.
OCCUPANCY LICENSE — The license issued to the owner of regulated
rental units under this chapter, which is required for the lawful rental and
occupancy of regulated rental units.
OCCUPANT — An individual who resides in a regulated rental unit, whether
or not he or she is the owner thereof, with whom a legal relationship with
the owner/landlord is established by a written lease or by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
OWNER-OCCUPIED DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit in which the
owner resides on a regular, permanent basis.
OWNER — One or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all
or part of the legal title to the premises, or all or part of the beneficial
ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises,
including a mortgage holder in possession of a regulated rental unit.
PERSON — A natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association, limited partnership, trust, or any other entity.
POLICE — Municipal police or any properly authorized member or officer of
a municipal police department thereof or any other law enforcement agency
having jurisdiction within the Borough of Munhall.
PREMISES — Any parcel of real property in the Borough, including the land
and all buildings and appurtenant structures or appurtenant elements, upon
which one or more regulated rental units is located.
REGULATED RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit occupied by any person
under a rental agreement.
RENTAL AGREEMENT — A written agreement between owner/landlord and
occupant/tenant supplemented by the addendum47 required under Article
II, § 333-7, of this chapter, embodying the terms and conditions concerning
the use and occupancy of a specified regulated rental unit or premises.
TENANT — An individual who resides in a regulated rental unit, whether
or not he or she is the owner thereof, with whom a legal relationship with
the owner/landlord is established by a written lease or by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (same as occupant).
47.Editor's Note: Said addendum is on file in the Borough office.
§ 333-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-2
1:189

ARTICLE II
Owner's Duties
§ 333-3. General.
§ 333-4. Designation of manager.
Every owner who is not a full-time resident of the Borough of Munhall or a
resident elsewhere within 15 miles from Munhall shall designate a manager
who shall reside within 15 miles of the Borough of Munhall. If the owner is
a corporation, a manager shall be required if any officer of the corporation
does not reside within the aforesaid distance. The officer shall perform
the same function as a manager. If the owner is a partnership, a manager
shall be required if a partner does not reside in the aforesaid distance.
Said partner shall perform the same function as a manager. The manager
shall be the agent of the owner for service of process and receiving notices
and demands, as well as for performing the obligations of the owner under
A. It shall be the duty of every owner to keep and maintain all regulated
rental units in compliance with all applicable codes and provisions of all
other applicable state laws and regulations and local ordinances, and to
keep such property in good and safe condition.
B. As provided for in this chapter, every owner shall be responsible for
regulating the proper and lawful use and maintenance of every dwelling
which he, she or it owns. As provided for in this chapter, every owner
shall also be responsible for regulating the conduct and activities of the
occupants of every regulated rental unit which he, she or it owns in the
Borough, which conduct or activity takes place at such regulated rental
unit or its premises.
C. In order to achieve those ends, every owner of a regulated rental unit
shall regulate the conduct and activity of the occupants thereof, both
contractually and through enforcement, as more fully set forth below.
D. This section shall not be construed as diminishing or relieving, in any
way, the responsibility of occupants or their guests for their conduct or
activity; nor shall it be construed as an assignment, transfer, or
projection over or onto any owner of any responsibility or liability which
occupants or their guests may have as a result of their conduct or
activity under any private cause of action, civil or criminal enforcement
proceeding, or criminal law; nor shall this section be construed so as to
require an owner to indemnify or defend occupants or their guests
when any such action or proceeding is brought against the occupant
based upon the occupant's conduct or activity, nothing herein is
intended to impose any additional civil/criminal liability upon owners
other than that which is imposed by existing law.
E. This chapter is not intended, nor shall its effect be, to limit any other
enforcement remedies which may be available to the Borough against
an owner, occupant, or guest thereof.
§ 333-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-4
1:191
this chapter and under rental agreements with occupants. The identity,
address and telephone number(s) of a person who is designated as manager
hereunder shall be provided by owner or manager to the Borough, and such
information shall be kept current and updated as it changes.
§ 333-5. Disclosure.
The owner or manager shall disclose to the occupant, in writing, on or
before the commencement of the tenancy:
§ 333-6. Maintenance of premises.
§ 333-7. Written rental agreement.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the manager, if applicable;
and
B. The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the premises.
A. The owner shall maintain the premises in compliance with the
applicable codes of the Borough and shall regularly perform all routine
maintenance, including lawn mowing and ice and snow removal, and
shall promptly make any and all repairs necessary to fulfill this
obligation.
B. The owner and occupant may agree that the occupant is to perform
specified repairs, maintenance tasks, alterations or remodeling. In such
case, however, such agreement between the owner and occupant must
be in writing. Such an agreement may be entered into between the
owner and occupant only if:
(1) The agreement of the parties is entered into in good faith and not
for the purpose of evading the obligations of the owner or
occupant; and
(2) The agreement does not diminish or affect the obligation of the
owner to other occupants in the premises.
C. In no case shall the existence of any agreement between owner and
occupant relieve any owner of any responsibility under this chapter or
other ordinances or codes for maintenance of premises.
A. All rental agreements for regulated dwelling units shall be in writing
and shall be supplemented with the addendum attached hereto as
Appendix A.48 No oral leases and no oral modifications thereof are
permitted. All disclosures and information required to be given to
occupants by the owner shall be furnished before the signing of the
rental agreement. The owner shall provide occupant with copies of the
rental agreement and addendum upon execution. The owner shall
48.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough office.
§ 333-4 MUNHALL CODE § 333-7
1:192
§ 333-8. Complaints.
The owner shall reply promptly to reasonable complaints and inquiries from
occupants.
§ 333-9. Landlord and Tenant Act.
The owner shall comply with all provisions of the Landlord and Tenant Act
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.49
further secure a written acknowledgment from the occupants that they
have received the disclosures and information required by this chapter.
B. Terms and conditions. Owner and occupant may include in a rental
agreement terms and conditions not prohibited by this chapter or other
applicable ordinances, regulations, and laws, including rent, term of the
agreement, and other provisions governing the rights and obligations of
the parties.
C. Prohibited provisions. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, no
rental agreement may provide that the occupant or owner agrees to
waive or to forego or remedies under this chapter. A provision
prohibited by this subsection included in a rental agreement shall be
unenforceable.
D. Attachment of ordinance to rental agreement. Following the effective
date of this chapter, a summary hereby in a form provided to owner by
the Borough, at the time of licensing, shall be attached to each rental
agreement delivered by or on behalf of an owner when any such
agreement is presented for signing to any occupant. If a summary has
been provided when the rental agreement was first executed, a
summary does not have to be provided upon renewal. Where a rental
agreement has been entered into prior to the effective date of this
chapter, the owner shall provide the occupants with a copy of the
summary within 60 days after enactment of this chapter.
E. Upon oral or written request by the police or Code Enforcement Officer,
the owner shall within 10 days of such request furnish to the Borough
copies of acknowledgment that the occupants have received the
disclosures and information required to be given and acknowledged as
required by ordinance.
F. Upon oral or written request by the police or Code Enforcement Officer,
the owner shall within 10 days of such request furnish to the Borough,
for inspection purposes, copies of the leases the owner has entered into
for regulated rental units.
49.Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 250.101 et seq.
§ 333-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-10
1:193
§ 333-10. Common areas.
Where an owner does not regulate the use of common areas and the
behavior of occupants and guests in the common areas, the owner shall be
directly responsible for the behavior of occupants and guests in the common
area as if the owner were an occupant.
§ 333-11. Enforcement.
§ 333-12. Code violations.
Upon receiving notice of any code violation from the Code Enforcement
Officer, the owner shall promptly take action, or cause the necessary action
to be taken, to abate the offending condition and eliminate the violation.
§ 333-13. Borough may make repairs.
In case the owner of premises shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with
any notice from the Borough or its Code Enforcement Office to correct
a violation relating to maintenance and repair of the premises under any
code within the period of time stated in such notice, the Borough may
cause the violation to be corrected. There shall be imposed upon the owner
a charge of the actual costs involved, plus 10% of said costs for each
A. Within 10 days after receipt of written notice from the Code
Enforcement Officer that an occupant of a regulated rental unit has
violated a provision of this chapter, the owner shall take immediate
steps to remedy the violation and take steps to assure that there is not a
reoccurrence of the violation.
B. Within 20 days after receipt of a notice of violation, the owner shall file
with the Code Enforcement Officer a report, on a form provided by the
Borough, setting forth what action the owner has taken to remedy the
violation and what steps he or she has taken to prevent a reoccurrence
of the violation. The report shall also set forth a plan as to steps the
owner will take in the future in the violation recurs.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall review the report and, if adequate
steps have been taken and the plan is adequate to address future
violations, shall approve the plan. The owner shall, on his or her
initiative, enforce the plan and failure to do so shall be a violation of this
chapter.
D. In the event that a second violation occurs within a license year
involving the same occupant or occupants, the Code Enforcement
Officer may direct the owner to evict the occupants who violated this
chapter and to not permit the occupant to occupy the premises during
the subsequent licensing period.
E. If an occupant has been evicted from a regulated unit pursuant to this
chapter, he or she shall not be eligible to rent any other regulated unit
within the Borough of Munhall.
§ 333-10 MUNHALL CODE § 333-13
1:194
time the Borough shall cause a violation to be corrected; and the owner
of the premises shall be billed after same has been completed. Any such
bill which remains unpaid and outstanding after the time specified therein
for payment shall be grounds for the imposition of a municipal lien upon
the premises as provided by law. Such lien may be reduced to judgment
and enforced and collected as provided by law, together with interest at
the legal rate and court costs. The remedies provided by this section are
not exclusive, and the Borough and its Code Enforcement Officer may
invoke such other remedies available under this chapter or other applicable
codes, ordinances or statures, including, where appropriate, condemnation
proceedings or declaration of premises as unfit for habitation; or
suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal of the license issued hereunder.
§ 333-14. Inspection of premises.
The owner shall permit inspections of any premises by the Code
Enforcement Officer at reasonable times upon reasonable notice.
§ 333-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-14
1:195

ARTICLE III
Occupant Duties
§ 333-15. General.
The occupant shall comply with all obligations imposed upon occupants by
this chapter, all applicable codes and ordinances of the Borough and all
applicable provisions of state law.
§ 333-16. Health and safety regulations.
§ 333-17. Peaceful enjoyment.
The occupant shall conduct himself or herself and require the other
persons, including, but not limited to, guests on the premises and within his
or her regulated rental unit with his or her consent, to conduct themselves
in a manner that will not disturb the peaceful enjoyment of the premises
by others, and that will not disturb the peaceful enjoyment of adjacent or
nearby dwellings by the persons occupying same.
§ 333-18. Residential use.
The occupant shall, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law or
ordinance, occupy or use his or her regulated rental unit for no other
purpose than as a residence.
§ 333-19. Illegal activities.
The occupant shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor permit others on the
premises to engage in, any conduct declared illegal under the Pennsylvania
Crimes Code (18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or Liquor Code (47 P.S. § 1-101 et
seq.), or the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act (35 P.S.
§ 780-101 et seq.).
§ 333-20. Disruptive conduct.
A. The maximum number of person permitted in any regulated rental unit
at any time shall not exceed one person for each 50 square feet of
habitable floor space in said regulated rental unit. The maximum
number of persons permitted in the common areas of any multiple-unit
dwelling at any time shall not exceed one person for each 15 square feet
of common area on the premises.
B. The occupant shall dispose from his or her regulated rental unit all
rubbish, garbage, and other waste in a clean and safe manner in
compliance with Chapter 375, Solid Waste, of the Code of the Borough
of Munhall and all other applicable ordinances, laws and regulations.
A. The occupant shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor permit others on the
premises to engage in, disruptive conduct, or other violations of this
chapter.
§ 333-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-20
1:197
§ 333-21. Compliance with rental agreement.
The occupant shall comply with all lawful provisions of the rental agreement
entered into between owner and occupant. Failure to comply may result in
the eviction of the occupant by the owner.
§ 333-22. Damage to premises.
The occupant shall not intentionally cause, nor permit nor tolerate others to
cause, damage to the premises. Conduct which results in damages in excess
of $500 shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
§ 333-23. Inspection of premises.
The occupant shall permit inspections by the Code Enforcement Officer of
the premises at reasonable times, upon reasonable notice.
B. When police or the Code Enforcement Officer investigates an alleged
incident of disruptive conduct, he or she shall complete a disruptive
conduct report upon a finding that the reported incident did, in his or
her judgment, constitute "disruptive conduct" as defined herein. The
information filled in on said report shall include, if possible, the identify
or identities of the alleged perpetrator(s) of the disruptive conduct and
all other obtainable information, including the factual basis for the
disruptive conduct requested on the prescribed form. Where the police
make such investigation, said police office shall than submit the
completed disruptive conduct report to the Code Enforcement Officer
within seven working days. In all cases, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall mail a copy of the disruptive conduct report to the owner or
manager within 10 working days of the occurrence of the alleged
disruptive conduct, whether the person making the investigation on
behalf of the Borough is the Code Enforcement Officer or police.
§ 333-20 MUNHALL CODE § 333-23
1:198
ARTICLE IV
Licenses and Inspection
§ 333-24. License requirement.
§ 333-25. Annual license term; fee; occupancy limit.
A. As a prerequisite to entering into a rental agreement or permitting the
occupancy of any regulated rental unit (except as provided in
Subsection C below), the owner of every such regulated rental unit shall
be required to apply for and obtain a license for each regulated rental
unit.
B. A license shall be required for all regulated rental units.
C. The application for the license shall be in a form as determined by the
Borough.
D. The owner shall maintain a current list of occupants in each regulated
dwelling unit which shall include their name, permanent address and
permanent telephone number. The owner shall furnish the list to the
Borough upon request and shall notify the Borough of any changes in
the number of occupants so that revisions can be made to the license.
E. The owner shall furnish with his or her application for license a copy of
the written lease which the owner intends to have the occupants of
each licensed dwelling unit execute. If the owner uses more than one
form of lease, the owner shall furnish a copy of each form. The license
will not be issued if the lease form does not meet the requirements of
§ 333-7 of this chapter.
F. The owner shall furnish with his or her application, for inspection
purposes only, the leases that have been entered into that will cover all
of part of the license term. The license will not be issued if such leases
are not furnished for inspection. Leases shall be furnished for all
persons who have paid a deposit at the time the owner applies for a
license or who have committed to residing in the premises.
A. Each license shall have an annual term running from January 1 through
December 31 each year.
B. Upon application for a license and prior to the issuance or renewal
thereof, each applicant shall pay to the Borough an annual license and
inspection fee, in an amount to be established from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council. Such resolution may provide for
more than one fee scale for different categories of premises, to be more
specifically set forth in the resolution.
C. The license shall indicate thereon the maximum number of occupants in
each regulated rental unit.
§ 333-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-25
1:199
§ 333-26. Inspection.
§ 333-27. Search warrant.
Upon a showing of probable cause that a violation of this chapter or any
other ordinance of the Borough of Munhall has occurred, the Code
Enforcement Officer or police may apply to the Magisterial District Judge
having jurisdiction in the Borough of Munhall for a search warrant to enter
and inspect the premises.
D. No license shall be issued if the owner has not paid any fines and costs
arising from enforcement of this chapter or any of the ordinances of the
Borough of Munhall relating to land use and/or code enforcement, if
any licensing fees under this chapter are due and owing to the Borough,
or if any taxes of any nature are due which are imposed on the real
estate involved.
A. All premises shall be subject to periodic inspection by the Code
Enforcement Officer or another duly authorized agent of the Borough.
Such inspection may take place when an application is submitted for a
license or at any time during the year.
B. The Code Enforcement Office is hereby designated as the official
authorized to enforce this chapter and to take appropriate measures to
abate violations herein, for and on behalf of the Borough of Munhall.
The police will also have authority to enforce this chapter and take
appropriate action to abate violations.
C. This section shall not be construed so as to limit or restrict the Code
Enforcement Officer's authority to conduct inspections of premises,
whether or not subject to the permitting and inspection requirements of
this chapter or pursuant to any other ordinance or code.
§ 333-25 MUNHALL CODE § 333-27
1:200
ARTICLE V
Grounds for Nonrenewal, Suspension or Revocation of License
§ 333-28. General.
The Code Enforcement Officer may initiate disciplinary action against an
owner that may result in a formal warning, nonrenewal, suspension or
revocation of the owner's license for violating any provision of this chapter
that imposes a duty upon the owner, and/or for failing to regulate the breach
of duties by occupants as provided for herein.
§ 333-29. Definitions of options.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FORMAL WARNING — Formal written notification of at least one violation
of this chapter. Upon satisfactory compliance with this chapter and any
conditions imposed by the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Borough
Council, the formal warning shall be removed when the owner applies
for license renewal at a time set by the Code Enforcement Officer or by
Borough Council.
NONRENEWAL — The denial of the privilege to apply for license renewal
after expiration of the license term. The Borough will permit the owner to
maintain occupants in the premises until the end of the license term but
will not accept applications for renewal of the license until a time set by the
Code Enforcement Officer or by Borough Council.
REVOCATION — The immediate loss of the privilege to rent regulated rental
units for a period of time set by the Code Enforcement Officer or the
Borough Council and the loss of the privilege to apply for renewal of the
license at the expiration of the time period. Upon the loss of the privilege to
rent, the owner shall take immediate steps to evict the occupants.
SUSPENSION — The immediate loss of the privilege to rent regulated
rental units for a period of time set by the Code Enforcement Officer
or Borough Council. The owner, after the expiration of the suspension
period, may apply for license renewal without the need to show cause why
the owner's privilege to apply for a license should be reinstated. Upon
suspension, the owner shall take immediate steps to evict the occupants.
§ 333-30. Criteria for applying discipline.
The Code Enforcement Officer, when recommending discipline, and the
Borough Council, when applying discipline, shall consider the following:
A. The effect of the violation on the health, safety and welfare of the
occupants of the regulated rental unit and other residents of the
premises.
B. The effect of the violation on the neighborhood.
§ 333-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-30
1:201
§ 333-31. Grounds for imposing discipline.
Any of the following may subject an owner to discipline as provided for in
this article:
C. Whether the owner has prior violations of this chapter and other
ordinances of the Borough or has received notices of violations as
provided for in this chapter.
D. Whether the owner has been subject to disciplinary proceedings under
this chapter.
E. The effect of disciplinary action on the occupants.
F. The action taken by the owner to remedy the violation and to prevent
future violations, including any written plan submitted by the owner.
G. The policies and lease language employed by the owner to manage the
regulated dwelling unit to enable the owner to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
H. In addition to applying discipline as set forth above, the Code
Enforcement Officer may recommend and Borough Council may impose
upon the existing or subsequent licenses reasonable conditions related
to fulfilling the purposes of this chapter.
A. Failure to abate a violation of Borough Codes and ordinances that apply
to the premises within the time directed by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
B. Refusal to permit the inspection of the premises by the Code
Enforcement Officer as required by Article IV, § 333-26, of this chapter.
C. Failure to take steps to remedy and prevent violations of this chapter by
occupants of regulated rental units as required by Article II, § 333-11,
of this chapter.
D. Failure to file and implement an approved plan to remedy and prevent
violations of this chapter by occupants of a regulated rental unit as
required by Article II, § 333-11, of this chapter.
E. Failure to evict occupants after having been directed to do so by the
Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough as provided for in Article II,
§ 333-11, of this chapter.
F. Three violations of this chapter or other ordinances of the Borough that
apply to the premises within a license term. For purposes of this
chapter, there need be no criminal conviction before a violation can be
found to exist, before a prior violation can be considered under this
section, the owner must have received notice in writing of this violation
within 30 days after the Code Enforcement Officer received notice of
the violation.
§ 333-30 MUNHALL CODE § 333-32
1:202
§ 333-32. Procedure for nonrenewal, suspension, or revocation of
license.
A. Notification. Following a determination that grounds for nonrenewal,
suspension or revocation of a license exist, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall notify the owner of the action to be taken and the reason
therefor. Such notification shall be in writing, addressed to the owner in
question, and shall contain the following information:
(1) The address of the premises in question and identification of the
particular regulated rental unit(s) affected.
(2) A description of the violation which has been found to exist.
(3) A notice that the regulated rental unit(s) is in violation of this
chapter with a specification of the grounds of the violation. Such
violations must be cured within 30 days from the date of notice.
(4) Notice that each day the violation remains shall be a separate
violation and punishable under Article VI. The Borough shall
further have the right to enjoin the obligations and duties created
under this chapter.
(5) A statement informing the owner that he, she or it has a right to
appeal the decision that the owner is in violation of this chapter by
submitting, in writing, to the Borough Secretary/Business
Manager, within 30 days from the date printed on the notice, a
detailed statement of the appeal, including the grounds therefor
and the reason(s) alleged as to why the determination of the Code
Enforcement Officer is incorrect or should be overturned, and a
statement of the relief requested by the appellant. Such notice of
appeal may be required to be submitted on a form to be prescribed
therefor by Borough Council, to be signed by the appellant. There
is hereby imposed a fee for filing of such appeals, the amount of
which shall be determined and established from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council.
(6) Upon receipt of such an appeal in proper form, accompanied with
the requisite filing fee, the Borough Secretary/Business Manager
shall schedule a hearing to be held at the time and date of the next
regularly scheduled Borough Council meeting not less than 10 days
from the date on which the appeal is filed.
(7) The appellant and the Code Enforcement Officer shall receive
written notice of the hearing on the appeal.
(8) Borough Council shall hold a hearing on the appeal which shall be
conducted in accordance with the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A.
§§ 551 through 555. The appellant and all other parties having an
interest may be heard. Based on the facts and arguments of the
appellant and of the Code Enforcement Officer and the police or
other public officials involved, and any relevant factual
§ 333-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-32
1:203
presentations of other parties, the Borough Council shall make a
decision either affirming, reversing, or modifying the action of the
Code Enforcement Officer from which the appeal was taken. Such
decision shall be rendered at a public meeting either immediately
following the hearing or within 30 days thereafter. The decision
shall be reduced to writing stating clearly the factual and legal
basis for the decision, within 45 days after the hearing. If Borough
Council deems it necessary or desirable, it may continue the
hearing to a subsequent time and date not later than 30 days from
the initial hearing, which time and date shall be openly announced
at the initial hearing and, in such case, the time limits for rendering
the decision and reducing it to writing set forth herein shall be
calculated from the last hearing date (at which the substance is
orally announced).
B. Delivery of notification.
(1) All notices shall be sent to the owner or manager, if applicable, by
certified mail. In the event that the notice is returned by the postal
authorities marked "unclaimed" or "refused," then the Code
Enforcement Officer shall attempt delivery by personal service on
the owner or manager, if applicable. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall also post the notice at a conspicuous place on the premises.
(2) If personal service cannot be accomplished after a reasonable
attempt to do so, then the notice may be sent to the owner or
manager at the address stated on the most current license
application for the premises in question, by regular first-class mail,
postage prepaid. If such notice is not returned by the postal
authorities within five days of its deposit in the U.S. mail, then it
shall be deemed to have been delivered to and received by the
addressee on the fifth day following its deposit in the U.S. mail, and
all time periods set forth under Subsection A above shall thereupon
be calculated from said fifth day.
§ 333-32 MUNHALL CODE § 333-32
1:204
ARTICLE VI
Enforcement
§ 333-33. Basis for violation.
It shall be unlawful for any person, as either owner or manager of a
regulated rental unit for which a license is required, to operate without a
valid, current license issued by the Borough authorizing such operation. It
shall also be unlawful for any person, either owner or manager, to allow the
number of occupants of a regulated unit to exceed the maximum limit as set
forth on the license, or to violate any other provision of this chapter. It shall
be unlawful for any occupant to violate this chapter.
§ 333-34. Violations and penalties.50
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a civil offense punishable, upon
conviction thereof by a Magisterial District Judge, by a fine as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of
Munhall, plus costs of prosecution. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 333-35. Nonexclusive remedies.
The penalty provisions of this article and the license nonrenewal,
suspension and revocation procedures provided in this chapter shall be
independent, nonmutually exclusive separate remedies, all of which shall be
available to the Borough as may be deemed appropriate for carrying out
the purposes of this chapter. The remedies and procedures provided in this
chapter for violation hereof are not intended to supplant or replace, to any
degree, the remedies and procedures available to the Borough in the case
of a violation of any other code or ordinance of the Borough, whether or
not such other code or ordinance is referenced in this chapter and whether
or not an ongoing violation of such other code or ordinance is cited as the
underlying ground for a finding of a violation of this chapter.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 333-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-35
1:205

ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 333-36. Notices.
§ 333-37. Changes in ownership occupancy.
It shall be the duty of each owner of a regulated rental unit to notify the
Code Enforcement Officer, in writing, of any change in ownership of the
premises or of the number of regulated rental units on the premises. It shall
also be the duty of the owner to notify the Code Enforcement Officer, in
writing, of any increase in the number of occupants in any regulated rental
unit or of the changing of a dwelling unit from owner-occupied to nonowneroccupied,
which thereby transforms the dwelling into a regulated rental
unit for purposes of this chapter.
§ 333-38. Owners severally responsible.
If any regulated rental unit is owned by more than one person, in any form
of joint tenancy, as a partnership, or otherwise, each person shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the duties imposed under the terms of this
chapter, and shall be severally subject to prosecution for the violation of this
chapter.
§ 333-39. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective on May 17, 2006.
A. For purposes of this chapter, any notice required hereunder to be given
to a manager shall be deemed as notice given to the owner.
B. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any notice required to be
given to the owner under this chapter shall have been received by such
owner if the notice was given to the owner in the manner provided by
this chapter.
C. A claimed lack of knowledge by the owner of any violation hereunder
cited shall be no defense to license nonrenewal, suspension or
revocation proceedings as long as all notices prerequisite to institution
of such proceedings have been given and deemed received in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
§ 333-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-39
1:207
Chapter 342
SECONDHAND AND ANTIQUE DEALERS
§ 342-1. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall engage in the business of being an antique or secondhand
dealer without first obtaining a license from the Borough of Munhall.
§ 342-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Munhall.
PERSONS — Natural persons as well as corporations, partnerships,
business units and associations.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Borough of
Munhall.
SECONDHAND DEALER or ANTIQUE DEALER — Any person who either
wholly or partly engages or operates the trade or business of buying and
selling used goods, such as antiques, precious stones, semiprecious stones,
metals and jewelry, tools, electrical devices, fixtures, appliances,
secondhand cars, automobile accessories or tires, household goods,
firearms, coins, trading cards, or any other type of secondhand article or
goods that are purchased, salvaged, traded or received from any person.
§ 342-3. License required.
Every person who is engaged in the business of being an antique or
secondhand dealer shall obtain a license from the Borough of Munhall.
§ 342-4. Application form.
An application for such license shall be on a form as prescribed, from time
to time, by the Borough of Munhall.
§ 342-5. License fee.51
A license fee shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council per year. Such fees shall be paid to the Borough of Munhall
for its general fund. The Council of the Borough of Munhall shall have the
right to establish a different annual fee, from time to time, by either motion
or by resolution adopted at a public meeting of Council of the Borough of
Munhall.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 333-39 MUNHALL CODE § 342-6
1:208
§ 342-6. Duration of license.
The license shall be valid for a calendar year commencing on January 1 and
terminating December 31. A license fee shall not be prorated regardless of
the date acquired.
§ 342-7. Public record.
All license application shall be a public record available to the general
public for inspection.
§ 342-8. Recordkeeping.
§ 342-9. Reporting time.
Every secondhand or antique dealer shall furnish, by 12:00 noon Monday,
to the Police Department of the Borough of Munhall information specified in
§ 342-8 of the previous business week.
§ 342-10. Required retention period.
No secondhand or antique dealer shall sell or dispose of in any way until
30 days after purchase any of the following secondhand articles or goods:
antiques, precious stones, semiprecious stones, coins, all jewelry, watches,
gold or old gold, platinum, silver or other precious metals, televisions,
radios, CD or tape players, cam recorders, video recorders, speakers or
any similar articles or things. No secondhand or antique dealer shall sell
or dispose of in any way any other secondhand article or goods not listed
above until 30 days after purchase of the same.
§ 342-11. Prohibited transactions.
No secondhand dealer or antique dealer shall purchase any article from
any person less than 18 years of age or from any intoxicated person. No
secondhand dealer or antique dealer shall purchase from any person who is
known to be or is reputed to be a thief or drug addict, or has a reputation
of being a thief or drug addict, until two days after a report containing the
A. Every secondhand and/or antique dealer shall keep a book legibly
written in the English language at the time of acquiring articles in the
course of business, which book shall contain:
(1) An accurate description of the article purchased;
(2) The name and address of the person selling the article;
(3) The name and address of the person buying the article.
B. The secondhand and/or antique dealer has the responsibility to verify,
by either a photo identification or other appropriate means of
identification, the accuracy of the information required to be logged
and kept by this section.
§ 342-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-11
1:209
information set forth in § 342-8 of this chapter is delivered to the Munhall
Police Department, and the Police Department informs the aforesaid dealers
that there are no reports that the items were stolen.
§ 342-12. Revocation of license.
No secondhand dealer or antique dealer licensed as aforesaid, his/her clerk,
agent, servant, or employee, shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter, or if any licensed secondhand dealer or antique dealer is convicted
or robbery, burglary, larceny, receiving stolen goods, or any other crime
involving the unlawful obtaining of personal property, or for any sufficient
cause, the Chief of Police shall revoke such license.
§ 342-13. Violations and penalties.52
Any person, association, partnership, or corporation who engages in or
carries on the business of a secondhand dealer or antique dealer without a
license, or who violates any provisions of this chapter, shall, upon conviction
by the proper judicial authorities, be sentenced to pay a fine as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of
Munhall, plus costs. Each day of engaging in the business without a license
shall be considered a separate offense and each transaction improperly
recorded or reported shall be considered a separate offense and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine as provided in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of Munhall, plus costs, for
each separate offense. This penalty of a fine, plus costs of prosecution, is in
addition to the right of the Chief of Police to revoke a license for cause. No
license fee shall be rebated for any license revoked for cause or voluntary
surrender.
Chapter 350
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sanitary Sewer Municipal Authority — See
Ch. 7.
Construction codes — See Ch. 168.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 379.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
389.
Zoning — See Ch. 440.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 342-11 MUNHALL CODE § 342-13
1:210
ARTICLE I
Trunk Sanitary Sewer Tap-In
[Adopted 4-9-1969 by Ord. No. 1185]
§ 350-1. Tap-in fee. [Amended 9-18-1996 by Ord. No. 139953]
From and after the passage and approval of this article, a charge shall
be assessed as a trunk sanitary sewer tap-in charge on each individual
dwelling, building or structure erected on any lot in the Borough of Munhall,
in an amount as established from time to time by resolution, for the first
unit erected and another fee, also in an amount as established from time to
time by resolution, for each additional unit erected on said lot.
§ 350-2. Fee to be paid before issuance of permit.
The aforesaid trunk sanitary sewer tap-in charge must be paid to the
Borough Secretary before a building permit is issued by the Building
Inspector.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 350-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-2
1:211

ARTICLE II
Water Shutoff
[Adopted 5-19-1983 by Ord. No. 1288]
§ 350-3. Authority.
The Collector of Delinquent Sewage, as agent of the Borough of Munhall,
after obtaining the written approval of the Munhall Borough Council or its
designated agent, given the authority to do so, be and hereby is authorized
and directed under and in accordance with the provisions of this article to
direct and authorize the authorized collection authority to shut off water
services to the aforesaid owners and occupants, and to provide the
Pennsylvania Service Company with the necessary information to enable it
to proceed to shut off the water to the aforesaid owners and occupants, such
direction and authorization and information to be provided in a manner and
form substantially as follows:
"You are hereby authorized and directed to shut off the supply of water to
the premises located at (give address) for the reason that (name of owner
or occupant), owner or occupant (strike out one) of the above premises
has neglected or failed to pay for a period of 30 days from the due date
thereof, a rental rate or charge for sewer, sewage or sewage treatment
service imposed by the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority."
"I certify that the owner or occupant of the premises above set forth is
the person responsible for payment of the overdue charge and that such
rentals, rates or charges are, in fact, overdue."
"I certify that the above claim or lien for the aforesaid service or services
has been assigned by the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority to the
Borough of Munhall."
"I further certify that written notice to the effect that the water supply
would be shut off at the above premises was mailed to ____________________,
owner or occupant (strike out one), (address) on (date), and further, that a
written notice to the effect that the water supply would be shut off at the
above premises was posted at a main entrance to the aforesaid premises on
(date) by (name or poster). Copies of the notice sent and the notice posted
are attached hereto and made part hereof."
"I further certify that no written notice has been given the Borough of
Munhall or the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority stating that
___________________, the aforesaid owner or occupant has a defense to the
aforesaid overdue sewage rentals, rates and charges."
§ 350-4. Compensation to be paid.
The Borough of Munhall is authorized and directed to pay to the
Pennsylvania Municipal Service Company a compensation for said shutoff
and turn-on services, in an amount to be agreed upon between the Borough
and the Pennsylvania Municipal Service Company.
§ 350-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-5
1:213
§ 350-5. Indemnification.
The Borough shall indemnify the Pennsylvania Municipal Service Company
and hold it harmless from any claims whatsoever arising out of the shutting
off of water to any of the owners or occupants of the properties affected. All
expenses and costs incurred by the Borough of Munhall in shutting off the
water will be borne by the owner or occupant as the case may be.
§ 350-5 MUNHALL CODE § 350-5
1:214
ARTICLE III
Rates and Charges
[Adopted 3-21-1989 by Ord. No. 1326]
§ 350-6. Rates and charges. [Amended 12-29-1993 by Ord. No.
1368; 9-18-1996 by Ord. No. 1399; 11-21-2001 by Ord. No. 1471]
There is hereby imposed and established rates or charges for the use and
service of the various sewer systems in the Borough of Munhall, said rates
or charges being based on the quantity of water used, and providing that
all users of the various sanitary sewer systems in the Borough of Munhall
shall be charged the rates hereinafter set forth on a quarterly basis, based
upon the users' water consumption for the corresponding quarter of each
calendar year:
§ 350-7. Payment of bills.
Charges for said sanitary sewage service shall be made quarterly, and all
bills shall be rendered as of the first day of the month following the quarter
for which charges are made and shall be due and payable within 30 days
from the date of the statement.
§ 350-8. Failure to pay. [Amended 8-15-1990 by Ord. No. 1328]
In the event the charges for said sanitary sewerage service remain unpaid
for a period of 30 days from the date of said statement for such services,
such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent,
after which a penalty of 10% of the amount of said statement shall be
added and shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month upon 110% of
the sewage charge, or fraction thereof, until paid, and shall be a lien upon
the real property to which said rental or service charge applies from the
date said rental or charge becomes due and payable. Said sewer rental or
charge, if not paid within 30 days, may be collected as provided by law,
including an action of assumpsit, distress of personal property, or by lien
filed in the nature of a municipal lien or claim. In addition, the Borough
reserves the right to terminate water service after notice, according to law
and ordinance.
A. The rate of $0.50 per 1,000 gallons of water used.
B. The sum of $2.50 shall be the minimum quarterly rate for all users.
C. Customer service charge of $0.36 per bill.
D. Garbage disposal service: $1 per quarter for each applicable user.
E. A customer service charge which shall include all charges, whether
based on use and consumption or administrative or service fees and
charges, which are imposed and charged to the Borough of Munhall by
the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority.
§ 350-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-9
1:215
§ 350-9. Payment; penalty for nonpayment. [Amended 8-15-1990 by
Ord. No. 1328]
The rates and charges herein established shall be imposed upon and
collected from the owner, tenant or occupant of each lot or parcel of land in
the Borough of Munhall serviced by a sanitary sewer owned, maintained or
operated by the Borough of Munhall from which sewerage, waste, or water
enter the Borough's sewer system.
§ 350-9 MUNHALL CODE § 350-9
1:216
ARTICLE IV
Discharge of Waste Materials
[Adopted 2-16-1995 by Ord. No. 1380]
§ 350-10. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning
hereafter designated:
ACT, THE — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
"Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
ALCOSAN — Allegheny County Sanitary Authority, including its treatment
facility and any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature.
CORROSIVE WASTE — A waste or substance which has any of the following
properties:
HAZARDOUS WASTE — All wastes that are defined as hazardous under the
regulations enacted pursuant to the Resource and Recovery Act (RCRA) as
specified in 40 CFR 261 or under the regulations promulgated pursuant to
the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act as specified in 25 Pa. Code
261a.
IGNITABLE WASTE — A waste or substance which can create a fire hazard
in the sewage collection system or the ALCOSAN treatment facility which
has any of but is not limited to the following properties:
INTERFERENCE — A discharge originating in the Borough which, alone or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
It is aqueous and has a pH of less than or equal to five or greater than
or equal to 10, as determined by pH meter.
A.
It is liquid and corrodes steel (SAE1020) at a rate greater than 6.53 mm
(0.250 in) per year at a test temperature of 55° C. (130° F.).
B.
It is liquid with a flash point less than 60° C. (140° F.) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
A.
B. It is an oxidizer as defined in 49 CFR 173.151.
Inhibits or disrupts the ALCOSAN facilities, its treatment processes or
operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal.
A.
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of ALCOSAN's
National Discharge Elimination System (hereinafter referred to as
"NPDES") permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation) or if the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
by ALCOSAN in compliance with the following statutory provisions
and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state
or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid
B.
§ 350-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-10
1:217
PASS-THROUGH — Any discharge of a pollutant through ALCOSAN into
the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with other discharges from
other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the ALCOSAN's
NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity or its legal representatives, agents or
assigns.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, emissions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt or other industrial, municipal or
agricultural waste discharged into water.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and/or radiological integrity of water.
REACTIVE/EXPLOSIVE WASTE — A waste or substance which can create
an explosion hazard in the sewage collection system or the ALCOSAN
treatment facility; which has any of, but is not limited to, the following
properties:
Waste Disposal Act (including Title 2 or more commonly referred to
as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and including state
regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act), the Clean Air
Act and the Toxic Substances Control Act.
It is normally unstable and readily undergoes violent change without
detonating.
A.
B. It reacts violently with water.
C. It forms potentially explosive mixtures with water.
When mixed with water it generates toxic gases, vapors or fumes
in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human health or the
environment.
D.
It is a cyanide or sulfide bearing waste which can generate toxic gases,
vapors or fumes in quantity sufficient to present a danger to human
health or the environment.
E.
It is capable of detonation or explosive reaction if it is subject to a
strong initiating source or if heated under confinement.
F.
It is readily capable of detonation, explosive composition or reaction at
standard temperature and pressure.
G.
§ 350-10 MUNHALL CODE § 350-10
1:218
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA, pursuant to Section 307(A) of
the Act.
WASTE WATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed
directly or indirectly into the facilities of ALCOSAN.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through or border upon the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any portion thereof.
§ 350-11. Prohibited discharges.
No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced directly or indirectly
into the facilities of ALCOSAN or into any sewer, pipe or other conveyance
located in the Borough and transmitting substances into the facilities of
ALCOSAN, any toxic pollutant or other wastewater which will:
§ 350-12. Prohibited substances.
No person shall introduce, permit or cause to be introduced, directly or
indirectly, into the facilities of ALCOSAN or into any piped sewer, pipe or
other conveyance located in the Borough and transmitting substances into
the facilities of ALCOSAN any of the following:
It is a forbidden explosive as defined in 40 CFR 173.51 or a Class A
explosive as defined in 49 CFR 173.53 or a Class B explosive as defined
in 49 CFR 173.88.
H.
A. Cause interference with the operation or performance of ALCOSAN's
treatment plant or other facilities.
B. Pass through ALCOSAN's treatment plant or other facilities.
A. Any substance which will endanger the life, health or safety of the
treatment plant sewer maintenance and plant operations personnel or
which would preclude safe entry into the sewer system or any portion of
the treatment plant.
B. Any ignitable, reactive, explosive, corrosive or hazardous waste, except
as provided for by ALCOSAN's rules and regulations.
C. Any wastewater with a temperature greater than 140° F. (60° C.).
D. Any waste which exceeds the naturally occurring background levels for
either Alpha, Beta or Gamma radiation and/or any wastewater
containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or
§ 350-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-12
1:219
§ 350-13. Violation of ALCOSAN regulations.
No person shall take any action or do or cause to be done anything in
violation of any rule or regulation of ALCOSAN. The pretreatment
regulations of the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority are incorporated
into this article by reference as though fully set forth herein.
§ 350-14. Violations and penalties.54
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of
Munhall, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
concentration not in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
E. Any solids or viscous substances capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operations of
ALCOSAN's facility or facilities discharging into the ALCOSAN system.
F. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly
or by interaction with other wastes may create a public nuisance or
adversely affect public health or safety.
G. Pathological wastes from a hospital or other medical establishment.
H. Garbage, whether ground or not, except properly shredded food waste
garbage resulting from the proper use of a garbage grinder or disposer
type approved by ALCOSAN and maintained in good operating
condition.
I. Sludges or other materials from septic tanks or similar facilities or from
sewage or industrial waste treatment plants or from water treatment
plants, unless the discharge of such sludges and other materials is
specifically approved by ALCOSAN.
J. Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference with the ALCOSAN.
K. Any substance which will cause ALCOSAN's effluent or any product of
the ALCOSAN facilities, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation processes, including any substance which
will cause the ALCOSAN facility to be in noncompliance with sludge use
or disposable criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under
Section 405 of the Act, any criteria, guidelines or regulations
promulgated pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or State laws or regulations
applicable to the treatment or disposal of such effluent or such product.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 350-12 MUNHALL CODE § 350-14
1:220
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, any person, firm
or corporation violating any provision of the ALCOSAN pretreatment
regulations may be subject to administrative and civil penalties as provided
for by such pretreatment regulations and administered by ALCOSAN. Such
penalties may include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief and penalties
of up to $25,000 per day, per violation as provided for by the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works Penalty Law, 35 P.S. § 752.1 et seq. Authority to so enforce
the pretreatment regulations is granted to ALCOSAN, and is in addition to
but not in place of any other remedy available to the Borough.
§ 350-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-14
1:221

ARTICLE V
Additional Sewer Charge
[Adopted 12-29-1997 by Ord. No. 1419; amended in its entirety
12-30-2003 by Ord. No. 1489]
§ 350-15. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Munhall Sewage Charge Ordinance."
§ 350-16. Payment.
There is hereby imposed and reimposed a charge for sewage to Munhall
users in the amount of $2.50 per 1,000 gallons of water or part thereof
consumed. The collector of sewage accounts is authorized and directed to
calculate and collect such charge on behalf of the Borough and to promptly
remit the same.
§ 350-17. Anticipated income.
It is found that anticipated income from this charge is a reasonable
approximation of the anticipated expenses of the Borough of Munhall in
regard to the operation, maintenance, repair and upgrading of the sanitary
sewage system.
§ 350-18. Attorneys' fees.
All attorneys' fees incurred shall be added to any delinquent account
pursuant to the Munhall Borough Attorney Fee Ordinance.55
§ 350-19. Termination of service.
The Borough hereby confirms and reestablishes its right to terminate water
service to any resident, business or entity who has failed to timely pay
sewage charges. The shutoff procedure will be followed pursuant to the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Any fees, charges or expenses
incurred in connection with such termination shall be paid by the user and/
or property owner.
§ 350-20. Reimposition of charges.
This charge shall be automatically reimposed in future years as part of the
Annual Budget Ordinance by the inclusion of such identified taxable income
in that document.
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 282, Municipal Claims and Liens.
§ 350-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-20
1:223

ARTICLE VI
Grease Remediation
[Adopted 12-18-2002 by Ord. No. 1479]
§ 350-21. Title.
This article shall hereafter be known as the "Borough of Munhall Grease
Remediation Ordinance."
§ 350-22. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards to ensure
public safety and protect the environment by regulating and controlling the
discharge of excessive amounts of grease into the Borough's sewer system.
§ 350-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXCESSIVE AMOUNTS OF GREASE — Discharge concentrations greater
than 100 part per million (ppm) of grease, oil and fat downstream of a
grease interceptor or trap.
FOOD PREPARATION FACILITY — Any food establishment in any building,
room or place or any portion thereof or appurtenant thereto, where human
food or drink is mixed, cooked or otherwise prepared, offered for sale, sold,
served or given, with or without charge to patrons, customers or guests for
consumption on the premises; provided, however, that this does not include
the mixing, cooking or other preparation or serving of food in a single-family
dwelling to the resident family or its guest.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — An interceptor whose flow rate is greater than
35 gallons per million (gpm) and which is located underground outside the
building.
GREASE TRAP — An interceptor whose flow rate is less than 35 gpm and
which is located inside the building. Grease traps shall be rated for a
minimum of 22.5 gpm.
MEAL — Generally consisting of courses containing meat or its equivalent,
vegetables, bread, pastry, beverages and accompaniments.
RESTAURANT — Any public eating place where meals are prepared, offered
for sale, sold and served to patrons, customers or guests for compensation
based on the price charged for and generally paid at the conclusion for each
meal.
§ 350-24. Plumbing.
All buildings or rooms occupied or used as a food preparation facility or
restaurant shall be well drained. All soil pipes, waste pipes, drains or other
plumbing fixtures shall be of adequate size to enable passage of any waste
§ 350-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-24
1:225
intended to pass through the pipe to the main public sewer. All drains,
sewers, waste and soil pipes, traps in water and gas pipes shall at all times
be kept in good condition so that no gasses or odors can escape from and
that so same will not leak. Additionally, all vent pipes shall be kept in good
condition and free from obstruction.
§ 350-25. Grease traps and grease interceptors required.
§ 350-26. Installation of grease traps and grease interceptors.
§ 350-27. Maintenance of grease traps and grease interceptors.
A. On or before June 1, 2003, every building, room or space or part thereof
used as a restaurant or food preparation facility, whether new or
existing, shall install or cause to be installed a grease trap or grease
interceptor. The type of installation shall be determined by the total
fixture flow through rate of potential grease laden fixtures discharging
through the building sewage lines as determined by the Borough
Engineer. For flow rates under 35 gpm, an internal grease trap may be
installed in certain existing structures used as restaurants and food
preparation facilities. Floor flow greater than 35 gpm, an external
underground grease interceptor must be installed in all existing
structures or change of use involving restaurants and food preparation
facilities.
B. All new restaurants and food preparation facilities shall be required to
install an external underground grease interceptor of a minimum 500
gallon capacity, regardless of flow rate.
C. All existing restaurants and food preparation facilities shall, at a change
of ownership or alteration, install an external underground grease
interceptor of a minimum five-hundred-gallon capacity. In all existing
structures, buildings or parts thereof in which there is a change of use
or occupancy to that of a restaurant or food preparation facility, there
shall be installed a grease interceptor, minimum five-hundred-gallon
capacity, regardless of flow rate. Each grease trap or grease interceptor
must be installed by a plumber registered in Allegheny County.
A. Grease trap or interceptor shall be installed at an appropriate location
along the sewer line between the restaurant and/or food preparation
facility and the connection to the main public sewer line. An inspection
tee shall be installed between the grease trap/interceptor discharge
line and the connection to the main public sewer line.
B. No solid waste device, such as waste grinders, disposal, potato peelers,
etc., shall discharge through the grease trap/interceptor. Only potential
grease laden fixtures may discharge through the trap/interceptor.
A. All grease traps and grease interceptors shall be maintained and kept in
good working order at all times. The trap or interceptor shall limit the
amount of grease discharged into the public sewer system to levels not
§ 350-24 MUNHALL CODE § 350-27
1:226
§ 350-28. Violations and penalties.
§ 350-29. Right of entry/inspection of facility maintenance.
exceeding those permitted by the Borough of Munhall and ALCOSAN.
Oil/grease discharges shall not exceed 100 ppm downstream of the trap
or interceptor.
B. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any owner, lessee or agent of
any restaurant or food preparation facility to, at a minimum of
quarterly, inspect the grease trap or interceptor. A written record shall
be kept of all inspections. The inspection record shall, at a minimum,
list the names (inspector and company), address and phone number of
the inspection/disposal company, the method and frequency of cleaning
schedule and the date of the cleaning/inspection. Such records shall be
furnished to the Borough of Munhall upon request. A more frequent
cleaning/inspection schedule may be ordered to be performed by the
facility when it is determined by the Borough of Munhall that the facility
is discharging excessive amounts of grease into the public sewer
system.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine as
provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the
Borough of Munhall, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day
that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.56
B. Persons in violation of the provisions of this article shall cease to
discharge or infiltrate or permit the discharge or infiltration of the
violating materials and substances upon receiving 30 days' notice, in
writing, to do so. In case the violator neglects or refuses to comply, in
addition to the fines set forth above, the Borough of Munhall may
proceed to have the violating system disconnected from the public
sewer system. All costs associated with the disconnection, together
with a penalty of 10% additional thereto, shall be collected from the
violator in the manner now provided by law. In addition to the penalties
provided above, the Borough of Munhall shall have the right, upon
proper notification, to cause water service to the offending premises to
be terminated by the provider thereof.
A. In the discharge of duties, the Borough of Munhall Code Enforcement
Officer, Borough Public Works personnel, the Borough Engineer or
authorized representative shall have the authority to enter, at any
reasonable hour, any restaurant or food preparation facility in the
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this article.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 350-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-29
1:227
B. The Borough of Munhall Code Enforcement Officer may cooperate with
or delegate his authority to the appropriate official of ALCOSAN or any
county agency charged with the duty of enforcing any ordinance or
regulations relating to the subject matter within this article.
§ 350-29 MUNHALL CODE § 350-29
1:228
ARTICLE VII
Sanitary Sewer Certificate
[Adopted 9-21-2016 by Ord. No. 157957]
§ 350-30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM — The collection system consisting of the
pipes, laterals, manholes and appurtenances that is designed to carry both
wastewater and stormwater, as indicated on the official Munhall Borough
Sewer System Map.
DYE TEST — A test conducted on or about real property by the use of
innocuous colored substances that will reveal the direction and flow of
storm or surface water.
ILLEGAL STORM OR SURFACE WATER CONNECTIONS — The discharge
of basement seepage or groundwater via the connection of downspouts roof
drainage or surface or areaway drainage into the sanitary sewer system.
MORTGAGE — The transfer, assignment, pledge or hypothecation of any
interest in real property to a lender for value, which transfer, assignment,
pledge or hypothecation is evidenced by a mortgage, deed of trust or other
security instrument. The term "mortgage," as used in this article, shall
not include the refinancing of a residential mortgage where the mortgagor
utilizes the property as their primary residence.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — The Munhall Sanitary Sewer Municipal
Authority.
MUNICIPAL LIEN AND PROPERTY TAX VERIFICATION LETTER — A
written letter from the Borough concerning municipal and/or Authority liens
and real property taxes.
PERSON — Any person, syndicate, association, partnership, firm,
corporation or the chief executive officer of any corporation, institution,
agency, authority, partnership or member of such partnership or other
lawful entity.
SALE — The transfer or assignment, with or without consideration, of any
interest in real property situate within the Borough, whether or not the
same is to a person or persons related by blood to the transferor.
SANITARY SEWER CERTIFICATION — An official statement from the
Authority stating that there are no illegal storm sewer or surface water
connections to the sanitary sewer lines on the real property to be sold,
transferred, assigned or mortgaged.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — The collection system consisting of the
pipes, laterals, manholes and appurtenances that is designed to carry only
57.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. VII, Sanitary Sewer Certificate,
adopted 11-15-2006 by Ord. No. 1512.
§ 350-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-30
1:229
wastewater, as indicated on the official Munhall Borough Sewer System
Map.
TEMPORARY SANITARY SEWER CERTIFICATE — A temporary statement
of certification from the Authority issued pursuant to the provisions of
§ 350-33 of this article.
§ 350-31. Sanitary sewer certification.
After the effective date of this article, any person or persons selling or
mortgaging any interest in real property situate within the Borough of
Munhall, as those terms are defined herein, shall be required to provide to
the purchaser and to the appropriate Borough/Authority officials designated
hereafter a sanitary sewer certification, which certification shall be
provided to the purchaser or designated Borough/Authority officials on the
time or times designated in § 350-32 of this article.
§ 350-32. Application; dye test; fee.
Any person selling or mortgaging real property (hereafter "applicant")
located within the Borough shall make application at least 21 days before
the sale or mortgage on a form furnished by the Municipal Authority. The
applicant shall then have a plumber who is registered and licensed by
the Allegheny County Health Department either certify the property to be
sold, transferred, assigned, mortgaged or refinanced is connected to an
existing public combined sewer which is indicated on the official Munhall
Borough Sewer System Map or, in the case of a property connected to the
sanitary sewer system, perform a dye test. Such plumber shall complete
the appropriate portions on the form and certify that the property has
been dye tested and certify the results of such test. In the event that
there are no illegal storm or surface water connections or discharges, the
Municipal Authority Manager, or his/her designate, shall issue a sanitary
sewer certification upon payment of a fee of $25. When an illegal storm or
surface water connection or discharge is discovered by means of the abovementioned
dye testing, no sanitary sewer certification will be issued until
the illegal connections are removed and certification of such removal by a
registered licensed plumber is received.
A. Munhall Borough Council hereby delegates, subject to Borough Council
approval, all power and authority under this article to the Munhall
Sanitary Sewer Municipal Authority ("Authority"), including, but not
limited to, power to administer a time of sale dye test program with
applications to be submitted to the Authority. The Borough further
delegates to the Authority, subject to Borough Council approval, the
power to establish rules and regulations setting forth provisions that
detail the process, procedures, and definitions of what is necessary to
comply with the time of sale dye testing requirements, along with all
enforcement powers possessed by the Borough. The Authority will
provide notification to the Borough Code Officer as to whether the time
of sale dye testing ordinance has been complied with for the purpose of
the Code Officer releasing lien letters.
§ 350-30 MUNHALL CODE § 350-33
1:230
§ 350-33. Temporary sanitary sewer certification.
A. A temporary sanitary sewer certification may be issued at the Municipal
Authority's sole discretion when either:
(1) The applicant proves that dye testing cannot be performed because
of weather conditions. When such is the case, the applicant shall
provide the Municipal Authority with security in the amount of
$200 to guarantee that the dye test will be performed. The
applicant will have the dye test performed within 14 days of written
notification from the Municipal Authority. In addition, the applicant
shall provide a signed, written acknowledgement from the
purchaser agreeing to correct, at the purchaser's sole expense, any
violations that may be discovered as a result of subsequent dye
tests. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit any purchaser from
requiring the applicant to reimburse the purchaser for any costs
incurred; provided, however, primary responsibility shall run with
the land and no such agreement shall affect the Borough or the
Municipal Authority enforcement powers or excuse the seller,
mortgagor or purchaser from performance hereunder.
(2) Illegal storm or surface water connection or discharge.
(a) When an illegal storm or surface water connection or
discharge is discovered and the necessary remedial activities
to correct such connection or discharge would require a length
of time such as would create a practical hardship for the
applicant, applicant may apply to the Municipal Authority
Manager for a temporary sanitary sewer certificate which may
only be issued when the applicant provides the Municipal
Authority with all of the following:
[1] A bona fide, executed contract between the applicant and
registered, licensed plumber to complete the necessary
remedial work with the Borough listed therein as a thirdparty
beneficiary;
[2] Cash security in the amount of said contract is posted with
the Municipal Authority; and
[3] An agreement by the purchaser to be responsible for all
cost over-runs related to the remedial work together with
a license to enter upon the property to complete work in
case of default of contractor.
B. The temporary sanitary sewer certification shall expire 30 days after its
issuance, and at the expiration of the same the security thus posted
shall be applied by the Municipal Authority to have the necessary
remedial work completed. Any excess of funds remaining as security
shall be refunded to the applicant, but in the event that the security
posted is insufficient to complete the remedial work, the purchaser, or
§ 350-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-33
1:231
§ 350-34. Municipal lien letters.
§ 350-35. Adoption of rules and regulations by Borough Council.
§ 350-36. Exception.
Property which has been constructed in accordance with a valid building
permit and has been inspected by the Borough Building Inspector and the
Plumbing Division of the Allegheny County Health Department may be sold
or conveyed without evidence of compliance as required by the ordinance;
provided, however, if such property is sold after one year from the date of
its original occupancy, compliance is mandatory. A sanitary sewer certificate
granted under this ordinance shall be valid for a period of one year, and any
sale taking place after said five-year period shall be subject to the provisions
of this article and a new sanitary sewer certificate shall be required.
in the case of a refinance the property owner, shall be charged for the
same and shall be responsible for payment thereof.
A. A request for a municipal lien letter must be accompanied by a valid
sanitary sewer certification and the following fees which shall be
delivered at least seven days before such letter is to be provided:
(1) Municipal lien letter: $25.
B. The Borough shall from time to time have the authority to change the
fees required for the issuance of such letters by resolution.
C. Where requested by a property owner or his agent and subject to time
availability as determined solely by the Borough Secretary. The
Borough may issue municipal lien letters on two days' notice upon the
payment of a priority service fee of $20, in addition to the fees set forth
above.
A. The Municipal Authority Board may from time to time adopt reasonable
rules and regulations for the operation and enforcement of this article
as the same may become necessary, which shall include, but not be
limited to:
(1) Establishing acceptable forms of security or guarantees;
(2) Establishing the form of (i) applications, (ii) purchaser
acknowledgements, and (iii) plumber certifications; and
(3) Limiting the times of year in which a temporary sanitary sewer
certificate is available for reasons of weather.
B. Such rules and regulations shall be adopted at a regular meeting of the
Municipal Authority and shall be posted in the offices of the Municipal
Authority, the Borough Zoning Officer and the Borough Business
Manager.
§ 350-33 MUNHALL CODE § 350-37
1:232
§ 350-37. Effect on other laws.
Nothing in this article shall limit in any manner whatsoever the Borough's
right to enforce its ordinances or the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as or
offered as a defense to any citation issued by any municipal corporation or
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania pursuant to any other law or ordinance.
§ 350-38. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the
terms or provisions of this article, and, in particular, the provisions of
§§ 350-31, 350-32, and 350-33 hereof, or of any regulation or
requirement pursuant hereto and authorized hereby shall, upon
conviction before any District Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine of
$300 plus reasonable costs and attorney fees and in default of payment
thereof to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Each day the
provisions of this article are not complied with shall constitute a new
offense.
B. The Borough Council delegates to the Municipal Authority its police
powers to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 350-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-38
1:233

ARTICLE VIII
Stormwater Discharge into Sanitary Sewer
[Adopted 9-21-2016 by Ord. No. 158058]
§ 350-39. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM — The collection system consisting of the
pipes, laterals, manholes and appurtenances that is designed to carry both
wastewater and storm water, as indicated on the official Munhall Borough
Sewer System Map.
ILLEGAL STORM OR SURFACE WATER CONNECTIONS — The discharge
of basement seepage or groundwater via the connection of downspouts roof
drainage or surface or areaway drainage into the sanitary sewer system.
PERSON — Any person, syndicate association, partnership, firm,
corporation of the chief executive officer or any corporation, institution,
agency, authority, partnership or member of such partnership or other
lawful entity.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — The collection system consisting of the
pipes, laterals, manholes and appurtenances that is designed to carry only
waste water, as indicated on the official Munhall Borough Sewer System
Map.
SEWER AUTHORITY or AUTHORITY — The Munhall Sanitary Sewer
Municipal Authority.
§ 350-40. Prohibited connections.
A. After the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation connected to the Borough of Munhall
sanitary sewer system to connect any roof drain, down spout, driveway
drain, surface area drain or any other type of drainage that allows for
basement seepage, groundwater, surface water or stormwater
infiltration or entrance into the sanitary sewer system.
B. After the effective date of this article, any residential or commercial
structure that maintains any roof drain, down spout, driveway drain,
surface area drain or any other type of drainage that allows for
basement seepage, groundwater, surface water or stormwater
infiltration or entrance into the sanitary sewer system shall
permanently remove and disconnect any and all roof drain, down spout,
driveway drain, surface area drain or any other type of drainage that
allows for basement seepage, groundwater, surface water or
stormwater infiltration or entrance into the sanitary sewer system.
58.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. VIII, Stormwater Discharge into
Sanitary Sewer, adopted 11-15-2006 by Ord. No. 1513.
§ 350-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-40
1:235
§ 350-41. Effect on other laws.
Nothing in this article shall limit in any manner whatsoever the Borough's
right to enforce its ordinances or the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as or
offered as a defense to any citation issued by any municipal corporation or
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania pursuant to any other law or ordinance.
§ 350-42. Violations and penalties.
C. The requirements of this section are not applicable to residential or
commercial structures in areas serviced by a combined sewer system.
D. The Board of the Munhall Sanitary Sewer Municipal Authority is hereby
authorized to enact reasonable rules and regulations, subject to review
and approval of Munhall Borough Council, for the operation and
enforcement of this article.
A. Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the
terms or provisions of this article or of any regulation or requirement
pursuant hereto and authorized hereby shall, upon conviction before
any District Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine of $300 plus
reasonable costs and attorney fees and in default of payment thereof to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Each day the provisions
of this article are not complied with shall constitute a new offense.
B. In addition to and not in lieu of the foregoing, the Borough and/or
Authority may seek equitable and legal relief to compel compliance
with this article.
C. The Borough hereby delegates its police power for the enforcement of
this article to the Munhall Sanitary Sewer Municipal Authority.
§ 350-40 MUNHALL CODE § 350-42
1:236
Chapter 373
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 144.
Construction codes — See Ch. 168.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 255.
Junked and abandoned vehicles — See Ch.
419.
§ 350-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-42
1:237

ARTICLE I
Solid Waste Management
[Adopted 10-20-1988 by Ord. No. 1317]
§ 373-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Solid Waste Ordinance."
§ 373-2. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the
meaning ascribed herein, unless the context clearly indicates different:
ACT or ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of
1980 (P.L. 380, No. 97, July 7, 1980).59
AGRICULTURAL WASTE — Poultry and livestock manure, or residual
materials in liquid or solid form, generated in the production, and
marketing of poultry, livestock, fur-bearing animals and their products,
provided such waste is not a hazardous waste. The term includes the
residual materials generated in producing, harvesting, and marketing
of all agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and agricultural crops or
commodities grown on what are usually recognized and excepted as
farms, forests, or other agricultural lands.
BULKY WASTE — Large items of solid waste, including, but not limited
to, appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches or stumps
which may require special handling due to their size, shape, or weight.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including, but not
limited to, stores, markets, office building, restaurants, shopping
centers and theaters.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — All municipal and
residual waste building materials, grubbing waste, and rubble resulting
from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on
houses, commercial buildings and other structures and pavements.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking, or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a
manner that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters
the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC WASTE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE — Solid waste, comprised
of garbage and rubbish, which normally originates in the residential
private household or apartment house.
59.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 373-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-2
1:239
GARBAGE — Any solid waste derived from animal, grain, fruit, or
vegetable matter that is capable of being decomposed by
microorganisms with sufficient rapidity to cause such nuisances as
odors, gases or vectors.
HAULER or PRIVATE COLLECTOR — Any person, firm, copartnership,
association or corporation who has been licensed by the Borough or its
designated representative to collect, transport, and dispose of refuse
for a fee as herein prescribed.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes,
as defined in the Act, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may:
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing, including, but not limited to, factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and
slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
service, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community
activities; and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or
hazardous waste under Act 97 from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant,
or air pollution control facility.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Munhall, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal
government or agency, state institution and agency, or any other legal
entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or
penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall
include the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal
entity having officers and directors.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology used to
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total population;
or
(1)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of or otherwise managed.
(2)
§ 373-2 MUNHALL CODE § 373-2
1:240
convert part or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing
facilities include, but are not limited to, transfer facilities, composting
facilities, and resource recovery facilities.
REFUSE — All solid waste materials which are discarded as useless.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material
or other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations
and any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term "residual waste"
shall not include coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal
Control Act.60 Residual waste shall not include treatment sludges from
coal mine drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being carried
on pursuant to and in compliance with a valid permit issued pursuant
to the Clean Streams Law.61
RUBBISH — All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and
other decomposable matter. This category includes, but is not limited
to, ashes, bedding, cardboard, cans, crockery, glass, paper, wood and
yard cleanings.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of
material placed for collection or from a solid waste processing or
disposal facility.
SEWAGE TREATMENT RESIDUES — Any coarse screenings, grit and
dewatered or air-dried sludges from sewage treatment plants and
pumpings from septic tanks or septage which are a municipal solid
waste and required proper disposal under Act 97.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including, but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material.
STORAGE — The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in
such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall
be presumed that the containment of any waste in excess of one year
constitutes disposal. This presumption can be overcome by clear and
convincing evidence to the contrary.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any solid waste at any
time after generation.
TRANSFER STATION — Any supplemental transportation facility used
as an adjunct to solid waste route collection vehicles.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
60.Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
61.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 373-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-3
1:241
§ 373-3. Prohibited activities.
§ 373-4. Standards for storage of solid waste.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit to
accumulate upon any public or private property within the Borough,
any garbage, rubbish, bulky waste, or any other municipal or residual
solid waste except in accordance with the provisions of this article, any
Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and the
Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste within the
Borough except in accordance with the provisions of this article, any
Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and the
Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any solid waste in the
Borough except in accordance with the provisions of this article, any
Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and the
Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, transport, collect, or remove
any solid waste from public or private property within the Borough
without first securing a license to do so in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any materials from any
solid waste that is stored or deposited for collection within the Borough
without prior approval by the Borough.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid
wastes within the Borough except at an approved and permitted
resource recovery facility under Act 97 and any Department rules and
regulation adopted pursuant to Act 97.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit, or cause
or permit to be thrown, placed or deposited, any solid waste in or upon
any street, alley, sidewalk, body or water, public or private property
within the Borough except as provided in this article.
A. The storage of all solid waste shall be practiced so as to prevent the
attraction, harborage or breeding of insects or rodents and to eliminate
conditions harmful to public health or which create safety hazards,
odors, unsightliness or public nuisances.
B. Any person producing municipal waste shall provide a sufficient
number of approved containers to store all waste materials generated
during periods between regularly scheduled collections, and shall place
and store all waste materials therein.
C. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following preparation standards:
§ 373-3 MUNHALL CODE § 373-4
1:242
(1) All municipal waste shall be drained of free liquids being placed in
storage containers.
(2) All garbage or other putrescible waste shall be securely wrapped in
paper, plastic or similar material or placed in properly tied plastic
bags.
(3) All cans, bottles or other food containers should be rinsed free of
food particles and drained before being placed in storage
containers.
(4) Garden clippings and tree trimmings shall be placed in approved
containers or shall be cut and tied securely into bundles. Bundles
shall be not more than four feet in length, not more than two feet in
diameter and not more than 40 pounds in weight.
(5) Newspapers and magazines shall be placed in approved containers
or shall be tied securely into bundles of not more than 40 pounds in
weight.
(6) When specified by the Borough or its designated representative,
special preparation and storage procedures may be required to
facilitate the collection and resource recovery of certain waste
materials.
D. All municipal waste shall be stored in containers approved by the
Borough or its designated representative. Individual containers and
bulk containers utilized for storage of municipal waste shall comply
with the following standards:
(1) Reusable containers shall be constructed of durable, watertight,
rust- and corrosion-resistant material, such as plastic, metal or
fiberglass, in such a manner as to be leakproof, weatherproof,
insectproof and rodentproof.
(2) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a tight
fitting cover and suitable lifting handles to facilitate collection.
(3) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a capacity
of not less than 10 gallons nor more than 40 gallons and a loaded
weight of not more than 40 pounds.
(4) Disposable plastic bags or sacks are acceptable containers,
provided the bags are designated for waste disposal. Plastic bags
shall have sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity
when lifted by the top, shall be securely tied at the top for
collection, and shall have a capacity of not more than 30 gallons
and a loaded weight not more than 35 pounds.
(5) All containers, either reusable or disposal, shall also comply with
the minimum standards established by the National Sanitation
Foundation.
§ 373-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-4
1:243
§ 373-5. Standards and regulations for collection. [Amended
12-29-1992 by Ord. No. 1354]
E. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following storage standards:
(1) Containers shall be kept tightly sealed or covered at all times. Solid
waste shall not protrude or extend above the top of the container.
(2) Reusable containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all
times. The interior of the containers shall be thoroughly cleaned,
rinsed, drained and disinfected, as often as necessary, to prevent
the accumulation of liquid residues or solids on the bottom or sides
of the containers.
(3) Containers shall be used and maintained so as to prevent public
nuisances.
(4) Containers that do not conform to the standards of this article or
which have sharp edges, ragged edges or any other defect that may
hamper or injure collection shall be promptly replaced by the
owner upon notice from the Borough or its designated
representative.
(5) Containers shall be placed by the owner or customer at a collection
point specified by the Borough or its designated representative.
(6) With the exception of pickup days when the containers are placed
out for collection, the containers shall be properly stored on the
owner or customer premises at all times.
(7) Bulk waste items such as furniture, automobile parts, machinery,
appliances, and tires shall be stored in a manner that will prevent
the accumulation or collection of water, the harborage of rodents,
safety hazards and fire hazards.
F. The storage of all municipal waste from multifamily residential units,
commercial establishments, institutions and industrial lunchroom or
office waste sources is subject to the regulations and standards set
forth in this article. The type, size and placement requirements for bulk
containers shall be determined by the waste generator and the waste
hauler, and are subject to approval by the Borough.
A. The Borough shall provide for the collection of all garbage, rubbish, and
bulky wastes from individual residences and multifamily residential
sources with less than four units, or it may contract with a private
collector or collectors to provide this essential residential collection
service.
B. All households and homeowners shall utilize the residential collection
service provided by the Borough unless they can demonstrate that they
§ 373-4 MUNHALL CODE § 373-5
1:244
have made alternative arrangements that are consistent with this
article and approved by the Borough.
C. All multifamily residential sources (with more than four units),
commercial, institutional and industrial establishments shall negotiate
individually contract collection service with the Borough's collector or
any other properly licensed waste hauler of their choice.
D. All residential garbage and rubbish shall be collected at least once a
week. Bulky wastes shall be collected following prior arrangement with
the Borough's collector and payment of any required special fees.
E. All commercial, institutional, public and industrial lunchroom and office
waste containing garbage shall be collected at least once a week.
Rubbish collection from these sources shall be made as often as
necessary to control health hazards, odors, flies, and unsightly
conditions. The Borough reserves the right to require more frequent
collection when deemed necessary.
F. Residential collection schedules shall be published regularly by the
Borough or its contracted hauler.
G. All solid waste collection activity shall be conducted from Monday
through Friday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. in the
summer and 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. in the winter, unless prior approval
of any exception has been granted by the Borough. No collection,
hauling or transporting of solid waste shall be permitted on Sunday.
H. All licensed haulers and haulers under contract with the Borough shall
comply with the following standards and regulations:
(1) All municipal waste collected within the Borough shall ultimately
be disposed only at a landfill cited in the Allegheny County Solid
Waste Plan, 1990, or on subsequent revisions thereto.
(2) Any trucks or vehicles used for the collection and transportation of
municipal waste must comply with the requirements of Act 97, and
any Department regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and must
be licensed by the Allegheny County Health Department.
(3) All collection vehicles conveying domestic waste and garbage shall
be watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside
littering, attraction of vectors, the creation of odors and other
nuisances.
(4) Collection vehicles for rubbish and other nonputrescible solid
waste shall be capable of being enclosed or covered to prevent
roadside letter and other nuisances.
(5) All solid waste shall be collected and transported so as to prevent
public health hazards, safety hazards and nuisances.
§ 373-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-5
1:245
§ 373-6. Collection and disposal charges. [Amended 12-30-1991 by
Ord. No. 1342B; 3-18-1992 by Ord. No. 1346; 12-29-1993 by Ord.
No. 1367; 12-21-1994 by Ord. No. 1379; 9-18-1996 by Ord. No.
1399]
(6) All solid waste collection vehicles shall be operated and maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition.
A. The Borough Council shall be authorized to make funds available, in
accordance with the laws and procedures of the Borough, for the
establishment, maintenance, and operation of a municipal solid waste
collection and disposal system; or for the contracting of such service to
a private collector.
B. Fees. [Amended 1-3-2006 by Ord. No. 1499; 1-7-2008 by Ord. No.
1524; 12-30-2008 by Ord. No. 1535; 11-6-2011 by Ord. No. 1552]
(1) The owner, tenants or occupants of any single-family home,
individual residence, duplex or multifamily residence is subject to
and shall pay the annual solid waste collection fee as established by
Munhall Borough Council from time to time by resolution. The
owner shall be responsible for payment of said annual fee in the
event the premises or property is unoccupied or vacant.
(2) For all new residential construction, said annual fee shall not
become applicable and due until either the first date of occupancy
or the issuance of an occupancy permit for said premises,
whichever occurs earlier. From the date the applicability of the
annual fee starts, said fee shall continue as described above in
Subsection B(1).
(3) For single-family houses, duplexes and multifamily apartments, the
annual fee shall be as established from time to time by resolution of
Munhall Borough Council, per household, for the collection of solid
waste.
(4) For multifamily apartments of four or more units, hotels,
restaurants, clubs, stores, boardinghouses and all other
commercial establishments, the annual charge for collection of
solid waste shall be established by Munhall Borough Council by
resolution, as needed, on a case-by-case basis.
C. The Borough shall be responsible for the collection of any fees for solid
waste collection and disposal from residential customers. Licensed
haulers shall be responsible for the collection of any collection and
disposal fees from commercial, institutional, and industrial
customers.62
D. Living units. [Added 7-16-2008 by Ord. No. 1530]
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 373-5 MUNHALL CODE § 373-6
1:246
§ 373-7. Administrative appeals.
(1) As used in this subsection, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
LIVING UNIT — Shall be deemed to be one dwelling, apartment
or condominium for a single-family residence whether the same is
occupied or not.
(2) The annual fee set by simple resolution by Council shall be set for
each year until amended and shall be applicable and payable for
each living unit whether occupied or not.
(3) Any quarterly payment received by the Borough after the due date
shall have a five-dollar late charge for each living unit added
thereto, plus all applicable administrative fees, penalties and
interest billed by the appointed waste fee collector. Council may
amend or change this late charge by simple resolution.
(4) Each day of any violation of this subsection shall be deemed to be a
separate civil violation and subject to a civil penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of
Munhall, plus court costs.63
(5) Dates of collection shall be as established in Ordinance No. 1524,
and those dates shall continue in the future. If the same are
changed from time to time, Council shall hereinafter make such
changes by simple resolution.
(6) For establishments or residential buildings with four or more units
not included in the services provided by this subsection, collection
services may be agreed to from time to time by the owner, and the
Borough. Council is authorized to contract for such collection and
set a rate by public vote by simple resolution.
A. All appeals shall be made in writing to the Borough Council.
B. Pending a reversal or modification, all decisions of the Borough shall
remain effective and enforceable.
C. Appeals may be made by the following persons:
(1) Any person who is aggrieved by a new standard or regulation
issued by the Borough may appeal within 10 days after the Borough
gives notice of its intention to issue the new standard or regulation.
D. The notice of appeal shall be served in writing and sent by certified mail
with return receipt requested. Within 20 days after receipt of the notice
of appeal, the Borough shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the hearing
shall be sent to both parties in time to adequately prepare for the
hearing. Notice shall be sent to the parties by certified mail with return
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 373-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-7
1:247
§ 373-8. Injunction powers.
The Borough may petition the Allegheny County courts for an injunction,
either mandatory or prohibitive, to enforce any of the provisions of this
article.
§ 373-9. Violations and penalties.64
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be, upon
conviction thereof, sentenced to a fine as provided in Chapter 1, Article II,
General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of Munhall, plus costs, and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment for a
period of not to exceed 30 days. Each day of violation shall be considered a
separate offense.
receipt requested at the last known address in addition to publication
in the local newspaper.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 373-7 MUNHALL CODE § 373-9
1:248
ARTICLE II
Scavengers
[Adopted 10-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1321]
§ 373-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution
or cooperative enterprise.
REFUSE MATERIALS — All materials discarded as useless by any resident
of the Borough of Munhall and placed at the curb for collection by the
collector authorized by and contracted to the Borough of Munhall.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized and uncontrolled sorting, removal,
reclamation or disturbance of refuse materials placed at the curb for
collection.
§ 373-11. Prohibited activities.
§ 373-12. Violations and penalties.65
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General
Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of Munhall, plus costs, and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
30 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any refuse material in
the Borough of Munhall, except in accordance with the provisions of the
rules and regulations adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and the Allegheny County Health Department and the ordinances of the
Borough of Munhall.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner to sort, remove,
take possession of or otherwise disturb any refuse material on public or
private property within the Borough of Munhall without first securing
written agreement or authorization to do so from the Borough.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any materials from
refuse materials stored or deposited for collection within the Borough
of Munhall.
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 373-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-12
1:249

ARTICLE III
Recycling
[Adopted 11-15-1989 by Ord. No. 1322]
§ 373-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events sponsored in whole or in part by a
municipality, or conducted within a municipality and sponsored privately,
which include, but are not limited to, fairs, bazaars, socials, picnics and
organized sporting events that will be attended by 200 or more individuals
per day.[Added 7-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1581]
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings,
and similar material, but not including grass clippings.[Amended
7-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1581]
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse or other material, including
solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from
operation of residential or municipal establishments. The term does not
include source-separated recyclable materials.
MUNICIPALITY — Any county, city, borough, incorporated town, township
or home rule municipality.
MUNICIPALITY RECYCLING PROGRAM — A source separation and
collection program for recycling municipal waste or source-separated
recyclable materials, or a program for collection centers for recycling
municipal waste, that is operated by or on behalf of a municipality. The
term includes any source separation and collection program for composting
leaves that is operated by or on behalf of a municipality. The term shall
not include any program for recycling construction/demolition waste and/or
materials.
NEWSPAPER — Includes paper the type commonly referred to as
"newsprint" and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly
having printed thereon news and opinions and containing
advertisements.[Amended 6-15-2005 by Ord. No. 1496]
OFFICE PAPER — Paper products commonly used in an office or home for
printing, copying and computer related use.[Added 7-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 1581]
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
federal government or agency, state institution or agency (including, but
not limited to, the Department of General Services and the State Public
School Building Authority), or any other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provisions of
this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty, or any combination
of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors
of any incorporated or other legal entity having officers and directors.
§ 373-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-13
1:251
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed of or processed as municipal waste or the
magnetized separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than
through combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials other
than a fuel for the operation of energy.
RECYCLING FACILITY — A facility employing a technology that is a process
that separates or classifies municipal waste and creates or recovers
reusable materials that can be sold to or reused by a manufacturer as
a substitute for or a supplement to virgin and raw materials. The term
"recycling facility" shall not mean transfer stations or landfills for solid
waste nor composting facilities or resource recovery facilities.
RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY — A processing facility that provides
for the extraction and utilization of materials or energy from municipal
waste that is generated off site, including, but not limited to, a facility that
mechanically extracts materials from municipal waste, a combustion facility
that converts the organic fraction of municipal waste to usable energy, in
any commercial and biological process that converts municipal waste into
a fuel product. The term also includes any facility for the combustion of
municipal waste that is generated off site, whether or not the facility is
operated to recover energy.
SOLID WASTE — Solid waste as defined in the Act of July 7, 1980 (P.L. 380,
No. 97), known as the "Solid Waste Management Act."66
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ACT — The Act of July 7, 1980 (P.L. 380, No.
97).67
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that are
separated from municipal waste at the point of origin for the purpose of
recycling.
§ 373-14. Establishment of program.
There is hereby established a resource recovery program for the mandatory
separation of recyclables from garbage, rubbish and municipal waste in the
Borough of Munhall.
§ 373-15. Separation of garbage. [Amended 1-17-1991 by Ord. No.
1335; 7-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1581]
A. All persons shall be required to separate from municipal waste
generated at their homes, apartments and other residential
establishments the following seven materials designated by the
Borough: [Amended 6-15-2005 by Ord. No. 1496; 1-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 1502; 11-18-2009 by Ord. No. 1539; 7-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 1581]
66.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
67.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 373-13 MUNHALL CODE § 373-15
1:252
§ 373-16. Disposal of solid waste provided by Borough. [Amended
1-17-1991 by Ord. No. 1335; 7-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1581]
The municipality shall pick up all recyclable materials from the curbside
on the designated day that the municipal waste is picked up by the
municipality. Said recyclable material shall be placed in the designated
containers to be provided by the household or the municipality and shall
be picked up by trucks and other related equipment at the curb side. The
recyclable material shall be transported to the recycling facility.
(1) Clear and colored glass.
(2) Aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans.
(3) Newspapers and office paper.
(4) Magazines/periodicals/phone books/cardboard.
(5) High-grade office paper and corrugated paper from the area
businesses.
(6) Plastics.
(7) Leaf waste.
B. Persons shall separate and prepare for collection the designated
materials in the following manner:
(1) Newspaper and office paper shall be placed in paper bags.
[Amended 6-15-2005 by Ord. No. 1496; 7-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 1581]
(2) Clear glass and colored glass shall be emptied, cleaned and placed
in sturdy, reusable containers to be provided by the household or
the municipality. [Amended 7-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1581]
(3) Aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans shall be emptied, cleaned and
placed in sturdy, reusable containers to be provided by the
household or the municipality. [Amended 6-15-2005 by Ord. No.
1496; 7-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1581]
(4) All persons shall separate and remove leaf waste from other
municipal waste generated at their homes, apartments and other
residential establishments and shall place said leaf waste in paper
bags to be designated by the municipality and placed at the curb
side for collection by the Borough at designated times unless those
persons have otherwise provided for composting of leaf waste.
[Amended 6-15-2005 by Ord. No. 1496]
(5) Plastics shall be placed in paper bags or recycling containers.
[Added 11-18-2009 by Ord. No. 1539]
§ 373-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-17
1:253
§ 373-17. Ownership of separated materials.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impair the ownership of separated
materials by the person who generated them unless and until such materials
are placed at curb side for collection by the Borough or its agents.
§ 373-18. Multifamily rental housing properties.
Any person, owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily
rental housing properties with four or more units must comply with the
requirements of this article by establishing a collection system for
recyclable materials at each multifamily rental housing property. The
collection system must include suitable containers for collecting and sorting
materials, easily accessible locations for the containers, and written
instructions to the occupants concerning the use and availability of the
individual collection system. Persons, owners, landlords, and agents of
owners or landlords who comply with the provisions of this section shall
not be liable for the noncompliance of occupants of the multifamily rental
housing properties.
§ 373-19. Commercial, institutional or municipal establishments.
[Amended 3-15-2006 by Ord. No. 1503; 7-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1581]
All persons shall be required to separate from municipal waste generated at
commercial, municipal or institutional establishments and from community
activities, the following materials:
§ 373-20. Collection of solid waste by unauthorized persons
prohibited.
§ 373-21. Violations and penalties.
A. Office paper.
B. Aluminum cans.
C. Cardboard.
D. Leaf waste.
A. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to collect or pick up or
cause to be collected or picked up any recyclable material once it has
been placed on the curb.
B. It shall also be unlawful for any person to collect, remove or dispose of
solid waste which contains recyclable materials when they are
combined with other forms of solid waste.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, upon
conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of
§ 373-17 MUNHALL CODE § 373-21
1:254
Munhall, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.68
B. Each violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate
offense, and the removal of recyclables from one or more locations shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as provided for in
this section.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 373-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-21
1:255

ARTICLE IV
Storage Containers, Dumpsters and Bags
[Adopted 4-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1557]
§ 373-22. Preamble.
The above whereas clauses are incorporated into this article and made a
part hereof.69
§ 373-23. Restrictions for disposal of construction and demolition
waste.
From the effective date of this article, the storage, temporary storage
and removal of construction and/or demolition waste or any other type
of material and use of containers, dumpsters and bags to that end may
be accomplished only in compliance with the terms of this article. Such
materials, bags, dumpsters and containers may be placed, stored and in use
for no longer than 30 days.
§ 373-24. Permit required.
Any person or entity desiring to dispose of construction and/or demolition
waste or for the storage of any materials outdoors must first apply to
the Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer for a permit to put in
place a container, dumpster or storage bag on public or private property.
It is declared to be the intent of this article that no container, dumpster
or storage bag may be placed on public or private property except in
compliance with this article. All containers and dumpsters must be
illuminated by reflectors or lights. All containers, dumpsters and storage
bags may not be filled above the top of the container, dumpster or bag.
§ 373-25. Application.
The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to prepare forms for such
applications requesting such data as the Building Inspector deems
necessary in his discretion, including, but not limited to, limits of liability
of any liability insurance policy requested, a hold harmless provision
protecting the Borough, a provision mandating lighting or reflectors on
such containers or dumpsters, the placement location, warning signs and
barricades and whether a cash or security bond to cover damages should
69.Editor's Note: The whereas clauses for Ord. No. 1557 are as follows: WHEREAS, the
Borough of Munhall has experienced an abuse in connection with the presence of various
storage containers, dumpsters and storage bags on public and private property which are
utilized in the Borough; and WHEREAS, abuses have occurred by allowing the same to
become unusable, unsightly, overflowing, permitting litter to accumulate consisting of the
contents of such containers, and that such containers become nuisances by unduly
interfering with pedestrian traffic; and WHEREAS, the Borough has experienced
significant expense and complaints by residents due to these abuses, and it is the purpose
of this ordinance to abate such practices; and WHEREAS, this ordinance is deemed to be
in the best interests of the residents of the Borough, and is passed pursuant to authority
of the Borough Code.
§ 373-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-25
1:257
be included. A dated application signed by the owner of the land and the
applicant, if not the owner, must provide at least the following information:
§ 373-26. Issuance of permit; duration; renewal; fees.70
Based on the application and all the circumstances, the Building Inspector
may issue a permit in accordance with this article. The Building Inspector
may place such further restrictions on the permit as he sees fit to assure
compliance with the standards of this article. Permits shall be valid for no
longer than 30 days; a permit may be renewed by filing an application with
the Building Inspector. A fee shall be set as established from time to time
by resolution of the Borough Council for each permit and each renewal,
payable upon presentation of the application. Borough Council may change
this fee from time to time, in its sole discretion, by simple resolution of
Council.
§ 373-27. Permit conditions.
The Building Inspector, in his discretion, may issue a permit, refuse to issue
a permit, refuse to renew a permit, and move to rescind a permit by taking
into consideration the following circumstances and any other factors or
conditions he deems to be relevant:
A. Name and address of the applicant and the owner of the subject real
estate: the address where the work is to be performed;
B. The dimensions and capacity of the container, dumpster or bag to be
used, a description of the work to be performed on the subject real
estate, and the length of time anticipated to complete the project; and
C. A plot plan of the site where the applicant wishes to place the container,
dumpster or bag, the duration of time when it will be in place, and what
materials will be stored in it.
A. If the container, dumpster or bag, due to its size or proposed location,
has or likely will unduly interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
parking;
B. If the applicant's activity/work or proposed activity/work produces or
likely will produce or contain hazardous or noxious conditions (smoke,
dust, odors);
C. If the applicant has not reasonably prosecuted the project;
D. The circumstances surrounding the applicant's need for a container,
dumpster or bag and the availability of alternate means of storing and
disposing of construction and demolition waste.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 373-25 MUNHALL CODE § 373-28
1:258
§ 373-28. Responsibility of person or business providing container.
Any person, business or entity that provides any storage container,
dumpster or storage bag which is placed in use in Munhall Borough, and
which depicts its name displayed on the exterior of such storage container,
dumpster or storage bag, shall be secondarily responsible and liable under
this article and shall remove such storage container, dumpster or storage
bag within five days following notice from the Munhall Borough Building
Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer. Failure to comply shall subject such
person, business or entity to citation and fine provided below.
§ 373-29. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Building Inspector may appeal
to the Zoning Hearing Board by filing such appeal in the office of the
Borough Manager and paying an appeal fee as prescribed for appeals to
the Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of the decision of the Building
Inspector.
§ 373-30. Violations and penalties.71
Any person or entity found to be in violation of this article shall be subject to
a civil fine as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code
of the Borough of Munhall for each day such a container, dumpster or bag
remains without a permit as set forth herein.
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 373-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-30
1:259
Chapter 379
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading and excavating — See Ch. 243.
Stormwater discharge into sanitary
sewer — See Ch. 350, Art. VIII.
Zoning — See Ch. 440.
§ 373-30 MUNHALL CODE § 373-30
1:260
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 379-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Munhall
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 379-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
§ 379-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in § 379-2 of this chapter, through provisions
designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases runoff volumes,
flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation,
overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood control efforts in
downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens
public health and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of
water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM),
including regulation of development and activities causing accelerated
runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and welfare and the
protection of people of the commonwealth, their resources, and the
environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource that provides groundwater
recharge for water supplies and supports the base flow of streams.
D. The use of green infrastructure (GI) and low impact development (LID)
are intended to address the root cause of water quality impairment by
using systems and practices which use or mimic natural processes to: 1)
infiltrate and recharge, 2) evapotranspire, and/or 3) harvest and use
precipitation near where it falls to earth. Green infrastructure practices
and LID contribute to the restoration or maintenance of
predevelopment hydrology.
E. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) program.
§ 379-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-3
1:261
§ 379-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, The
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,72 as amended, and/or the Act
of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. Section 680.1 et seq., as
amended, The Stormwater Management Act.
§ 379-5. Applicability.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff,
including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to
regulation by this chapter.
§ 379-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 379-7. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore
the existing and designated uses of the waters of this commonwealth.
B. Preserve natural drainage systems.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source, reduce runoff volumes
and mimic predevelopment hydrology.
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater best
management practices (BMPs) that are implemented within the
municipality.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
72.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 379-3 MUNHALL CODE § 379-8
1:262
§ 379-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
§ 379-9. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No
action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the municipality
purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 379-10. Waivers.
A. If the municipality determines that any requirement under this chapter
cannot be achieved for a particular regulated activity the municipality
may, after an evaluation of alternatives, approve measures other than
those in this chapter, subject to Subsection B. The proposed area of
disturbance shall be less than one acre. The request for a modification
or waiver shall originate with the landowner, shall be in writing, and
shall accompany the stormwater management site plan submitted to
the municipality. The request shall provide the facts on which the
request is based, the provisions of the Ordinance involved, and the
proposed modification. The designated plan reviewer shall review the
request to determine if it meets the requirements of the Ordinance,
including Subsection B below. If acceptable to the municipality, the
municipality may grant the waiver or modification.
B. Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this chapter may be
approved by the municipality if enforcement will exact undue hardship
because of unique physical circumstances or conditions pecullar to the
land in question, provided that the modifications will not be contrary or
detrimental to the public interest and will achieve the intended
outcome, and that the purpose of the Ordinance is preserved. Hardship
must be due to such unique physical circumstances or conditions and
not to circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions
of the Stormwater Management Ordinance. Cost or financial burden
shall not be considered a hardship. Modifications shall not substantially
or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property. A request for modifications shall be in writing and accompany
the Stormwater Management Site Plan submission, as directed in
Subsection A.
C. No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity
involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to one acre may be
granted by the municipality.
§ 379-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-11
1:263
§ 379-11. Version of regulations and standards.
Any reference to a statute, regulation or standard, shall be interpreted to
refer to the latest or most current version of that document.
§ 379-11 MUNHALL CODE § 379-11
1:264
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 379-12. Definitions.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender, and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
B. These definitions do not necessarily reflect the definitions contained in
pertinent regulations or statutes, and are intended for this chapter only.
ACT 167 — The municipality is empowered to regulate land use
activities that affect runoff and surface and groundwater quality and
quantity by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), 32 P.S. Section 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water
Management Act."
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious
area is not considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an
application to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a project site in the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural."
In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational
and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs or
measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that
is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
§ 379-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-12
1:265
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in
Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law (3 P.S. § 851(c)) that
has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to
administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated
under 25 Pa. Code 102.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the design
and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see Return
Period.
DESIGNATED PLAN REVIEWER — A qualified professional as defined
herein, or organization such as the Allegheny County Conservation
District, that has been designated by the municipality to be the
reviewer of SWM site plans for the municipality, and shall be
understood to be the reviewer where indicated as the municipality
within this chapter.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely
in a designed period after a rainfall event, and to become dry until the
next rainfall event.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See Project Site.
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road
maintenance; building construction; and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is
worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EXISTING CONDITION — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
§ 379-12 MUNHALL CODE § 379-12
1:266
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and
studies as being a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that
comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania
DEP Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended
or replaced from time to time by DEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the 100-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary
of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies
provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have
defined the boundary of the 100-year floodway, it is assumed, absent
evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to
50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management
plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE — Systems and practices that use or mimic
natural processes to infiltrate, evapotranspire, or reuse stormwater on
the site where it is generated.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies
wells and springs and is within the saturated zone of soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies from precipitation or overland flow.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary
widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D)
according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare
soil after prolonged welting. The NRCS defines the four groups and
provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group
classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be
identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local
NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils become less pervious
as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS73).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces
(or areas) shall include, but not be limited to: roofs; additional indoor
living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures; and
any new streets or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas
are counted as impervious areas if they directly prevent infiltration.
73.Editor's Note: See § 379-38A and B..
§ 379-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-12
1:267
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
INVASIVE SPECIES — DCNR defines invasive plants as those species
that are not native to the state, grow aggressively, and spread and
displace native vegetation. (see http://www.dcnr.state.pa.us/cs/groups/
public/documents/document/dcnr_010314.pdf for a list of invasive
species.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Inclusive of any or all of
the following meanings: (i) the improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving (a)
a group of two or more buildings or (b) the division or allocation of
land or space between or among two or more existing or prospective
occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features; (ii) any
subdivision of land; (iii) development in accordance with Section
503(1.1) of the PA Municipalities Planning Code.74
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — Site design approaches and
small-scale stormwater management practices that promote the use
of natural systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of
rainwater. LID can be applied to new development, urban retrofits, and
revitalization projects. LID utilizes design techniques that infiltrate,
filter, evaporate, and store runoff close to its source. Rather than rely
on costly large-scale conveyance and treatment systems, LID addresses
stormwater through a variety of small, cost-effective landscape features
located on-site.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Munhall, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
NATIVE VEGETATION — Plant species that have historically grown in
Pennsylvania and are not invasive species as defined herein.
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously
SCS).
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified under
Pennsylvania law to perform the work required by this chapter.
74.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 379-12 MUNHALL CODE § 379-12
1:268
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92, 25 Pa.
Code 102, or the Clean Streams Law.75
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of
runoff from a site or subarea to which the proposed conditions peak
rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT — A watershed or portion of a watershed
for which a release rate has been established by an adopted Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan.76
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time.
For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be
expected to occur on average once every 25 years; or stated in another
way, the probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one
year is 0.04 (i.e., a 4% chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A permanent vegetated area of trees and shrubs
located adjacent to streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.77
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or
man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to: detention and
retention basins; open channels; storm sewers; pipes; and infiltration
facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by
the developer or the developer's representative indicating how
stormwater runoff will be managed at the development site in
75.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
76.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
77.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 379-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-12
1:269
accordance with this chapter. Stormwater management site plan will be
designated as SWM site plan throughout this chapter.
STREAM — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a defined
bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
SUBDIVISION — As defined in The Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,78 Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE — See Stream.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers,
lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies
or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts
thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
WATERSHED — Region or land area drained by a river, watercourse, or
other surface water of this commonwealth to a downstream point.
WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
78.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 379-12 MUNHALL CODE § 379-12
1:270
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 379-13. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 379-14:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality
issues written approval of an SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans approved by the municipality, in accordance with
§ 379-23, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
C. These standards apply to the landowner and any person engaged in
regulated activities.
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law.79 Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual80), No. 363-2134-008, as amended and
updated.
E. Impervious areas:
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter; except that the volume controls in § 379-15 and the peak
rate controls of § 379-16 do not need to be retrofitted to existing
impervious areas that are not being altered by the proposed
regulated activity.
F. Stormwater flows onto adjacent or downstream property shall not be
created, increased, decreased, relocated, impeded, or otherwise
79.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
80.Editor's Note: See § 379-38D.
§ 379-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-13
1:271
altered without written notification of the affected property owner(s).
Notification shall include a description of the proposed development
and the stormwater flows that are being created, increased, decreased,
relocated, impeded, or otherwise altered. Adjacent property shall at
a minimum include any property having a shared boundary with the
subject property of the SWM site plan, however, if in the judgement of
the designated plan reviewer additional properties are being affected,
additional notifications may be required. Proof of notification (signed
postal receipt for example) shall be included as part of the SWM plan
submission to the municipality. Such stormwater flows shall be subject
to the requirements of this chapter.
G. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded
areas.
(b) Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
(c) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
(3) Incorporate methods described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual81). If methods
other than green infrastructure and LID methods are proposed to
achieve the volume and rate controls required under this chapter,
the SWM site plan must include a detailed justification, acceptable
to the designated plan reviewer, demonstrating that the use of LID
and green infrastructure is not practicable.
H. Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the project site at
strategic locations, made as shallow as practicable, and located to
maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while still meeting
the other requirements of this chapter.
I. Normally dry, open-top, storage facilities should completely drain both
the volume control and rate control capacities over a period of time not
less than 24 and not more than 72 hours from the end of the design
storm.
J. The design storm precipitation depths to be used in the analysis of peak
rates of discharge shall be as obtained in PennDOT's Drainage Manual,
81.Editor's Note: See § 379-38C.
§ 379-13 MUNHALL CODE § 379-13
1:272
§ 379-14. Exemptions.
Publication 584, Appendix 7A. This information is listed below for
twenty-four-hour storm events:
Design Storm
Rainfall Total
(inches)
1-year 2.04
2-year 2.44
5-year 2.99
10-year 3.44
25-year 4.09
50-year 4.65
100-year 5.24
K. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law,82 and the Storm
Water Management Act.83
L. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP
Manual.84
M. The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures
for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in
this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of,
and do not conflict with, state law including, but not limited to, the
Clean Streams Law.85
A. Regulated activities that result in cumulative earth disturbances less
than one acre are exempt from the requirements in § 379-18 of this
chapter except as provided in Subsection B below.
B. Earth disturbances between 0.25 acre (10,890 square feet) and one
acre of earth disturbance must submit a SWM site plan to the
municipality which shall consist of the following items and related
supportive material needed to determine compliance with §§ 379-15
through 379-17. The applicant can use the protocols in the Small
Project Stormwater Management Site Plan if municipality has adopted
Appendix C.
82.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
83.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
84.Editor's Note: See § 379-38C.
85.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 379-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-14
1:273
(1) General description of proposed stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications of the materials
to be used for stormwater management facilities.
(2) An erosion and sediment control plan, including all reviews and
letters of adequacy from the Conservation District where
appropriate.
(3) Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of
impervious area that is proposed; proposed structures, roads,
paved areas, and buildings; and a statement, signed by the
applicant, acknowledging that any revision to the approved
drainage plan must be approved by the municipality, and that a
revised erosion and sediment control plan must be submitted to the
municipality or Conservation District for approval.
(4) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail; and all calculations, assumptions, and
criteria used in the design of the stormwater management facilities
must be shown.
C. Agricultural activity is exempt from the SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this chapter provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
D. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the SWM
site plan preparation requirements of this chapter provided the
activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
E. Roadway resurfacing and maintenance projects, which do not increase
impervious area, and underground infrastructure projects are exempt
from the provisions of this chapter, provided the activities meet the
requirements of all other municipal, state and federal requirements.
F. Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 379-13D through J.
G. The municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the municipality believes may
pose a threat to public health and safety or the environment.
H. Voluntary green stormwater infrastructure (GSI) retrofit projects that
are solely intended to better manage runoff from existing development
and are not part of new development or redevelopment, are exempt
from the stormwater management provisions of this chapter. This does
not exempt such projects from any other municipal, state, or federal
regulation.
§ 379-14 MUNHALL CODE § 379-15
1:274
§ 379-15. Volume controls.
The green infrastructure and low impact development practices provided
in the BMP Manual86 shall be utilized for all regulated activities wherever
possible. Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design
Storm Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B
below. Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm
Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below, or
alternative design criteria as allowed by PA Code Title 25, Chapter 102.
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual87) is applicable as
a method to any size of regulated activity. This method requires detailed
modeling based on site conditions. The following shall be incorporated
into the CG-1 method:
(1) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year twenty-four-hour duration
precipitation.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in
impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff
flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration. If the developer provides
justification that the listed removal options are not feasible, and the
designated plan reviewer agrees, runoff shall be detained in a
facility designed for a twenty-four-to-seventy-two-hour dewatering
time in an area with a dedicated stormwater system (not
contributory to a combined sewer system) and shall be detained in
a facility designed for a seventy-two-hour dewatering time in an
area contributory to a combined sewer system before discharge to
local stormwater systems or the environment.
(3) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be
considered meadow in good condition.
(b) 20% of existing impervious area, when present shall be
considered meadow in good condition in the model for existing
conditions.
B. The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual88) provided below is
independent of site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm
Method is not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated
activities greater than one acre or for projects that require design of
stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
86.Editor's Note: See § 379-38C.
87.Editor's Note: See § 379-38C.
88.Editor's Note: See § 379-38C.
§ 379-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-15
1:275
§ 379-16. Rate controls.
(1) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches of
runoff from the net increase in impervious surfaces.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in
impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff
flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration. If the developer provides
justification that the listed removal options are not feasible, and the
designated plan reviewer agrees, runoff shall be detained in a
facility designed for a twenty-four-hour dewatering time in an area
with a dedicated stormwater system (not contributory to a
combined sewer system) and shall be detained in a facility designed
for a seventy-two-hour dewatering time in an area contributory to a
combined sewer system before discharge to local stormwater
systems or the environment.
(3) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(4) This method is exempt from the requirements of § 379-16, Rate
controls.
A. For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan:89
(1) Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment
discharge rates for the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twentyfive-,
fifty-, and 100-year, twenty-four-hour storm events. This is the
equivalent to a 100% release rate area when compared to those
rates shown in the maps contained in Appendix A (New and
Existing Release Rate Management Districts). This
predevelopment to post-development control is not to be
misconstrued as the same as the "Conditional Direct Discharge"
areas on the release rate maps. If it is shown that the peak rates of
discharge indicated by the post-development analysis are less than
or equal to the peak rates of discharge indicated by the predevelopment
analysis for one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-,
and 100-year, twenty-four-hour storms, then the requirements of
this section have been met. Otherwise, the applicant shall provide
additional controls as necessary to satisfy the peak rate of
discharge requirement. Peak flows should be computed using the
methods included in the chapter titled "Stormwater Calculations
and Methodology" of the PADEP Stormwater Management BMP
Manual.
89.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 379-15 MUNHALL CODE § 379-16
1:276
§ 379-17. Riparian buffers.
B. For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan:90
(1) For the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year,
twenty-four-hour storm events, the post-development peak
discharge rates will follow the applicable approved release rate
maps. These maps are contained in Appendix A (New and Existing
Release Rate Management Districts) of this chapter. For any areas
not shown on the release rate maps, the post-development
discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment discharge
rates for the specified design events. Peak flows should be
computed using the methods included in Chapter 8 of the PADEP
Stormwater Management BMP Manual.
A. In order to protect and improve water quality, a riparian buffer
easement shall be created and recorded as part of any subdivision or
land development that encompasses a riparian buffer. The intent of this
chapter in establishing a riparian buffer is to protect and improve
stream water quality. The riparian buffer is intended to slow overland
flow to the stream through the presence of native grasses, trees and
shrubs, allowing infiltration/groundwater recharge; causing deposition
of sediment, nutrients, pesticides, and other pollutants in the buffer
rather than in the stream; and reducing erosion by providing stream
bank stabilization. The trees provide shade for streams; keeping waters
cooler and reducing evaporation.
B. Except as required by PA Code Title 25 Chapter 102, the riparian buffer
easement shall be required for all streams (as defined in Article II) with
a contributing watershed area of greater than 10 acres. The riparian
buffer easement shall be measured to be a minimum of 35 feet from the
top of the streambank (on each side).
C. Minimum management requirements for riparian buffers.
(1) No use or construction within the riparian buffer shall be permitted
that is inconsistent with the intent of the riparian buffer as
described in Subsection A.
(2) Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within
the riparian buffer easement.
(3) Whenever practicable, invasive vegetation shall be actively
removed and the riparian buffer easement shall be planted with
native trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse native
plant community appropriate to the intended ecological context of
the site.
90.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 379-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-17
1:277
D. The riparian buffer easement shall be enforceable by the municipality
and shall be recorded in the appropriate county recorder of deeds
office, so that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the
property located therein. The easement shall allow for the continued
private ownership and shall count toward the minimum lot area
required by zoning, unless otherwise specified in the municipal Zoning
Ordinance.
E. Any permitted use within the riparian buffer easement shall be
conducted in a manner that will maintain the extent of the existing
100-year floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability, and
preserve and protect the ecological function of the floodplain.
F. Stormwater drainage pipes shall be permitted within the riparian buffer
easement, but they shall cross the easement in the shortest practical
distance. Other structural stormwater management facilities are not
permitted within the riparian buffer easement.
G. The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private
recreation trails are permitted by the municipality within riparian
buffers:
(1) It is preferred that trails be designed to be permeable and for
nonmotorized use only; however, impermeable trails are permitted
provided they have adequate drainage.
(2) Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant
species and other sensitive environmental features.
H. Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted
within the riparian buffer easement and shall comply with setback
requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
I. Underground utilities shall be permitted within the riparian buffer
easement; however, work shall be performed to minimize disturbance
area and removal of trees. Restoration within the riparian buffer
easement shall be with native species of trees, grasses, and other
plantings. One tree shall be planted for each tree removed and the
restoration shall be designed by a registered professional with the
requisite experience. Aboveground utilities shall only be permitted to
cross the easement perpendicular to the easement or in the shortest
practical distance. Existing utilities may remain and be maintained as
required.
§ 379-17 MUNHALL CODE § 379-17
1:278
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management Site Plan Requirements
§ 379-18. Plan requirements.
A. Appropriate sections from the municipality's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, and other applicable local ordinances, shall be
followed in preparing the SWM site plans. In instances where the
municipality lacks Subdivision and Land Development regulations, the
content of SWM site plans shall follow the Allegheny County
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
B. The municipality shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient
in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in
accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan is found to be
deficient, the municipality may either disapprove the submission and
require a resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the
municipality may accept submission of modifications.
C. The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
(1) Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as
necessary to implement the operation and maintenance (O&M)
plan discussed in Subsection C(3)(i).
(2) The following signature block for the municipality:
"The Municipal Engineer, on this date _________________, has
reviewed and hereby certifies that the SWM Site Plan meets all
design standards and criteria of the Municipal Ordinance No.
______________, except where waivers have been granted as noted
on the Plan. The review is based on a survey and plan prepared
by others and assumes that all information is correct and valid as
submitted."
(3) The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(b) A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP
Manual.91 A detailed site evaluation shall be completed for
projects proposed in environmentally sensitive areas, such as
brownfields.
(c) Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as
specified in this chapter, or as otherwise necessary to
demonstrate that the maximum practicable measures have
been taken to meet the requirements of this chapter, including
the recommendations and general requirements in § 379-13.
91.Editor's Note: See § 379-38C.
§ 379-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-18
1:279
§ 379-19. Plan submission.
§ 379-20. Plan review.
(d) Expected project time schedule.
(e) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.
(f) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water
quality, and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic
features and on any existing stormwater conveyance system
that may be affected by the project.
(g) Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage
structures, pipes, open channels, and swales.
(h) SWM site plan shall show the locations of existing and
proposed on-lot wastewater facilities and water supply wells,
property boundaries, existing and proposed topography,
point(s) of interest, utilities, and potential utility conflicts.
(i) The SWM site plan shall include an O&M plan for all existing
and proposed physical stormwater management facilities. This
plan shall address long-term ownership and responsibilities for
O&M including type and schedule/frequency of maintenance
activities, personnel and equipment requirements, estimated
annual maintenance costs, and method of financing continuing
O&M.
(j) A justification, acceptable to the designated plan reviewer,
must be included in the SWM site plan if BMPs other than
green infrastructure methods and LID practices are proposed
to achieve the volume, rate and water quality controls under
this chapter.
A. Up to five copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted as follows:
(1) Two copies to the municipality.
(2) One copy to the Municipal Engineer (when applicable).
(3) One copy to the Allegheny County Conservation District (when
requested by the District).
(4) One copy to the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority (in areas with
combined sewer systems).
A. The municipality has designated the Municipal Engineer as the
designated plan reviewer of SWM site plans for the municipality, and
shall be understood to be the reviewer where indicated as the
municipality within this chapter.
§ 379-18 MUNHALL CODE § 379-20
1:280
§ 379-21. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in SWM
BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM
BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated
on the SWM site plan, as determined by the designated plan reviewer, shall
require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with
this article.
§ 379-22. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the municipality's concerns, to the municipality in accordance
with this article. The applicable review fee, in accord with Article VI, must
accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 379-23. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The municipality's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity
of five years following the date of approval. The municipality may specify a
term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM
site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the municipality
signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM site plan is
B. SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the municipality for consistency
with the provisions of this chapter.
C. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days
whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved or requires
additional documentation. If the SWM site plan involves a subdivision
and land development plan, the notification shall occur within the time
period allowed by the Municipalities Planning Code92 (90 days). If a
longer notification period is provided by other statute, regulation, or
ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by the municipality.
D. For any SWM site plan that proposes to use any BMPs other than green
infrastructure and LID practices to achieve the volume and rate
controls required under this chapter, the municipality will not approve
the SWM site plan unless it determines that green infrastructure and
LID practices are not practicable.
E. If the municipality disapproves the SWM site plan, the municipality will
state the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The municipality also
may approve the SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide
the acceptable conditions for approval in writing.
F. The applicable review fee, in accord with Article VI, must accompany a
resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan.
92.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 379-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-23
1:281
not completed according to § 379-24 within the term of validity, then the
municipality may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke
any and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by
the municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 379-22 of this
chapter.
§ 379-24. Record drawings; completion certificate; final inspection.
A. The developer shall be responsible for providing record drawings of all
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The record
drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction
plans shall be submitted to the municipality.
B. The record drawing submission shall include a certification of
completion signed by a qualified professional verifying that all
permanent SWM BMPs have been constructed according to the
approved plans and specifications. The latitude and longitude
coordinates for all permanent SWM BMPs must also be submitted, at
the central location of the BMPs. If any licensed qualified professionals
contributed to the construction plans, then a licensed qualified
professional must sign the completion certificate.
C. The municipality may conduct inspections during construction as it
deems appropriate. If inspections performed by the municipality reveal
deficiencies from the submitted and approved SWM site plan, the
municipality may request corrective actions. Any corrective action shall
be at the cost of the stormwater facility owner.
D. After receipt of the completion certification by the municipality, the
municipality may conduct a final inspection.
§ 379-23 MUNHALL CODE § 379-24
1:282
ARTICLE V
Operation and Maintenance
§ 379-25. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 379-26. Operation and maintenance agreements.
A. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site
plan. The municipality may require a dedication of such facilities as part
of the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
requirement is not an indication that the municipality will accept the
facilities. The municipality reserves the right to reject or accept the
ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the
stormwater management controls.
B. Facilities, areas, or structures used as SWM BMPs shall be enumerated
as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed
restrictions or conservation easements that run with the land.
C. The O&M plan shall be recorded by the property owner at their expense
as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.
D. The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for
any failure to satisfy the provisions of this article.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall
sign and record an Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Agreement (see
Appendix B) covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be
privately owned.
(1) The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule in the O&M
agreement.
(2) The owner shall convey to the municipality conservation easements
to assure access for periodic inspections by the municipality and
maintenance, as necessary.
(3) The owner shall keep on file with the municipality the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for maintenance activities; in the event of a change,
new information shall be submitted by the owner to the
municipality within 10 working days of the change.
B. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the
SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M Agreement, the
municipality may perform the services required and charge the owner
appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the
property.
§ 379-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-27
1:283
§ 379-27. Performance guarantee.
For SWM site plans that involve subdivision and land development, the
applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the municipality for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and this chapter
in accordance with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and 511 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.93
93.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 379-27 MUNHALL CODE § 379-27
1:284
ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 379-28. General.
A. The municipality may include all costs incurred into the review fee
charged to an applicant.
B. The review fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for the
following:
(1) Administrative/clerical processing.
(2) Review of the SWM site plan.
(3) Review of a SWM site plan resubmission.
(4) Attendance at meetings.
(5) Inspections.
§ 379-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-28
1:285

ARTICLE VII
Prohibitions
§ 379-29. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter a regulated small MS4 or to enter
the surface waters of this commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
small MS4, or discharges into waters of this commonwealth, which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except (1) as provided in
Subsection C below and (2) discharges authorized under a state or
federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution of a regulated small MS4 or to
the waters of this commonwealth:
(1) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
(2) Discharges from potable water sources including water line
flushing and fire hydrant flushing, if such discharges do not contain
detectable concentrations of total residual chlorine (TRC).
(3) Noncontaminated irrigation water, water from lawn maintenance,
landscape drainage and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(4) Diverted stream flows and springs.
(5) Noncontaminated pumped ground water and water from
foundation and footing drains and crawl space pumps.
(6) Noncontaminated HVAC condensation and water from geothermal
systems.
(7) Residential (i.e., not commercial) vehicle wash water where
cleaning agents are not utilized.
(8) Noncontaminated hydrostatic test water discharges, if such
discharges do not contain detectable concentrations of TRC.
(9) Dechlorinated swimming pool and hot tub discharges, as long as
the PADEP guidelines for swimming pool water discharge are
followed.
D. In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants
to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth, the
municipality or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
§ 379-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-30
1:287
§ 379-30. Roof drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative
BMPs wherever feasible.
§ 379-31. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, drainage easements, or structures that were installed as a
requirement of this chapter without the written approval of the municipality.
§ 379-30 MUNHALL CODE § 379-31
1:288
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 379-32. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the municipality or its designated
agent may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the
municipality to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and
facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 379-33. Inspection.
§ 379-34. Enforcement.
§ 379-35. Suspension and revocation.
A. The landowner or the owner's designee (including the municipality for
dedicated and owned facilities) shall inspect SWM BMPs, facilities and/
or structures installed under this chapter according to the following
frequencies, at a minimum, to ensure the BMPs, facilities and/or
structures continue to function as intended:
(1) Annually for the first five years.
(2) Once every three years thereafter.
(3) During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
B. Inspections should be conducted during or immediately following
precipitation events. A written inspection report shall be created to
document each inspection. The inspection report shall contain the date
and time of the inspection, the individual(s) who completed the
inspection, the location of the BMP, facility or structure inspected,
observations on performance, and recommendations for improving
performance, if applicable. Inspection reports shall be submitted to the
municipality within 30 days following completion of the inspection.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically
exempted in § 379-14.
B. It shall be unlawful to violate § 379-31 of this chapter.
C. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a
responsibility of the municipality.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the municipality pursuant to this
chapter may be suspended or revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
§ 379-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-35
1:289
§ 379-36. Violations and penalties.
§ 379-37. Appeals.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the municipality when:
(1) The municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the municipality may provide a limited
time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
municipality will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a
written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner
to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation
within the allowed time period, the municipality may revoke or suspend
any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision
of this chapter.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties
shall be cumulative.
B. In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the
municipality within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality, relevant to
the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the county court of
common pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within
30 days of the municipality's decision.
§ 379-35 MUNHALL CODE § 379-37
1:290
ARTICLE IX
References
§ 379-38. References.
A. U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology,
1969-2001. Originally published as the National Engineering
Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at:
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.
B. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
C. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
D. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-2134-008 (March 31, 2012), as amended and updated. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
E. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Weather Service. Hydrometeorological Design
Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United
States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, Silver Spring, Maryland.
Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
§ 379-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 379-38
1:291
Chapter 385
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 168.
Contractors' hours of work — See Ch. 173,
Art. I.
Grading and excavating — See Ch. 243.
Trees along public ways — See Ch. 408, Art. I.
§ 379-38 MUNHALL CODE § 379-38
1:292
ARTICLE I
Storage of Building Materials on Streets
[Adopted 11-7-1901 by Ord. No. 5; amended in its entirety at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 385-1. Definitions.
§ 385-2. Permit requirements for storage of building materials.
Under special circumstances, where there shall be no other practicable
means for temporary storage, a permit may be granted by the Borough for
the storage of building materials upon a limited portion of the street and/
or sidewalk abutting the property upon which such building materials are
to be used. Such permit shall be established from time to time pursuant to
resolution.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, association, firm
or corporation.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
A. Such permit shall be valid for a limited time, not in excess of five days,
which shall be determined by the Borough on the basis of the scope of
the work being undertaken and the inconvenience to the public
involved, and such time limit shall be stated on the permit. Under
special circumstances, a permit may be extended beyond the original
time limit with approval of the Borough for a fee to be established
pursuant to resolution.
B. The building material shall occupy only such portion of the street and/or
sidewalk specified in the permit.
C. Such building material shall be placed so as not to interfere with
drainage of any street or sidewalk or with access to any fire hydrant.
D. Such building material shall be arranged in a regular, neat, compact
form so as to occupy a minimum of space and present the least risk of
falling, sliding or scattering.
E. The holder of such permit shall be liable for all damages, losses, costs
or expenses that are or may be considered by reason of the placing or
storage of such material upon the street or sidewalk.
F. The holder of such permit shall be responsible for placing barriers,
guards and warning lights in the vicinity of or around such material so
as to prevent injury to persons and property.
G. On or before the date of expiration of such permit, all such material
shall be removed from the street and/or sidewalk, and the street and/or
§ 385-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-2
1:293
§ 385-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of
Munhall plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
sidewalk shall be restored to the condition in which it was immediately
prior to such storage, in default of which the Borough may cause such
material to be removed and placed upon the property where such
material is to be used, with the expense of such removal payable by the
holder of such permit and collected in any manner provided by law.
§ 385-2 MUNHALL CODE § 385-3
1:294
ARTICLE II
Driving Vehicles Over Curbs and Sidewalks
[Adopted 5-13-1903 by Ord. No. 18; amended in its entirety at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 385-4. Procedure for driving on curbs or sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to drive
or cause to be driven any vehicle on, over and across any curb or sidewalk
before first obtaining permission of the abutting property owner and the
placing of a proper platform, covering or other device for the protection of
the sidewalk and curb.
§ 385-5. Report required of damage to curbs or sidewalks.
Any depression, break or damage caused to any curb or sidewalk by any
vehicle or by any other agency shall be reported to the Borough within 24
hours after the damage has occurred, and emergency repairs must be made
by the property owner, tenant or agent within 48 hours after such report.
§ 385-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of
Munhall plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 385-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-6
1:295

ARTICLE III
Street Openings
[Adopted 11-21-2001 by Ord. No. 1472]
§ 385-7. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Street Opening Ordinance."
§ 385-8. Permit required.
Hereinafter, it shall be unlawful to open or excavate in any street, alley,
road, sidewalk or highway of the Borough, or cause the same to be done,
for the purpose of laying or relaying or repairing any gas, water, sewer,
oil and other piping, electric light, telephone, television, telegraph, heating
or other conduits, including the making of house or service connections
therewith, or for the purpose of erecting or removing any poles to which
shall be or are attached telegraph, telephone, television, electric light,
street railway or guy wires or for any other purpose whatsoever, except
driveway access curb cuts, without first securing a permit from the Borough
in accordance with this article.
§ 385-9. Permit application.
Any person or entity who shall desire to make any opening or excavation
in any of the Borough streets is required to file an application with the
Borough Secretary. The application shall be provided by the Borough and
shall include the name of the applicant, the exact location of the proposed
opening or excavation and the approximate size or depth thereof, the date
or dates during which such opening is to be permitted and the date and
time the opening is to be refilled and resurfaced. The application shall
contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that the work shall
be done in a careful and prudent manner and in full compliance with
the ordinances of the Borough and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and the applicant shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless
the Borough of Munhall and its agents, servants and employees against
any and all actions, suits, demands, payments, costs and charges for or by
reason of the proposed opening or excavation and all damages to person or
property resulting in any manner therefrom, or occurring in the prosecution
of the work connected therewith, or from any other matter, cause or thing
relating thereto. All applications for permits shall supply a plan or sketch
indicating the nature, location and dimensions of the proposed opening for
the installation of the new work or modifications. The plan shall indicate the
final location of any conduits, pipes, lines, connections and property.
§ 385-10. Insurance and bond required.
A. No person or entity shall open or excavate any street or alley without
first posting bond or security with the Borough with a trust or surety
company acceptable to the Borough as surety, in the sum determined by
the schedule of fees, conditioned for the faithful performance of the
§ 385-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-10
1:297
obligations of this article and for any and all damages, claims, demands,
suits, costs and counsel fees occasioned or arising from the opening,
excavation or closing of said streets and alleys.
(1) Liability insurance. Prior to issuance of a permit, the applicant shall
provide the Borough of Munhall with a certificate of comprehensive
liability insurance for public liability and property damage with
limits of no less than $1,000,000 per accident and issued by an
insurance company approved by the Borough of Munhall.
(2) Bond for restoration, repairs and payment of all engineering,
inspection and legal fees. In addition to the requirements of
Subsection A(1) hereof, as a guarantee of good faith in repairing or
restoring the surface of any street, road, alley or highway opened
and payment of all fees required by this article, a bond of an
approved surety company, deposit of cash or certified check for
such guarantee shall be made in the name of the Borough and
deposited with the Borough Manager, based upon the following
rates:
(a) A total amount in a sum based upon an amount as set by
resolution of Borough Council per square foot of surface to be
opened in the case of any unimproved street, road, alley or
highway of the Borough.94
(b) A total amount in a sum based upon an amount as set by
resolution of Borough Council per square foot of surface to be
opened in the case of any concrete, bituminous, brick or
otherwise permanently improved surface of any street, road,
alley, sidewalk or highway of the Borough or, in lieu thereof,
the actual cost of repair.95
(c) The basis of measurement of street and surface openings shall
be the actual square feet of paving or surfacing necessary to
completely repair the street surface at such opening. All
opening and excavations shall be measured by the Borough
Engineer, and such measurement shall be final and conclusive.
B. Such bond, deposit of cash or certified check, so deposited with the
Borough Manager, shall be turned over to the proper Borough authority
as Council may, by motion, direct and shall be retained for two years
from the date of the final restoration of the opening. In the event the
restoration of the surface of the excavated street, road, alley or
highway is deemed to be improper, faulty, defective or not done at all,
then, in any such case, the permittee shall be given 10 days' written
notice by the Borough to make such repair or restoration as the
Borough deems proper and, upon the failure of the permittee to do so,
the Borough may make such repair or restoration forthwith and charge
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 385-10 MUNHALL CODE § 385-10
1:298
§ 385-11. Permit fees.
Prior to the issuance of any permit to open or excavate any street in the
Borough of Munhall, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in the amount
fixed.
§ 385-12. Restricted issuance of permits.
Permits shall be issued only to persons furnishing public utility services or
the owner or owners of the real property adjoining the location where such
opening or excavation is to be made.
§ 385-13. Permit approval.
A permit may be issued to the applicant after all the requirements therefor
have been filled. If the application is disapproved, written notice of
disapproval, together with reasons therefor, shall be given to the applicant.
or deduct the cost of the same against the bond, deposit of cash or
certified check of the permittee. At the expiration of the two years,
the Borough shall return or refund to the permittee his bond, deposit
of cash or certified check, or any portion of the same to which he is
entitled.
A. At the time of applying for the permit, the applicant shall pay to the
Borough of Munhall a permit fee in an amount to be established, from
time to time, by resolution of Borough Council.96
B. A separate permit application and accompanying fee shall be required
for each street, alley, road, highway, sidewalk, or portion thereof, within
which opening(s) or excavation(s) are proposed.
C. All permits shall expire in six months from the date of issuance, unless
extended by the Borough in its sole discretion.
D. All work under the authority of any permit shall be inspected by the
Borough Engineer and/or Inspector. The Borough of Munhall shall be
given a minimum of 24 hours' advance notice of completion of any work
conducted pursuant to this article for inspection purposes. All
applicants shall be solely responsible for all engineering, inspection and
legal fees associated with such inspection. All such bills received by the
applicant shall be due and payable within 30 days of the date of
issuance. No applicant shall be eligible for additional permits if a bill
issued pursuant to this section is overdue.
E. If an applicant secures a permit for work to be performed in an area
where a parking meter stall or stalls will be unavailable for public use,
the applicant shall be required to make restitution to the Borough in the
full amount of lost parking meter revenue based on one-hundredpercent
occupancy of the parking meter stall or stalls.
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 385-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-14
1:299
§ 385-14. Display permit.
If a permit is required under the provisions of this article, then a copy of the
permit, attested by the proper Borough officer, shall be kept at all times on
the job during the continuance of operations by those performing the work,
otherwise the work may be stopped at the direction of the police or other
officers of the Borough until such a permit is produced.
§ 385-15. Work requirements. [Amended 5-16-2012 by Ord. No.
1558]
§ 385-16. Precautionary requirements and measures.
A. All surfaces which are opened subject to this article shall be restored in
accordance with the Paved Surface Restoration Specification Drawing
No. 1, which is attached hereto and made a part hereof.97
B. Any materials and construction methods employed shall conform to
both the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Specifications Publication 408, current edition, and as it may be
amended from time to time, and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Standards for Roadway Construction,
Series RC-1M to 100M, current edition, and as it may be amended from
time to time. Both publications are incorporated into and made a part of
this article.
C. If there is a conflict in interpretation between any of the three sources
above described, the one setting the most stringent obligations shall
govern.
D. A limited exception is hereby created applicable only to Munhall
Borough residential property owners who occupy a house in Munhall
Borough as their primary residence which is the subject of and related
to the restoration work under this article. In this limited circumstance
and this limited exception, all such restoration and repairs under this
article shall be made in accordance with and subject to final approval in
the sole discretion of the Borough Engineer who shall apply those
applicable and relevant engineering standards to such restoration work
which are approved by Munhall Borough Council from time to time.
A. Any permittee under this article and those operating with and under
him shall at all times be required to adequately support the surface of
the highway under which they are tunneling, the use of which highway
is permitted by the public, and to take all precautions necessary to
prevent injury or damage to the public. If, in the opinion of the Borough,
it becomes necessary for the safety of the public to have open trench
excavation in lieu of tunneling on openings or excavations at
approximately right angles to the center line of the street or highway,
97.Editor's Note: Said Paved Surface Restoration Specification Drawing is included at the end
of this chapter.
§ 385-14 MUNHALL CODE § 385-16
1:300
§ 385-17. Correction of unsatisfactory work.
In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder shall, in
the opinion of the Borough Inspector, be unsatisfactory and the same shall
not be corrected in accordance with his instructions within the time fixed
by him, or in the event that the work for which the permit was granted is
not completed within the time fixed by the Borough Inspector, the Borough
of Munhall may proceed to correct such unsatisfactory work or complete
any such work not completed and charge the cost thereof, plus 10%, to the
applicant.
§ 385-18. Emergency opening.
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe,
line, construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning
or responsible for such pipe, line, construction or apparatus to commence
an excavation to remedy such condition before securing a permit, provided
that application for a permit shall be made immediately and not later
than the next business day thereafter and that all other provisions of this
then the same shall be required of the permittee and those operating
with and under him. The Borough Engineer may add requirements
necessary for the public safety. During the making of any excavation,
every necessary and reasonable precaution shall be taken by the
applicant and those operating with and under him to keep the roadway
in a safe and passable condition both by day and by night.
B. Any and every opening or excavation in an unimproved roadway shall
be carefully refilled with modified 2A limestone and thoroughly
compacted, and the roadway shall be restored to as good a condition as
originally. In the case of excavations in improved highways, the earth
removed shall be replaced with modified 2A limestone and thoroughly
compacted, and then the brick, concrete, bituminous or other hard
surface shall be replaced with the same type of material in as good a
condition as possible. The applicant shall notify the Borough Inspector
when the opening or excavation is ready for backfilling and before any
backfilling is done, when backfilling work is completed, when
temporary paving has been installed and when the street has been
permanently restored so that inspections may be made.
C. Any permitted opening or excavation shall be protected by a suitable
barricade during the daylight and a barricade with lights at night so
long as the excavation remains open.
D. All permits granted herewith are granted under and subject to the
condition that the person to whom the same is issued shall indemnify,
save and keep harmless the Borough and its agents, servants and
employees from any loss in damages or otherwise which may or shall be
occasioned at any time by the said excavation or by any leak, explosion
or other injury from any pipe, apparatus, conduit or any other matter
placed in the said excavation.
§ 385-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-18
1:301
article are fully complied with. If any such emergency condition shall not
be immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for such
emergency, then the Borough, after such notice as it shall deem necessary
under the circumstances of the particular case, shall proceed to do the work
made necessary by such emergency and charge the same on the basis of
cost plus 10% to such owner or person.
§ 385-19. Restrictions regarding trees.
The permittee or its contractors do not have the right to cut, remove
or destroy trees or shrubbery within the legal right-of-way, except under
specifications, regulations and conditions as the Borough may prescribe.
§ 385-20. Permittee responsibilities.
If at any time in the future the roadway is widened, reconstructed or the
alignment or grades are changed, the permittee further agrees to change
or relocate all or any part of the structures covered by this permit which
interfere with the improvement of the roadway at his own cost and expense.
§ 385-21. Payment for work done.
Payment for all work done by the Borough under the provisions hereof
shall be made by the person made liable therefor under the provisions
hereof within 30 days after a bill therefor is sent to such person by the
Borough. Upon failure to pay such charges within such time, the same shall
be collectible by the Borough by an action in assumpsit or in the manner
provided by law for the collection of municipal claims.
§ 385-22. Refilling of opening or excavation; restoration of surface;
responsibility for defects occurring within two years.
Any person who shall open or excavate any street in the Borough shall
thoroughly and completely refill the opening or excavation in such a manner
as to prevent any settling thereafter, and shall restore the surface to the
same condition as it was before the opening or excavation in such a manner
as to prevent any settling thereafter, and shall restore the surface to the
same condition as it was before the opening or excavation, and such
restoration shall be in accordance with the specifications of the Department
of Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which are hereby
adopted as specifications of the Borough for restoration of surfaces of
streets in the Borough, as restored; the surface shall conform to the proper
grade and be of the same surface covering as the part of the thoroughfare
immediately adjoining the opening. If within two years after the restoration
of the surface as herein provided defects shall appear therein, the applicant
shall reimburse the Borough for the cost of all necessary repairs to the
permanent paving, plus 10%.
§ 385-18 MUNHALL CODE § 385-23
1:302
§ 385-23. Work necessitating opening.
The Borough Inspector shall give timely notice to all persons owning
property abutting on any street within the Borough about to be paved
or improved and to all public utility companies operating in the Borough,
and all such persons and utility companies shall make all water, gas or
sewer connections, as well as any repairs thereto, which would necessitate
excavation of the said street within 30 days from the giving of such notice,
unless such time is extended, in writing, for cause shown by the Borough
Inspector. New paving shall not be opened or excavated for a period of
five years after the completion thereof, except in case of emergency, the
existence of which emergency and the necessity for the opening or
excavating of such paving to be determined by the Borough Inspector. If
it is sought to excavate upon or open a street within five years after the
completion of the paving, the applicant shall make written application to the
Borough Council, and a permit for such opening shall be issued only after
express approval of the Borough Council.
§ 385-24. Violations and penalties.98
Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent or employee,
violating or assisting in the violation of any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of Munhall
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues or each section of this article which shall be found to have been
violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 385-25. Amendment.
The fees established by this article may henceforth be modified by simple
resolution of Munhall Borough Council.
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 385-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-25
1:303

ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 4-21-2010 by Ord. No. 1544]
§ 385-26. Responsibility to clear sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity owning, possessing, maintaining
or occupying any property along any public street or alleyway within the
Borough of Munhall to fail to remove from the sidewalk abutting said
property all snow and ice within 24 hours after the same shall have ceased
to fall and/or accumulate thereon and to keep said sidewalks free and clear
of all snow and ice thereafter.
§ 385-27. Placement of snow and ice on public streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity owning, possessing, maintaining
or occupying any property along any public street or alleyway within the
Borough of Munhall, in removing said snow and ice as set forth in § 385-26
hereof, to deposit same on the traveled cartway or surface of any dedicated
public street or alleyway within the Borough of Munhall.
§ 385-28. Fire hydrants to be kept clear.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity owning, possessing, maintaining
or occupying any property along any public street or alleyway within the
Borough of Munhall, in removing said snow and ice as set forth in § 385-26
hereof, to deposit same in such a manner as to obscure the visibility of any
fire hydrant or obstruct or impede access to any fire hydrant.
§ 385-29. Parking restriction.
In order to aid and allow for the Borough of Munhall to clear the public
streets and alleyways of snow, it is hereby ordained and mandated that any
person in the Borough of Munhall that has access to or use of a driveway
or garage must move his or her vehicle off of the public street or alleyway
and onto a driveway or into a garage within two hours of the occurrence
of any snowfall accumulation that exceeds two inches. Said restriction shall
remain until Munhall Borough shall have had reasonable opportunity to
plow or otherwise remove the snow which has accumulated.
§ 385-30. Violations and penalties.99
Any person who is found to be in violation of this article shall be subject to a
fine as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the
Borough of Munhall for each violation.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 385-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-30
1:305
Chapter 389
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 49.
Construction codes — See Ch. 168.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 227.
Grading and excavation — See Ch. 243.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 291.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 350.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 379.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 385.
Trees — See Ch. 408
Zoning — See Ch. 440.
§ 385-30 MUNHALL CODE § 385-30
1:306
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 389-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Munhall
Subdivision Regulations."
§ 389-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To assure harmonious and orderly development and thereby promote
the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the Borough of
Munhall.
B. To ensure integration of subdivision plans with the various elements of
the Munhall Comprehensive Plan.100
C. To secure equitable treatment of all subdivision plans by providing for
uniform procedures and standards for the observance of all
subdividers, Planning Commission and the Borough.101
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
101. Editor's Note: Original § 103, Application of regulations, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 389-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-2
1:307

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 389-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
§ 389-4. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in this section:
ALLEY — A minor public way, having a right-of-way width between property
lines of 20 feet, for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties
otherwise abutting on a street.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.102
BLOCK — An area bounded by existing or proposed streets.
BUILDING — Any structure intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure
of persons, animals or any other property.
BUILDING LINE or SETBACK LINE — A line parallel to a street or alley.
Between such line and the street or alley right-of-way line, no buildings
or structures may project, except steps, uncovered porches or terraces not
exceeding 30 inches in height.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street or alley intended for vehicular use.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of street center lines.
COLLECTOR STREET — See "street, collector."
A. The present tense includes the future tense.
B. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, company or corporation as well as an individual.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
D. The word "lot" includes the words "plot," piece" and "parcel."
E. The word "building" includes all structures, or parts thereof, affixed to
the land.
102. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 389-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-4
1:309
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public
facilities.103
COMPLETION GUARANTEE — A deposit of cash, bond, certified check or
negotiable securities and an agreement to the effect that the subdivider will
install required improvements.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A plan, which may consist of several maps, data
and other descriptive matter, as may be adopted, altered or revised from
time to time by the Planning Commission for guiding the orderly physical
development of the Borough or any portion thereof, including the general
locations for streets, parks or other public open spaces, public utilities,
schools and other facilities.104
CROSSWALK — A public right-of-way having a width of 10 feet or more
within a block, intended for pedestrian use, and from which motor vehicles
are excluded.
CUL-DE-SAC — A dead-end street designed to be so permanently, with a
suitable vehicular turnaround at the closed end.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.105
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development; a plat of subdivision; all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures; intensity
of use or density of development; streets, ways and parking facilities;
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of
development plan," when used in this chapter, shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.106
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream
or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of
water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof, but not a mobile home or
trailer, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including
one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings,
but not including hotels or lodging houses.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building or portion thereof containing
two or more dwelling units.
103. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
105. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
The original definition of "development" was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I).
106. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 389-4 MUNHALL CODE § 389-4
1:310
EASEMENT — A grant by the owner of land for the use of others, including
the public.
FILING, PLAT — A plat shall be deemed to be filed with the Planning
Commission or the Borough Council, as the case may be, when it has been
received and properly receipted by the Building Inspector. The Building
Inspector may refuse to receive a plat if the procedures under Article III
of this chapter have not been fully observed. The Building Inspector shall
transmit plats to the official bodies concerned.
IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC — Any or all of the following: grading, paving,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, waterlines, sanitary and storm sewer lines and
structures, drainage channels and structures, curb returns, sidewalk and
driveway entrances within rights-of-way, guardrails, traffic signals and
devices, streetlights, retaining walls, sodding and planting.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:107
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure.
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park;
for the purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is defined
as a tract or area used principally as a location for permanent
amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to
newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans
(3)
C.
107. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 389-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-4
1:311
LOCAL STREET — A street which is used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.108
LOT DEPTH — The distance between straight lines connecting front and
rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the
required front yard; provided, however, that the width between side lot lines
at their foremost points (where they intersect with street lines) shall not
be less than 80% of the required lot width except in the case of lots on
the turning circle of culs-de-sac or curved streets, where the eighty-percent
requirement shall not apply.
MAJOR STREET — A street which is used primarily for fast or heavy traffic
of an intercommunity nature and including state highways and turnpikes.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A local street which is adjacent to a major
street and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from
through traffic.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.109
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erections thereon of a single mobile home.110
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.111
PLAT — A plan or map which shows the proposed layout of the subdivision.
PLAT FILING — See "filing, plat."
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — A preliminary map indicating the proposed
subdivision which is submitted to the Borough Planning Commission for
advice and direction.
for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
109. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
110. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
111. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
The original definition of "owner," which immediately followed this definition, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 389-4 MUNHALL CODE § 389-4
1:312
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — See "improvements, public."
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:112
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Borough Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain
public comment prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.113
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84),114 known as the "Sunshine Act."115
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.116
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing
made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to
any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination.
All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall
not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or agency, nor shall
any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used, received or considered by the
body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision shall
be made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to
any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost
of reproduction.117
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved for use as a street, alley, crosswalk or for
other public purpose.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The maximum distance of unobstructed vision, in a
horizontal or vertical plane, along a street from a vehicle located at any
given point on the street, which shall take into account the visibility over
a crest vertical curve and the extent of headlight illumination across a sag
vertical curve.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas.
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities.
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
112. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
113. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
114. Editor's Note: The Sunshine Act, 65 P.S. § 271 et seq., 1986, July 3, P.L. 388, No. 84, was
repealed 10-15-1998 by P.L. 729, No. 93; see now the Sunshine Act, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et
seq.
115. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
116. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
117. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 389-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-4
1:313
STREET — A public way, having a right-of-way of no less than 50 feet
between property lines, for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, whether
designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
turnpike, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, way, or however otherwise
designated.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street which carries traffic from local streets to
the major streets, including the principal entrance streets of a residential
development and streets for circulation within such a development.
STREET, LOCAL — See "local street."
STREET, MAJOR — See "major street."
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS — See "marginal access street."
STREET, PARTIAL OR HALF — A street, generally parallel and adjacent
to a property line, having a lesser right-of-way than normally required for
satisfactory improvement and use of the street.
STREET, PUBLIC — A street accepted for public improvement and
maintenance whether by borough, county or state governments.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person who undertakes the subdivision of land, as
defined herein. A subdivider shall be an owner or authorized agent of the
owner of the land to be subdivided.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.118
WATERCOURSE — Channel, creek, ditch, drain, dry run, spring or stream.
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 389-4 MUNHALL CODE § 389-4
1:314
ARTICLE III
Procedure for Submission of Plats
§ 389-5. Responsibilities of subdivider and Planning Commission.
§ 389-6. Preapplication procedure.
§ 389-7. Procedure for approval of preliminary plat.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to become familiar with
the subdivision regulations contained herein; to consult with the
Planning Commission, other Borough officials, and public utility people
on the availability of services and facilities in the area to be subdivided;
and to discuss the subdivision proposals with potentially interested
parties, such as lending and mortgage insurance institutions, in order
to determine what part of the market demand should be served and the
subdivision plan which would be the most advantageous to the
development of the Borough as well as to the subdivider.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Planning Commission to discourage
premature development and developments in unsuitable areas that are
inaccessible or hazardous or lack services. The Planning Commission
shall also encourage replatting of dead subdivisions and coordinating
the platting of small adjacent land.
A. Previous to filing of an application for approval of the preliminary plan,
the subdivider may submit to the Planning Commission sketch plans
and data as specified in § 389-24 of this chapter.
B. The Planning Commission shall review the sketch plans and data at its
next regular meeting, provided the above information is submitted to
the Planning Commission at least 10 days before the meeting date.
C. Within 14 days after the above-mentioned meeting, the Planning
Commission shall inform the subdivider whether or not the sketch plans
and data, as submitted, meet the objectives of this chapter. The
Planning Commission shall make suitable recommendations for
modification and improvements of such plans and data and shall return
such plans and data to the subdivider.
A. The subdivider shall have a preliminary plat prepared, together with
improvement plans and other supplementary material as specified in
§ 389-25 of this chapter.
B. Five copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material
specified herein shall be submitted to the Planning Commission,
together with a written application for approval, at least 10 days prior
to the meeting at which it is to be considered.
C. Following review of the preliminary plat and other material submitted
for conformity to the regulations contained herein and negotiations
with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the amount and
§ 389-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-7
1:315
§ 389-8. Procedure for approval of final plat.
extent of improvements to be made by him, the Planning Commission
shall, within 30 days, act thereon as submitted or modified, and if
approved, the Planning Commission shall express its approval as
approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if
disapproved, shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor, in
writing. The writing shall be communicated to the subdivider personally
or mailed to him at his last known address not later than 15 days
following the decision. When the application is not approved in terms as
filed, the decision shall specify the defects found in the application and
describe the requirements which have not been met and shall, in each
case, cite the provisions of the statute, ordinance, law or this chapter
relied on.119
D. The action of the Planning Commission shall be noted on three copies of
the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions
determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one copy
shall be retained by the Planning Commission, and the third copy shall
be submitted to the Borough Engineer.
E. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final
plat. Rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval to the layout
submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the
final plat, which shall be submitted for approval of the Planning
Commission.
F. The approval of a preliminary plat shall be deemed to have lapsed
unless an application for final approval of at least part of the
preliminary plat is made within one year of tentative approval.
A. The subdivider shall have prepared a final plat, which shall conform
substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, together with
improvement plans and other material as specified in § 389-26 of this
chapter. The final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved
preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at this time;
provided, however, that such portion conforms to all the requirements
contained herein.
B. The final plat and other material required for approval, together with a
written application for approval, shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission at least 10 days prior to the meeting at which it is to be
considered.
C. If the final plat is disapproved by the Planning Commission, the reasons
therefor shall be stated in writing, under the same conditions as a
preliminary plat, to the subdivider. Any person aggrieved by the
decision of the Planning Commission shall be represented at such
meeting and produce the plats and data being appealed. When it has
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 389-7 MUNHALL CODE § 389-8
1:316
§ 389-9. Fees.
approved a final plat, the Planning Commission shall submit such plat
to the Borough Council for its consideration.120
D. The Borough Council shall approve, with or without modifications, or
disapprove the final plat within 45 days of approval by the Planning
Commission; if the final plat is disapproved by the Borough Council, the
reasons therefor shall be stated in writing to the subdivider, either
personally or mailed to him at his last known address, not later than 15
days following the decision.121
E. The final plat, after the approval of the Planning Commission and the
Borough Council, shall be submitted to the Allegheny County Planning
Commission for its approval and in accordance with its regulations.
F. Failure of the Borough Council to render a decision and communicate it
to the applicant within the time and in the manner required herein shall
be deemed an approval of the application in terms as presented unless
the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in
the prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the
decision, in which case, failure to meet the extended time or change in
manner of presentation of communication shall have like effect.122
A. To cover the costs of reviewing plats, processing applications, and other
expenses incidental to the approval of a subdivision, the subdivider
shall pay a fee, in an amount as established from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council, at the time of application for approval of
a preliminary plan, said fee to be payable to the Borough of Munhall.
When the application for approval of a preliminary plat is forwarded to
the Planning Commission, it shall be accompanied by a receipt that this
fee has been paid.123
B. To cover the costs of holding any required public hearings; the checking
of maps, plans, specifications, and any other engineering data; the
inspection and engineering supervision of construction; and other
miscellaneous expenses incidental to the construction and final
approval of a subdivision or other construction project, the subdivider
or developer shall deposit to an escrow fund established for this
purpose a sum of money in the amount of 2% of the estimated or
contract cost of those portions of the project included under site
development and improvement, except that the minimum payment
permissible for this purpose shall be in an amount as established from
time to time by resolution of Borough Council. Should expenses
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I);
original Subsection 7, which pertained to filing of final plats and which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 389-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-9
1:317
§ 389-10. Recording plats and deeds.126
§ 389-11. Effect of plat approval on Official Map.127
After a plat has been approved and recorded as provided in this chapter, all
streets and public grounds on such plat shall be and become a part of the
Official Map of the Borough without public hearing.
incurred by the Borough exceed the amount of the escrow deposit
at any time during construction, a further deposit shall be required
before final approval and acceptance of the project. Any funds left in
the deposit upon final approval and acceptance shall be returned to the
developer.124
C. When the application for final approval is forwarded to the Planning
Commission or Borough Council, it shall be accompanied by a receipt
that these fees have been paid.
D. If the subdivider fails to apply for final approval of the subdivision
within 12 months, the fee for any portion thereof shall not be
refunded.125
A. Upon the approval of a final plat, the developer shall, within 90 days of
such final approval or 90 days after the date of delivery of an approved
plat signed by Council following completion of conditions imposed for
such approval, whichever is later, record such plat in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County. The Recorder of Deeds shall
not accept any plat for recording unless such plat officially notes the
approval of the Council and review by the County Planning
Commission.
B. The recording of the plat shall not constitute grounds for assessment
increases until such time as lots are sold or improvements are installed
on the land included within the subject plat.
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
125. Editor's Note: Original § 306, Issuance of building and occupancy permits, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
126. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
127. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 389-9 MUNHALL CODE § 389-11
1:318
ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 389-12. General standards.
§ 389-13. Street layout.
A. The layout of any subdivision in the Borough of Munhall shall be in
accordance with the Borough Comprehensive Plan and Chapter 440,
Zoning. The type of development shall be appropriate for the location,
and the street pattern shall tie in with the overall street and highway
plan of the Borough.
B. Where a proposed park, playground or other public use shown on the
master plan is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the Planning
Commission may require the dedication or reservation of such area
within the subdivision in those cases in which the Planning Commission
deems such requirements to be reasonable.
C. Land which the Planning Commission has found to be unsuitable for
subdivision due to flooding, bad drainage, and other features likely to
be harmful to the safety, welfare and general health of the future
residents, and which the Planning Commission considers inappropriate
for subdivision, shall not be subdivided unless adequate methods to
eliminate these hazards are formulated by the developer and approved
by the Borough Engineer and the Planning Commission.
A. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
streets shall conform to the Borough's Comprehensive Plan and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to
topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by
such streets. Where not shown on the Comprehensive Plan or on the
Official Map of the Borough, the arrangement and other design
standards of streets shall conform to the provisions found herein.
B. In general, all streets shall be continuous and in alignment with existing
streets and shall compose a convenient system to ensure circulation of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic, with the exception that local streets
may be so laid out, including the use of loop streets and culs-de-sac,
where made necessary by topographic conditions, and their use by
through traffic will be discouraged.
C. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major
street, the Planning Commission may require marginal access streets in
order to protect residential areas from heavy traffic and also to provide
separation between local and through traffic.
D. New half or partial streets will not be permitted. Wherever a tract to be
subdivided borders an existing half or partial street, the other part of
the street shall be platted within such tract.
§ 389-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-13
1:319
E. Culs-de-sac shall not exceed 600 feet in length, as measured from the
center line of the intersecting street to the center of its circular
turnaround, and shall furnish access to not more than 20 dwelling units.
F. The terminus of a cul-de-sac shall be a circular turnaround having a
minimum radius to the outside edge of the paving or curb of 40 feet and
a right-of-way having a minimum radius of 50 feet.
G. Every subdivision shall have access to a paved public street.
H. Where a railroad abuts or extends through any portion of a subdivision,
provision shall be made for overpasses or underpasses acceptable to
the Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission; streets paralleling any
railroad shall be separated therefrom by a buffer strip of at least 50 feet
in depth, and if such buffer strip is composed of residential lots, such
lots shall be at least 150 feet in depth.
I. Local streets are intended to serve primarily the abutting properties
and shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic, for which
purpose loop streets and culs-de-sac may be used.
J. Collector streets are intended to carry traffic from residential areas to
major streets, county, state and federal highways.
K. Major streets are intended for use by heavy through traffic and as
connections to and between county, state and federal highways and
major urbanized areas.
L. Marginal access streets are intended to provide access by local traffic
to properties adjoining major streets without interfering with through
traffic.
M. Alleys are intended to provide secondary access to business and
industrial properties for deliveries. Alleys may be permitted under
special circumstances in residential areas but in no case shall an alley
provide the only means of access to a lot.
N. Crosswalks are intended to provide pedestrian circulation through
large blocks or in developments where it is desired to separate
pedestrian from vehicular traffic.
O. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles; no street shall intersect another at less than 60°.
P. Intersections of more than two streets shall be avoided. Where this
proves impossible, such intersections shall be designed with care for
safety, and suitable curbs, barriers, signs and other devices may be
required.
Q. Clear sight triangles whose adjacent and opposite sides shall each be
measured 100 feet along street center line from their point of junction
at all intersections; no buildings or obstruction to vision shall be
§ 389-13 MUNHALL CODE § 389-13
1:320
§ 389-14. Street design. [Amended 3-18-1993 by Ord. No. 1357;
6-16-1993 by Ord. No. 1361]
permitted within such sight triangles unless clearly impossible because
of existing topography.
R. Streets shall have a grade not to exceed 4% for a distance within 25 feet
of the street right-of-way line at any intersection transverse.
S. Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out either
directly opposite one another or else shall have a minimum offset of 150
feet between their center lines.
T. Intersections with major streets shall be located not less than 400 feet
apart between their center lines.
U. Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of 5°, connection shall be
by horizontal curves.
V. Alleys shall not be constructed in any new subdivision but may only be
constructed when they are a natural continuation of an alley already
partially open and in use, in which case they shall be ended within a
continuing distance of 300 feet.
W. The proposed name of the subdivision and proposed street names shall
not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the names of any
other subdivision or street in the Borough of Munhall. Street names
shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission.
A. Width, grade alignment, construction and improvement for each street
in a proposed subdivision shall conform to the standards established in
the following table:
Minimum Improvement Standards for Public Ways
Major Collector Local
Marginal
Access Alley Crosswalk
Residential Districts
Right-of-way
width (feet)
90 60 50 40 20 10
Paving width
(feet)
36 36 28 20 16 6
Business Districts
Right-of-way
width (feet)
90 80 — 60 20 10
Paving width
(feet)
44 40 — 36 20 —
Industrial Districts
Right-of-way
width (feet)
— 60 50 40 20 10
§ 389-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-14
1:321
Minimum Improvement Standards for Public Ways
Major Collector Local
Marginal
Access Alley Crosswalk
Paving width
(feet)
— 36 36 24 20 6
All Districts
Minimum sight
distance (feet)
550 350 200 200 100 —
Minimum
center-line
radius (feet)
650 400 200 200 200 —
Maximum
grade
(percent)
7% 10% 12% 10% 12% —
Minimum
grade:
Without
curbs
(percent)
1% 1% 1% 1% 1% —
With curbs
(percent)
1% 1% 1% 1% 1% —
B. The entire right-of-way of each street in a proposed subdivision shall be
graded, and there shall be installed paving, drainage structures, curbs
and gutters and sidewalks in accordance with the appropriate
standards for the class of street, with the exception that the standards
of the high-density residential area may be used in a low-density
residential area.
C. Minimum curb or pavement-edge radii at street intersections shall be
25 feet for intersections of a local street with another local street or a
local street with a collector street or a local street with an alley; 30 feet
for other intersections, or such greater radius as is suitable to the
specific intersection.
D. Where the grade of the street is above or below the grade of the
adjacent land, walls or slopes shall be constructed in a manner
satisfactory to the Borough Engineer and shall be sufficient to support
the street or the adjacent land, as the case may be.
E. Where the grade of the street is three feet or more above the grade of
the adjacent land, guardrails shall be built which shall be satisfactory to
the Borough Engineer.
F. Street shoulders shall be constructed with suitable materials from
roadway or structure excavation supplemented by additional suitable
material, if directed, from borrow excavation; the entire shoulder area
§ 389-14 MUNHALL CODE § 389-14
1:322
§ 389-15. Storm drainage.
shall be uniformly and thoroughly compacted by rolling as directed by
the Borough Engineer.
G. The outside edge of sidewalks shall be placed one foot from the street
right-of-way lines; except for business streets, where the sidewalk shall
occupy the full width between the curb and the street right-of-way lines.
H. Embankments at the sides of streets and cross sections of drainage
ditches shall not exceed a maximum slope of one foot horizontally to
one foot vertically in a cut section; and 1 1/2 feet horizontally to one
foot vertically in a fill section; in special cases the Borough Engineer
may require more rigid standards.
I. Means of ingress and egress for vehicles to and from each lot or parcel
shall be shown on the plans for installation in accordance with existing
Borough regulations for depressed curbs and driveways across
sidewalks.
J. Bituminous or macadam streets shall crown at the center line to a slope
of 1/4 inch to one foot; concrete streets shall crown at the center line to
a slope of 1/8 inch per foot; alleys shall be dished to the center line at a
slope of 1/4 inch per foot for bituminous or macadam paving and 1/8
inch per foot for concrete paving.
K. Standards for construction.
(1) All streets, curbs, sidewalks, sanitary sewers and storm drainage
facilities shall be constructed conforming to and in accordance with
the Standards for Construction Specifications, prepared by
Planning Development Associates (January 1993).
(2) All streets, curbs, sidewalks, sanitary sewers and storm drainage
facilities along Main Street from its intersection with Miller Avenue
to its intersection with McKinley and Cambria Streets and along
McWhinney Street from its intersection with Main Street to its
intersection with Caroline Street shall be constructed conforming
to and in accordance with Construction Standards prepared by
John C. Laatsch and Associates, dated February 24, 1993.
A. Suitable drainage structures, culverts, storm sewers, ditches and
related installations, shall be provided to ensure adequate drainage of
all low points along the line of streets and to intervals reasonably
related to the extent and grade of the area drained.
B. In the design of storm sewerage installations, special consideration
shall be given to the avoidance of problems which may arise from
concentration of stormwater over adjacent properties.
C. Where a natural watercourse is retained as a drainage channel, an
appropriate right-of-way not less than 20 feet shall be provided.
§ 389-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-15
1:323
§ 389-16. Land, block and lot requirements.
D. Provision for storm drainage and the design and installation of drainage
structures shall be acceptable to the Borough Engineer.
E. Drainage ditches or channels within street rights-of-way shall be
installed with a consideration for traffic safety; no such ditch or channel
shall be installed at an elevation more than three feet below the
elevation of the adjacent street paving edge.
F. Drainage ditches or channels shall have a minimum gradient of 1%.
A. Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided,
whether for residential, business or industrial use.
B. Land unsuited for development which would entail hazards to life,
health or property or would be uneconomic to provide with public
services shall not be subdivided; steep areas having slopes of 25% or
more and land subject to flooding shall not be subdivided unless such
deficiencies can be eliminated.
C. Residential blocks shall have a maximum length of 1,600 feet and a
minimum length of 500 feet; where a block exceeds 800 feet, a
crosswalk shall be provided.
D. Business or industrial blocks shall be of such size and shape as may be
suitable for their prospective use and shall provide sufficient space for
off-street parking and loading.
E. The width of any block shall be sufficient to permit at least two tiers of
lots of appropriate depth except where reverse frontage lots bordering
a major street are used.
F. Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide positive drainage away
from buildings.
G. Every lot shall abut on a proposed public street with the possible
exception of suitably designed residential courts having acceptable
means of access.
H. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street
right-of-way lines.
I. If remnants of land exist after subdividing they shall be suitably
incorporated in existing or proposed lots or dedicated to public use if
acceptable for such public use.
J. Double frontage lots are prohibited except where employed to prevent
vehicular access to a major street.
K. Easements for public utilities having a minimum width of 15 feet shall
be provided and shall be satisfactory to the agency providing such
§ 389-15 MUNHALL CODE § 389-16
1:324
§ 389-17. Community facilities.
§ 389-18. Utilities.
utility service. Whenever possible, utility easements shall extend along
rear property lines.
L. Every lot shall have a grade not to exceed 16% within an area 60 feet
wide and 60 feet deep measured from the street right-of-way line.
M. The building setback line in all districts shall be in accordance with the
yard requirements as stated in Chapter 440, Zoning. The setback shall
be measured from the required right-of-way line of any existing or
proposed street to the front line of the permitted buildable area.
A. In reviewing subdivision plats, the Planning Commission shall consider
the adequacy of existing or proposed community facilities to serve the
additional dwellings proposed by the subdivision.
B. Subdividers shall give earnest consideration to the providing of areas
for community facilities normally considered desirable for serving
residential areas, such as parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, schools,
churches, libraries, shopping and local business centers.
C. Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities should be
adequate to provide for building sites, play areas, landscaping and offstreet
parking as may be necessary for the use proposed.
D. Subdividers shall confer with the Planning Commission prior to
preparation of final plats in order to develop suitable plans for
providing community facilities.
E. Areas for community facilities may be provided through dedication or
sale to a public agency or gift or sale to a private agency, including a
property owners' association. In all cases, suitable arrangements shall
be made fixing responsibility for sponsorship and continued
maintenance of community facilities.
F. Subdivisions shall conform to the Borough's plan of parks, recreation
areas and other community facilities.
A. Where connection with the sanitary sewer system of the Borough is
practicable, the owner, by special arrangement with the Council, shall
install sanitary sewers and sewer laterals in conformity with Borough
specifications for sanitary sewer construction before streets and roads
shown on the plans are constructed. All gas, water, electric, and other
mains, pipes and conduits, together with all service connections or
laterals, shall be laid, when the need for the same can be reasonably
anticipated, before the streets and roads shown on the plans are
constructed.
§ 389-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-18
1:325
§ 389-19. Monuments.
§ 389-20. Street signs.
A street sign having a metal nameplate shall be installed at every street
intersection and shall conform to existing Borough standards.
B. Every lot in a subdivision shall be capable of being served by electric
lines, and easements acceptable to the electric company shall be
provided.
C. Where gaslines are proposed to be installed, easements acceptable to
the gas company shall be provided.
D. Where waterlines are proposed to be installed, easements acceptable to
the water company shall be provided.
E. To the fullest extent possible, underground utility lines located in
streets shall not be installed beneath existing or proposed paved areas.
F. Where bridges, dams and/or other structures are placed on streams
with a drainage area of 1/2 square mile or larger, application for a
permit shall be made to Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Water Control, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, by the
person in interest, and a copy of such permit filed with the Borough
Engineer.
A. Concrete monuments of a type and construction approved by the
Borough Engineer and with a minimum size of four inches by four
inches by three feet shall be installed in subdivisions in street rights-ofway
five feet from street lines at intersection of street lines, at points of
curve and tangency in street lines, at changes in alignment of street
lines, and at intersections of subdivision boundary lines with street
lines, as may be required by the Borough Engineer.
B. Monuments consisting of steel pipes, bars or rods measuring at least
one inch in diameter and three feet long and approved by the Borough
Engineer shall be installed in subdivisions at intersections of all lines
forming angles in the boundaries of subdivisions and at points where lot
lines intersect curved property lines, either front or rear, as may be
required by the Borough Engineer.
C. Monuments shall be scored on the top to coincide exactly with the
intersection of the lines to be marked and shall be set so that the top of
the monument is level with the surface of the surrounding ground as
finally graded.
§ 389-18 MUNHALL CODE § 389-20
1:326
ARTICLE V
Required Improvements
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 389-21. Completion of improvements or guarantee prerequisite to
final plat approval.
A. No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plat
have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, or improved as may be otherwise required by this chapter,
and any walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants, shade
trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and other
improvements as may be required by this chapter have been installed in
accordance with this chapter. In lieu of the completion of any
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat,
including improvements or fees otherwise required by this chapter, the
developer may deposit with the Borough financial security in an amount
sufficient to cover the costs of such improvements or common
amenities, including basins and other related drainage facilities,
recreational facilities, open space improvements, or buffer or screen
plantings, which may be required.
B. When requested by the developer in order to facilitate financing, the
Borough Council shall furnish the developer with a signed copy of a
resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent upon the
developer obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The final plat or
record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the financial
improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or letter of
contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the
financial security agreement is not executed within 90 days unless a
written extension is granted by the Council; such extension shall not be
unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in writing at the request of
the developer.
C. Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the
Borough may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld, federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution
irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such
lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for
the purposes of this section.
D. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by the
party posting the financial security, provided said bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the
commonwealth.
E. Such bond or other security shall provide for and secure to the public
the completion of any improvements which may be required on or
§ 389-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-21
1:327
before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or accompanying
agreement for completion of the improvements.
F. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the
required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion
estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by
the developer. Annually, the Borough may adjust the amount of the
financial security by comparing the actual cost of the improvements
which have been completed and the estimated cost for the completion
of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day after
either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date
of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the Borough may require
the developer to post additional security in order to assure that the
financial security equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be
posted by the developer in accordance with the subsection.
G. The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements
submitted by an applicant or developer and prepared by a professional
engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and certified by such
engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The
Borough, upon the recommendation of the Borough Engineer, may
refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or
developer and the Borough are unable to agree upon an estimate, then
the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
chosen mutually by the Borough and the applicant or developer. The
estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and
reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a third
engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be
paid equally by the Borough and the applicant or developer.
H. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year
from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the
required improvements, the amount of financial security may be
increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the
first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount
not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure.
I. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
Borough Council may authorize submission of final plats by section or
stages of development, subject to such requirements or guarantees as
to improvements in future section or stages of development as it finds
essential for the protection of any finally approved section of the
development.
J. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Council to release
or authorize the release, from time to time, of such portions of the
§ 389-21 MUNHALL CODE § 389-21
1:328
financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or
contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing,
addressed to the Council, and the Council shall have 45 days from
receipt of such request within which to allow the Borough Engineer
to certify, in writing, to the Council that such portion of the work
upon the improvements has been completed in accordance with the
approved plat. Upon such certification, the Council shall authorize
release by the bonding company or lending institution of an amount
as estimated by the Borough Engineer fairly representing the value of
the improvements completed or, if the Council fails to act within said
forty-five-day period, the Council shall be deemed to have approved the
release of funds as requested. The Council may, prior to final release
at the time of completion and certification by its Engineer, require
retention of 10% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
K. Where the Council accepts dedication of all or some of the required
improvements following completion, the Borough Council may required
the posting of financial security to secure structural integrity of said
improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in
accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final
plat for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication. Said financial security shall be of the same type as
otherwise required in this section with regard to installation of such
improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall not exceed
15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.
L. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or
facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority separate and distinct from the Borough, financial security to
assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in
accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or
municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial
security as otherwise required by this section.
M. If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat as
set forth in this section, the Borough shall not condition the issuance of
building, grading or other permits relating to the erection or placement
of improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted
upon the final plat upon actual completion of the improvements
depicted upon the approved final plat. Moreover, if said financial
security has been provided, occupancy permits for any building or
buildings to be erected shall not be withheld following the improvement
of the streets providing access to and from existing public roads to such
building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, as well as the completion of all other improvements as
depicted upon the approved plat, either upon the lot or lots or beyond
the lot or lots in question if such improvements are necessary for the
reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
§ 389-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-22
1:329
§ 389-22. Release from improvement bond.
A. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, the developer shall notify the Borough Council, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Borough
Engineer. The Borough Council shall, within 10 days after receipt of
such notice, direct and authorize the Borough Engineer to inspect all of
the aforesaid improvements. The Borough Engineer shall, thereupon,
file a report in writing with the Borough Council and shall promptly
mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered mail.
The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the
Borough Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Council; said
report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said
improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said improvements or
any portion thereof shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the
Borough Engineer, said report shall contain a statement of reasons for
such nonapproval or rejection.
B. The Borough Council shall notify the developer, within 15 days of
receipt of the Engineer's report, in writing by certified or registered
mail, of the action of said Borough Council with relation thereto.
C. If the Borough Council or the Borough Engineer fails to comply with the
time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be
deemed to have been approved, and the developer shall be released
from all liability pursuant to his performance guaranty bond or other
security agreement.
D. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the Borough Council, the developer shall proceed to
complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification as outlined herein shall be followed.
E. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer's right to contest or question by legal proceedings or
otherwise any determination of the Borough Council or the Borough
Engineer.
F. Where herein reference is made to the Borough Engineer, he shall be as
a consultant thereto.
G. The applicant or developer shall reimburse the Borough for the
reasonable and necessary expense incurred for the inspection of
improvements according to a schedule of fees adopted by resolution of
the Council and as from time to time amended.
(1) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense
in connection with the inspection of improvements, the applicant
shall, within 10 working days of the date of billing, notify the
Borough that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or
unnecessary, in which case the Borough shall not delay or
§ 389-22 MUNHALL CODE § 389-22
1:330
§ 389-23. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been
installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final
plat, the Borough Council is hereby granted the power to enforce any
corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable
remedies. If the proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient
to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the Borough Council may, at its
option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision
or land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action
to recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the
improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or
disapprove a subdivision or land development application or any
approval or permit related to development due to the applicant's
request over disputed engineer expenses.
(2) If within 20 days from the date of billing the Borough and the
applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and Borough shall
jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional
engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
review the said expenses and make a determination as to the
amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
(3) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer, in his
or her sole opinion, deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
(4) In the event that the Borough and applicant cannot agree upon the
professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the billing
date, then upon application of either party, the President Judge of
the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district in which the
Borough is located (or if at the time there be no President Judge,
then the senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such
engineer, who in that case shall be neither the Borough Engineer
nor any professional engineer who has been retained by or
performed services for the Borough or the applicant within the
preceding five years.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the
Borough shall pay the fee of the professional engineer. But
otherwise, the Borough and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the
fee of the appointed professional engineer.
§ 389-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-23
1:331
from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both,
shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such
security and not for any other Borough purpose.
§ 389-23 MUNHALL CODE § 389-23
1:332
ARTICLE VI
Specifications for Plats and Data
§ 389-24. Sketch plan.
§ 389-25. Application for approval of the preliminary plat.
An application for approval of a preliminary plat shall be accompanied by
the following documents:
A. The sketch plan, inasmuch as it is not a formal requirement of this
chapter, need not conform to any rigid standards; nevertheless,
sufficient data should be included so as to enable the Planning
Commission to interpret and give advice concerning the sketch plan.
B. It is recommended that the sketch plan be a simple pencil sketch on a
topographic or other suitable base map or print thereof, showing
proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to
conditions in and around the subdivision.
C. It is further recommended that the following data also be submitted
with the sketch plan: a location map showing the relationship of the
proposed subdivision to traffic arteries, public transportation, shopping
centers, schools and churches; existing and proposed covenants;
utilities available; number and size of residential lots; building types,
sizes, and price range; proposed park, playground, and school areas;
proposed commercial facilities, if any; and a time schedule if only part
of the subdivision is to be developed at one time.
A. Preliminary plat on five clear black-line prints on white paper at a scale
of 100 feet to one inch or larger, which shall include all contiguous land
owned by the subdivider and any other contiguous land which the
subdivider proposes to acquire and develop in the foreseeable future.
The plat shall show all existing conditions and proposals, including the
following:
(1) Streets: names; right-of-way, roadway and paving widths;
approximate grades and gradients; similar data for alleys, if any.
(2) Other rights-of-way or easements: location, width and purpose.
(3) Location of utilities and drainage facilities.
(4) Lot lines, lot numbers and block numbers.
(5) Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, or
other public uses.
(6) Sites, if any, for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers, churches,
industry or other nonpublic uses, exclusive of single-family
dwellings.
(7) Minimum building setback lines.
§ 389-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-25
1:333
§ 389-26. Application for final approval.
An application for final approval need include only that portion of a property
proposed for immediate subdivision.
(8) Site data, including number of residential lots, typical lot size, and
acres in parks and other community facilities.
(9) Title, scale, North arrow and date.
(10) Existing topography based on the latest data available from the
United States Geologic Survey having a contour interval of not
more than five feet.
(11) Proposed topography.
(12) Names of abutting subdivisions and owners of contiguous property.
B. Profiles, at a horizontal scale of 50 feet to one inch or larger and a
vertical scale not more than five times the horizontal scale, showing
existing and proposed center-line grades of existing and proposed
streets.
C. Typical cross sections and construction details of proposed street,
drainage structures and other proposed improvements.
D. Draft of proposed protective covenants whereby the subdivider
proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect
the proposed development.
A. The following copies of the final plat and other maps shall be submitted:
(1) One original drawing in black waterproof ink on new linen tracing
cloth, which will be returned to the subdivider after being properly
signed and executed upon final approval and which shall be used
for recording purposes.
(2) One reproduced black-line tracing on cloth or approved
transparency, which will be signed and executed upon final
approval and shall be returned to the Borough after recording in
the County Recorder's office.
(3) Seven clear and legible black-line prints on white paper which may
be distributed by the Borough as follows: one signed and executed
copy to the Planning Commission and one copy each to the School
Board and Borough Road Superintendent; five copies to the
Borough Secretary/Manager for distribution.
B. The final plat and any other maps shall conform to one of the following
sheet sizes: 18 inches by 24 inches; 24 inches by 36 inches; 36 inches by
48 inches. Where necessary to avoid sheets larger than the maximum,
the final plat shall be shown on two or more sheets of uniform size and
include a key diagram showing the relative location of the sections.
§ 389-25 MUNHALL CODE § 389-26
1:334
C. The final plat shall be at a scale of 50 feet to one inch or larger and shall
contain the following data:
(1) Subdivision name or identifying title.
(2) North point, scale and date.
(3) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and
other right-of-way lines, property and lot lines with accurate
dimensions, bearings, deflection angles, and radii, lengths or arcs
and central angles of all curves, satisfactory to the Borough
Engineer and sufficient to reproduce such lines upon the ground.
(4) Primary control points, approved by the Borough Engineer, or
descriptions and ties to such points, to which all dimensions,
angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred, and
the location of all existing and proposed monuments.
(5) The boundary lines of a subdivision shall be determined by actual
ground survey only, said survey to be traversed, balanced and
closed; the total error of closure shall not exceed the linear ratio of
1:5,000 and the allowable angular error of closure shall not exceed
30 seconds times the square root of the number of angles.
(6) Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land, and record
name, date, index number, street and lot lines of adjacent
subdivisions to a minimum distance of 100 feet beyond the
proposed subdivision boundary.
(7) The proposed building setback line for each street or the proposed
placement of each building and sight triangle lines.
(8) Names of streets within and adjacent to the subdivision and
numbers of all lots.
(9) Affidavit and certificates inscribed on the plat in black waterproof
ink in the form approved by the Planning Commission.
D. The final plat shall be accompanied by a topographic map at a scale of
50 feet to one inch or larger, which shall contain the following data:
(1) Boundary lines: bearings and distances.
(2) Easements: location, width and purpose.
(3) Streets on and adjacent to the tract: name and right-of-way width
and location; type, width and elevation of surfacing; and legally
established center-line elevations, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts,
etc.
(4) Utilities on and adjacent to the tract: location, size and invert
elevation of sanitary and storm sewers; location and size of water
mains; location of gaslines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone
poles, and streetlights; if water mains and sewers are not in or
§ 389-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-26
1:335
adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction and distance to and size
of nearest ones, showing invert elevation of sewers.
(5) Ground elevations on the tract, based on Sandy Hook data; for land
that slopes less than approximately 2%, show spot elevations at all
breaks in grade, along all drainage channels or swales, and at
selected points not more than 100 feet apart in all directions; for
land that slopes more than approximately 2%, either show contours
with an interval of not more than five feet if ground shape is regular
and such information is sufficient for planning purposes, or show
contours with an interval of not more than two feet if necessary
because of irregular land or need for more detailed data for
preparing plans and construction drawings.
(6) Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Planning
Commission: location and results of tests made to ascertain
subsurface soil, rock and groundwater conditions; depth to
groundwater unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet.
(7) Other conditions on the tract; watercourse, marshes, rock outcrop,
wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot or more in
diameter, houses, barns, shacks and other significant features.
(8) Other conditions on adjacent land extending 100 feet beyond tract
boundaries: approximate direction and gradient of ground slope,
including any embankments or retaining walls, character and
location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other
nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of
adjacent unplatted land; for adjacent platted land, refer to
subdivision plat by name, recording date, and number and show
approximately the percent of buildup, typical lot size, and dwelling
type.
(9) Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
(10) Proposed public improvements: highways or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction
on or near the tract.
(11)Key plan showing location of the tract at some legible scale.
(12) Title and certificates: present tract designated according to official
records in office of appropriate recorder; title under which
proposed subdivision is to be recorded, with names and addresses
of owners, notation stating acreage, scale, North arrow, datum,
bench marks, certification of registered civil engineer or surveyor.
E. The final plat shall include thereon or be accompanied by the following:
(1) Grading plan, which may be shown on the topographic map,
existing and proposed elevations and contours in accordance with
the standards for the topographic map; existing contours shall be
§ 389-26 MUNHALL CODE § 389-26
1:336
shown as dotted lines and proposed contours shall be shown as
solid lines.
(2) Location, size and invert elevation of all sewers and drainage
structures, which may be shown on the grading plan.
(3) Profiles and typical cross section for all streets; profiles shall show
the existing and proposed grades along the center line and ditch
inverts or tops of curbs of proposed streets, sewer lines and
drainage structures.
(4) A copy of all restrictions and covenants, if any, the subdivider
intends to place in the deeds to the lots in the subdivision.
(5) Written application for final approval on an approved form.
(6) Although not required at the time of application for final approval,
the subdivider shall file a completion guarantee before the plat will
be approved by the Borough Council.
§ 389-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-26
1:337

ARTICLE VII
Dedication of Streets and Other Public Improvements
§ 389-27. Dedication of streets and other public improvements.
When any street, park or other public improvements outlined in the
construction permit shall have been completed in accordance with the
terms of this chapter and in strict accordance with the Borough
specifications now in effect or hereafter adopted, as the case may be, said
street, park or improvement shall be deemed private until such time as the
same shall have been offered for dedication to the Borough of Munhall and
accepted by separate ordinance or resolution or until it shall have been
condemned for use as a public street, park or other improvement.
§ 389-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-27
1:339

ARTICLE VIII
Modifications
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 389-28. Modifications.
A. The Borough Council may grant a modification of the requirements of
one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is
observed.
B. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of this chapter involved
and the minimum modification necessary.
C. The request for modification shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for advisory comments.
D. The Borough Council shall keep a written record of all action on all
requests for modification.
§ 389-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-28
1:341

ARTICLE IX
Appeals
§ 389-29. Appeals.
In any case where the Borough Council disapproves a subdivision plan, any
person aggrieved thereby may, within 30 days thereafter, appeal therefrom
by petition to the Court of Common Pleas wherein such subdivision is
located, which court shall hear the matter de novo and, after hearing, enter
a decree affirming, reversing or modifying the action of the Council, as may
appear just in the premises. The Court shall designate the manner in which
notices of the hearing of such appeal shall be given to all parties interested.
The decisions of the Court shall be final.
§ 389-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-29
1:343

ARTICLE X
Violations and Penalties
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 389-30. Enforcement remedies.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District
Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good
faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this
chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge, and thereafter each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per-diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings
brought under this section.
§ 389-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-30
1:345

ARTICLE XI
Amendments
§ 389-31. Amendments.
A. The Borough Council may, from time to time on its own motion, or on
petition, or on recommendation of the Planning Commission, amend,
supplement or repeal the regulations and provisions of this chapter.
Every such proposed amendment or change, whether initiated by the
Borough Council or by petition, shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for review and a report thereon before the Borough
Council votes on the proposed amendment.
B. No amendment to the subdivision regulations in this chapter shall apply
to or offset any application for approval of the preliminary plat or final
approval or a construction permit for any preliminary or final
subdivision plat which has been previously approved by the Borough
Council, provided that said subdivision complies with the provisions of
this chapter at the time of said approval.
§ 389-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-31
1:347

ARTICLE XII
Interpretation
§ 389-32. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of health,
safety, morals and general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this
chapter are at variance with requirements, deed restrictions, covenants or
ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall
govern.
§ 389-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-32
1:349
Chapter 394
TAXATION
§ 389-32 MUNHALL CODE § 389-32
1:350
ARTICLE I
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 1-15-1987 by Ord. No. 1309]
§ 394-1. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Borough of Munhall."
§ 394-2. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Borough of Munhall, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements
on such transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, "Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax," 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 394-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Munhall, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust or
banking institution which is organized under the laws of the commonwealth,
the United States or any other state, territory, foreign county or
dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 349-2 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
§ 394-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-3
1:351
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members of general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporation, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TAX COLLECTOR — Any person, corporation, association, or partnership
appointed from time to time by the Council of the Borough of Munhall to
collect and administer this tax.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Borough, including,
without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently
attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
§ 394-3 MUNHALL CODE § 394-3
1:352
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of any estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate for local real estate tax purposes for the common level
ratio factor developed by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of easement of other interest in real estate the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B of this definition,
the actual monetary worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principle of the grantor of a related
D.
§ 394-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-3
1:353
§ 394-4. Imposition of tax; interest.
§ 394-5. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivision shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 394-6. Excluded transactions.
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented or recorded shall be subject
to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a tax at
the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the
signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.,128 so that if any other political
subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same
person or transfer then the tax levied by the Borough under the
authority of that Act shall during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate and
such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part of
the Borough; provided, however, that the Borough and any other
political subdivision which impose such tax on the same person or
transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2
of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different
rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted
under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 394-4 of this article shall not be imposed upon:
128. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 394-3 MUNHALL CODE § 394-6
1:354
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or to a reconveyance by the
condemning body of the property condemned to the owner of
record at the time of condemnation which reconveyance may
include property fine adjustments, provided said reconveyance is
made within one year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Borough is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, school district or county pursuant
to acquisition by the municipality, school district or county of a tax
delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister of the spouse of a
brother of sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devise or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all possible
beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of any ordinary trust.
§ 394-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-6
1:355
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in ownership of
the real estate proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real
estate being conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or
the interest in the association has been held by the grantee for
more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
§ 394-6 MUNHALL CODE § 394-6
1:356
§ 394-7. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 394-6, documents which make, confirm or
evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations
or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders
thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article, corporations
and associations are entities separate from their members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders.
§ 394-8. Acquired company.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, [68A
Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary purpose
preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural
or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this § 394-6, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and if itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
§ 394-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-8
1:357
§ 394-9. Credits against tax.
§ 394-10. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this § 394-9, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 394-8 MUNHALL CODE § 394-11
1:358
§ 394-11. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which the
sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or other
officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 394-12. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 394-13. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this § 394-13
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Borough
based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Borough.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Borough all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission shall be
paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
§ 394-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-13
1:359
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 394-14. Civil penalties.
§ 394-15. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements, or hereditament, or any interest therein lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Borough, which lands,
tenements, hereditament or interest therein are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable, and continue until discharge by
payment, or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is authorized to
file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny
County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens
Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 394-16. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 394-17. Regulations.
The Tax Collector is charged with enforcement and collection of tax and
is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable regulations for
enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which have been
promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue, under 72 P.S.
§ 8101-C et seq., are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
§ 394-18. Determination of additional tax and interest.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
A. If any person shall fail to pay any tax imposed by this article for which
he is liable, the Tax Collector is hereby authorized and empowered to
make a determination of additional tax and interest due by such person
§ 394-13 MUNHALL CODE § 394-18
1:360
§ 394-19. Refunds.
§ 394-20. Notice.
Where the Tax Collector is required to give notice, it shall be deemed
sufficient for said notice to be sent by certified mail to the person who paid
the tax at his last known post office address and by posting of said notice
upon the most prominent place of the realty.
§ 394-21. Review of determination, redetermination and refunds.
Any determination, redetermination and the decision of entitlement to a
refund is subject to the review and approval of the majority of the Council
of the Borough of Munhall prior to becoming final.
based upon any information within his possession or that shall come
into his possession. All such determinations shall be made within three
years after the date of the recording of the document.
B. Promptly after the date of such determination, the Tax Collector shall
send by registered mail a copy thereof to the person against whom it
was made. Within 30 days after date upon which the copy of any such
determination was mailed, such person may file with the Tax Collector a
petition for redetermination of such taxes. Every petition for
redetermination shall state specifically the reason which the petitioner
believes entitled him to such redetermination and it shall be supported
by affirmation that it is not made for the purpose of delay and that the
facts set forth therein are true. It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector,
within six months after the date of filing of any petition for
redetermination, to dispose of the petition. Notice of the action taken
upon any petition for redetermination shall be given to the petitioner
promptly after the date of redetermination by the Tax Collector.
C. At any time after the Tax Collector makes the determination of
additional taxes, penalties or interest is due and payable, the Solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of
Allegheny County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements
and amendments.
A. When the amount due upon determination, redetermination, or review
is less than the amount paid to the Borough on account thereof, the Tax
Collector shall enter a rebate in the amount of such difference to the
account of the person who paid the taxes.
B. Where there has been no determination of unpaid taxes, the Tax
Collector shall have the power, and his duty shall be, to hear and decide
any application for refund and, upon allowance of such application, to
enter a rebate in the amount of the overpayment to the person who paid
the taxes. Such application must be filed within 30 days after the date of
payment.
§ 394-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-22
1:361
§ 394-22. Appeals.
Any person who has paid the taxes and who is aggrieved by the decision of
the Tax Collector may appeal said decision to the Court of Common Pleas
of Allegheny County as provided by law within 30 days of the date said
decision was received. In the event the person who paid the taxes cannot be
located at his last known post office address, or has refused delivery of the
certified mail, the said appeal must be made within 30 days of the date of
posting of the realty as heretofore provided.
§ 394-22 MUNHALL CODE § 394-22
1:362
ARTICLE II
Tax Certification
[Adopted 3-18-1993 by Ord. No. 1358]
§ 394-23. Fees. [Amended 9-18-1996 by Ord. No. 1399129]
A fee in an amount as established from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council is to be collected by the Tax Collector of the Borough of
Munhall for the issuance of a certification of payment of real estate taxes.
The fee is applicable to each request regardless if there are two different
requests on the same property.
§ 394-23.1. Additional fees. [Added 3-16-2016 by Ord. No. 1578]
§ 394-24. Costs.130
The aforesaid fee is based on cost incurred by the Tax Collector in preparing
and issuing the said certification of payment of real estate taxes, and, from
time to time, Council of the Borough of Munhall may increase or decrease
said fee by resolution to reflect the cost incurred in preparing and issuing
the certification of payment of real estate taxes.
§ 394-25. Duties of Tax Collector.
The elected Tax Collector shall do the following:
A. For preparation of a certification regarding taxes on any single parcel of
land, a fee is allowed in the amount of $10 per tax parcel for each year
certified.
B. If payment is made and the check is returned by the bank for any
reason, a charge of $39 per item is allowed.
C. For preparation and issuance of a duplicate bill or duplicate receipt, a
fee is allowed in the amount of $5 per parcel.
D. The Tax Collector may charge $0.25 per page for copies of records.
A. Review the tax receipt book or tax duplicates to determine the payment
status of the realty tax.
B. Prepare and draft a tax receipt certification which shall indicate the
realty tax years being certified and amounts paid for current tax year.
C. Any year upon which realty taxes were not paid will be clearly marked
or indicated that realty taxes for said year are due and payable together
with penalty and interest.
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 394-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-25
1:363
§ 394-26. Collection services.
In the event that the elected Tax Collector's services are utilized, then
the elected Tax Collector shall keep hard costs incurred by the elected
Tax Collector in collecting the data and issuing said certification, which
may include reimbursement of salaries and wages paid by the elected
Tax Collector to employees of the elected Tax Collector's office for time
expended in collecting said data; provided, however, the elected Tax
Collector shall not be entitled to any additional compensation other than
actual costs incurred, nor shall said reimbursement of costs be in excess of
the fee imposed by the Borough regardless of the amount of costs incurred
by the Tax Collector.
D. The elected Tax Collector shall sign a tax receipt certification, and said
signature shall act as a verification that the information contained
thereon is an accurate reflection of the tax duplicate on record with the
Borough of Munhall.
E. Tax certification shall be given by the elected Tax Collector for only a
period of three prior years from the date of request. Unpaid realty tax
for years prior to said three years are recorded in the Prothonotary's
Office of Allegheny County.
§ 394-25 MUNHALL CODE § 394-26
1:364
ARTICLE III
Tax Relief for Longtime Senior Citizen Owners/Occupants
[Adopted 12-21-1994 by Ord. No. 1376]
§ 394-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 77 — The Act of December 22, 1993, P.L. 529, No. 77, codified as
Allegheny Regional Asset District Law, 16 P.S. § 6101-B et seq.
ALLEGHENY REGIONAL ASSET DISTRICT LAW — See the definition of
"Act 77," above.
ASSESSMENT — The fair market value of property as determined by the
Board of Property Assessment, Appeals and Review of Allegheny County.
BOROUGH — Munhall Borough.
COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Munhall.131
DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY ASSESSMENT — The Department of
Property Assessment, Appeals, Review and Registry of Allegheny County.
ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER — A longtime owner/occupant of a principal residence
in the Borough of Munhall who is:
HOUSEHOLD INCOME — All income received by an eligible taxpayer while
residing in his or her principal residence during a calendar year.
INCOME — All income from whatever source derived, including, but not
limited to, salaries, wages, bonuses, commissions, income from selfemployment,
alimony, support money, cash, public assistance and relief, the
gross amount of any pensions or annuities, including railroad retirement
benefits, all benefits received under the Federal Social Securities Act
(except Medicare benefits), all benefits received under state unemployment
insurance laws and veteran's disability payments, all interest received from
the federal or any state government or any instrumentality or political
subdivision hereof, realized capital gains, rentals, workmen's compensation
and the gross amount of loss of time insurance benefits, life insurance
benefits and proceeds (except the first $5,000 of the total of death
payments), and gifts of cash or property (other than transfers by gift
between members of a household) in excess of a total value of $300,
but shall not include surplus food or other relief in kind supplied by a
governmental agency or property tax or rent or rebate or inflation dividend.
A single person aged 65 or older during a calendar year in which county
realty property taxes are due and assessed.
A.
Married persons if either spouse is 65 or older during a calendar year
in which the Borough of Munhall real property taxes are due and
assessed.
B.
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 394-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-27
1:365
LONGTIME OWNER/OCCUPANT — Any person who for a least 10
continuous years has owned and occupied the same dwelling place as a
principal residence and domicile or any person who for at least five years
has owned and occupied the same dwelling as a principal residence and
domicile if that person received assistance in the acquisition of the property
as part of a government or nonprofit housing program.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Munhall, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
PERSON — A natural person.
PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE — The dwelling place of a person, including the
principal house and lot, and such lots as are used in connection therewith
which contribute to its enjoyment, comfort and convenience or a building
with a maximum of one commercial establishments and a maximum of three
residential units of which one residential unit must be a principal residence
of the longtime owner/occupant.
SENIOR CITIZENS REBATE AND ASSISTANCE ACT — The Act of March
11, 1971, P.L. 104, No. 3, as amended, codified at 72 P.S. § 4751-1 et seq.132
§ 394-28. Limitation of assessment for eligible taxpayers. [Amended
4-3-2002 by Ord. No. 1475]
All eligible taxpayers in the Borough of Munhall who are longtime owner/
occupants who meet the household income limits for qualification for
property tax rebate under the Senior Citizens Rebate and Assistance Act
shall be entitled to tax relief. Such entitled persons shall receive a 10%
reduction from the face amount of the tax bill as calculated on the certified
assessment.
§ 394-29. Participation in assessment limitation program.
Any person paying property taxes in the Borough of Munhall may apply
to participate in the assessment limitation program authorized under this
article. In order to eligible to participate in the program, the person must
meet the following conditions:
A. The person must be a single person aged 65 or older or be married
persons with either spouse being 65 of age or older.
B. The person must be a longtime owner/occupant.
C. The property owned by the person must be the principal residence and
domicile of the resident.
D. The person's household income must qualify him or her to receive any
amount of property tax rebate under the Senior Citizens Rebate and
Assistance Act.
132. Editor's Note: The Senior Citizens Property Tax Assistance Act was repealed by 2006, June
27, P.L. 1873, No. 1. See now Senior Citizens Property Tax and Rent Rebate Assistance Act,
53 P.S. § 6926.1301 et seq.
§ 394-27 MUNHALL CODE § 394-30
1:366
§ 394-30. Rules and regulations.
The Department of Property Assessment and the Borough Manager shall
have the authority to issue rules and regulations with respect to the
administration of the limitation of tax assessment program established
under this article. Such rules and regulations shall include, but not be
limited to, reasonable proof of household income, proof of residence, proof
of qualification for or receipt of a property tax rebate under the Senior
Citizens Rebate and Assistance Act and any other reasonable requirements
and conditions as may be necessary to operate the tax assessment limitation
program.
§ 394-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-30
1:367

ARTICLE IV
Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted 12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 1441]
§ 394-31. Adoption. [Amended 3-17-1999 by Ord. No. 1443]
A. A Taxpayers Bill of Rights is hereby adopted as set forth in the
disclosure statement attached hereto and incorporated herein as
Exhibit A.133 This disclosure statement may be amended, from time to
time, by Borough Council by simple resolution. This disclosure
statement and this article shall only apply to wage tax, occupation
privilege tax and the real estate transfer tax.
B. There is hereby created the Munhall Tax Hearing Board to consist of a
panel of three persons to serve in accordance with the
intergovernmental agreement with the Steel Valley School District
attached hereto as Exhibit B.134 The same is hereby approved and the
officers of the Borough are authorized to execute the same.
133. Editor's Note: Exhibit A, the disclosure statement, is on file in the Borough office.
134. Editor's Note: The intergovernmental agreement with Steel Valley School District is on file
and may be seen at the Borough office.
§ 394-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-31
1:369

ARTICLE V
Commercial and Manufacturing Parking Privilege Tax
[Adopted 3-15-2006 by Ord. No. 1501]
§ 394-32. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — Borough of Munhall.
COLLECTOR — The person or business appointed by the Council of Munhall
Borough to collect the commercial parking privilege tax.
COMMERCIAL BUSINESS — Dealing in or selling goods, food, sundries,
wares or merchandise at retail or wholesale. The term "commercial
business" includes, without limitation, restaurants.
MANUFACTURING — Businesses engaged in the mechanical or chemical
transformation of materials or substances into new products, or engaged in
the processing or assembly of component parts of manufactured products,
provided that the new product is neither a structure nor other fixed
improvement.
PARKING LOT — Any off-street area owned, leased, licensed, used or
otherwise controlled by a commercial business for the primary purpose of
parking of motor vehicles by customers or employees of the commercial
business.
PARKING SPACE — Any space designated for parking of a motor vehicle in
a parking lot.
TAX YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning the first day of January of
any given year.
§ 394-33. Imposition of tax; payment requirement.
§ 394-34. Amount; time of payment.
A. There is hereby levied, assessed and imposed for the 2006 tax year and
each tax year thereafter an annual commercial and manufacturing
parking privilege tax upon every person engaged in a commercial or
manufacturing business that has one or more parking lots within the
Borough during the tax year, and each such person shall pay the
commercial and manufacturing parking privilege tax.
B. The tax levied hereunder shall be imposed for the tax year 2006 and for
each tax year thereafter.
A. The commercial and manufacturing parking privilege tax levied,
assessed and imposed under this article is $25 per parking space for
commercial parking spaces and $15 per parking space for industrial
parking spaces of the commercial and manufacturing business.
§ 394-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-34
1:371
§ 394-35. Registration required; notice by Collector.
B. Except as provided in Subsection C below, the commercial and
manufacturing parking privilege tax for the 2006 tax year shall be due
to Legal Tax Service on March 31, 2006, and the commercial and
manufacturing parking privilege tax for each tax year thereafter shall
be due at the office of Legal Tax Service on March 31 of the tax year. If,
in any tax year, the date on which the commercial and manufacturing
parking privilege tax is otherwise due is a Saturday or Sunday, the
commercial and manufacturing parking privilege tax for that tax year
shall be due on the next business day.
C. If a person begins to engage in a commercial and manufacturing
business within the Borough after the first day of a tax year, the person
shall pay an amount of commercial and manufacturing parking
privilege tax prorated based upon the calendar quarters, or parts
thereof, remaining in the tax year as of the date of beginning of the
commercial and manufacturing business. If the date of beginning of the
commercial and manufacturing business occurs after the commercial
and manufacturing parking privilege tax due date established in
Subsection B above, then the commercial and manufacturing parking
privilege tax shall be due at the office of the Collector on the date of
registration.
D. The commercial and manufacturing parking privilege tax shall be
deemed to be delinquent if not paid at the office of the Collector on the
date due.
E. The Collector shall not issue a certificate of registration to any person
who fails to pay the commercial and manufacturing parking privilege
tax upon registration when required to do so.
F. Failure to pay the commercial and manufacturing parking privilege tax
on the date it becomes due, or any penalty or interest due on the
commercial and manufacturing parking privilege tax, shall be a
violation of this article.
A. Every person who is engaged in a commercial or manufacturing
business within the Borough, or who desires to continue to do so, or
who hereinafter begins to do so, shall, on or before the commencement
of the tax year or prior to so engaging in such tax year, make application
for registration with the Collector, unless he, she or it has previously
registered. Such registration need be made only once by the completion
of an application furnished by the Collector. Each application for
registration shall be signed by the applicant, in the case of a natural
individual, in the case of a partnership, limited partnership or joint
venture, by the managing member thereof, and in the case of an
association, company, limited liability company, corporation,
professional corporation or limited liability corporation or other legal
entity, by an officer thereof. Each applicant shall receive a certificate of
registration from the Collector, which shall not be assignable. In the
§ 394-34 MUNHALL CODE § 394-35
1:372
§ 394-36. Powers, duties and authority of Collector.
case of loss, defacement or destruction of any certificate, the person to
whom the certificate was issued shall apply to the Collector for a new
certificate, for which a fee of $20 shall be charged.
B. No person who is required to register by this section shall engage in a
commercial or manufacturing business prior to registering and
obtaining a certificate of registration.
C. If any elected or appointed officer or employee of the Borough learns of
any person who is engaged in a commercial business or manufacturing
within the Borough without having registered as required in this
section, he or she shall forward the name to the Collector, who shall
then add the name of the person so reported to the tax roll.
D. If the Collector learns of any person who is engaged in a commercial or
manufacturing business within the Borough without having registered
with the Collector, the Collector shall add the name to the tax roll.
E. Any failure by a person required to do so to register or to have a
certificate of registration, and any person's engaging in a commercial
or manufacturing business without registering and having obtained a
certificate of registration, shall be deemed a violation of this article.
F. The Collector shall give to all persons covered by this article a notice of
commercial and manufacturing parking privilege tax due for tax year
2006 and for each tax year thereafter. The persons covered by this
article shall return this notice along with the amount of the commercial
or manufacturing parking privilege tax to be paid to the Collector.
Failure of the Collector to give or the person covered by this article to
receive the notice required by this subsection shall not excuse the
person from paying the commercial and manufacturing parking
privilege tax where and when due.
A. It shall be the duty of the Collector to collect and receive the
commercial and manufacturing parking privilege taxes, penalties,
interest and fines imposed by this article; to keep a record showing the
amount received by the Collector from each person paying the
commercial and manufacturing parking privilege tax, penalty, interest
or fine, and the date of such repair; to administer the provisions of this
article, and to enforce the provisions of this article.
B. The Collector is hereby authorized and directed to make and to keep
such records; to prepare such forms; to prescribe, adopt and enforce
such rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this article, including rules or
regulations for the reexamination and correction of notices and
payments alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to which an
overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred; to make reasonable
investigation to verify the accuracy of any payment made or the reason
§ 394-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-36
1:373
§ 394-37. Delinquent taxes; collection; interest; nonpayment
charges.
§ 394-38. Violations and penalties.135
Any person convicted by a Magisterial District Judge of violating any
provisions of this article shall be sentenced to pay to the Borough, in
addition to the delinquent tax, penalty and interest, if any, in an amount
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the
Borough of Munhall, or $50 per day from the first date of violation until the
date of compliance, whichever is greater, along with cost of prosecution,
including attorneys' fees, and, in default of payment of such fines, costs and
fees, to be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days.
§ 394-39. Exemptions.
The following businesses shall be exempt from this fee:
for nonpayment, and to take such other measures as may be necessary
or convenient to carry this article into effect.
C. The Collector shall put all taxes, interest and penalties collected or
received under the provisions of this article into the treasury of the
Borough for the use and benefit of the Borough.
A. All delinquent commercial and manufacturing parking privilege taxes,
penalties and interest under this article shall be collected by the
Collector as other delinquent taxes, penalties and interest are now
collected, with the assistance of the Borough Solicitor, when requested.
B. An additional 10% of the amount of the commercial parking and
manufacturing privilege tax shall be added to any commercial and
manufacturing parking privilege tax that is delinquent, and shall be
collected by the Collector.
C. Delinquent commercial and manufacturing parking privilege taxes due
under this article shall bear interest at the rate of 0.5% per month or
fractional part of a month from the day they are due and payable until
paid.
A. Doctors offices.
B. Churches.
C. Senior citizens complexes.
D. Funeral homes.
E. All businesses with less than 20 parking spaces.
F. The first 20 parking spaces for all businesses shall be exempt.
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 394-36 MUNHALL CODE § 394-40
1:374
§ 394-40. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of Act 511 of 1965, as amended,
known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act."136
§ 394-41. Expiration.
This article shall expire at the end of the Tax Increment Financing (TIF)
Agreement, which is in the year 2018.
136. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 394-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-41
1:375

ARTICLE VI
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-21-2007 by Ord. No. 1522]
§ 394-42. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as "The Borough of Munhall
Local Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 394-43. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BOROUGH OF MUNHALL or BOROUGH — The area within the corporate
limits of the Borough of Munhall.
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the Borough of Munhall to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.137
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the Borough of Munhall.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.138
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
137. Editor's Note: Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act was repealed effective June 30,
2012. See now Section 303 of the act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971," and regulations at 61 Pa. Code Pt. I Subpt B Art. V (relating to
personal income tax).
138. Editor's Note: Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act was repealed effective June 30,
2012. See now Section 303 of the act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971," and regulations at 61 Pa. Code Pt. I Subpt B Art. V (relating to
personal income tax).
§ 394-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-43
1:377
performed within the corporate limits of the Borough of Munhall for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 394-44 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 394-44. Levy of tax.
§ 394-45. Exemptions and refunds.
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging
in an occupation with a primary place of employment within the
Borough of Munhall during the tax year. Each natural person who
exercises such privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall
pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata
basis, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. This tax may be used solely for the following purposes as the same may
be allocated by the Borough Council from time to time:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes; or
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 85, Subch.
F (relating to homestead property exclusion).
C. The Borough shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from the
tax for emergency services.
D. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore
levied by the Borough of Munhall.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the Borough is less than $12,000 for any calendar
year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of the tax for
that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are exempt from
payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
§ 394-43 MUNHALL CODE § 394-45
1:378
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
shall annually file an exemption certificate with the Borough and
with the person's employer affirming that the person reasonably
expects to receive earned income and net profits from all sources
within the Borough of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for
which the exemption certificate is filed. In the event the Borough
utilizes a tax collection officer, it shall provide a copy of the
exemption certificate to that officer. The exemption certificate shall
have attached to it a copy of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2
forms from employment within the Borough for the year prior to
the fiscal year for which the employee is requesting to be exempted
from the tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until
otherwise instructed by the Borough or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the Borough that the person has received earned
income and net profits from all sources within the Borough equal to
or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is
otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that calendar year, or
upon an employer's payment to the person of earned income within
the Borough in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year, an employer shall withhold the local services tax
from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
§ 394-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-45
1:379
§ 394-46. Duty of employers to collect.
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for the first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the Borough may pursue
collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employees from a local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Borough Manager, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal
law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The Borough Manger or the Collector shall determine
eligibility for refunds to exempt persons and provide refunds.
A. Each employer within the Borough of Munhall, as well as those
employers situated outside the Borough of Munhall but who engage in
business within the Borough of Munhall, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the Borough of Munhall and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax from each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the Borough of
Munhall.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the combined rate
of the tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest one-
§ 394-45 MUNHALL CODE § 394-46
1:380
§ 394-47. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
hundredth of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll
period basis for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in
an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For
purposes of this subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate
annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and the Borough.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer, and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The Borough shall provide a taxpayer a
receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the Borough if the failure to
withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by the
employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 394-45B of
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 394-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-48
1:381
§ 394-48. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 394-49. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the Borough of Munhall shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 394-50. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 394-51. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the Borough of Munhall but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
Borough of Munhall do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the Borough of Munhall. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the Borough of Munhall and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the Borough shall have
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or its principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
§ 394-48 MUNHALL CODE § 394-51
1:382
the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee for the
collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 394-52. Administration of tax.
§ 394-53. Suits for collection.
§ 394-54. Violations and penalties.139
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the Borough Council.
It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive payments of
this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by
him from each employer or self-employed person, together with the
date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article, is hereby charged and empowered, subject
to Borough Council approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
to the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County as in other cases
provided.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such
tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of
this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 394-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-54
1:383
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails
or refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a
violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the
Borough of Munhall, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action
to enforce the penalty may be instituted against any person in charge of
the business of any employer who shall have failed or who refuses to file a
return required by this article.
§ 394-55. Interpretation.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Borough of Munhall to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the Borough under the
Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 394-54 MUNHALL CODE § 394-55
1:384
ARTICLE VII
Earned Income and Net Profits
[Adopted 12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 1553]
§ 394-56. Incorporation by reference.
Act 32 (53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 through 6924.901) and its definitions, duties,
directives, rules, regulations, powers and penalties is hereby adopted by
reference as if the same had been set forth fully herein.
§ 394-57. Definitions.
The following words and phrases are included herein and, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings given to them in this section unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
DOMICILE — The place where a person lives and has a permanent home
and to which the person has the intention of returning whenever absent.
Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place
of abode, which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. Domicile is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce the person to
adopt some other permanent home. In the case of a business, domicile is
that place considered as the center of business affairs and the place where
its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — The compensation as required to be reported to or as
determined by the Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the Act of
March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the Tax Reform Code of 1971,140 and
rules and regulations promulgated under that section. Employee business
expenses as reported to or determined by the Department of Revenue
under Article III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 shall constitute allowable
deductions in determining earned income. The term does not include offsets
for business losses. The amount of any housing allowance provided to a
member of the clergy shall not be taxable as earned income.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business, other
than a corporation, as required to be reported to or as determined by the
Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the Act of March 4,1971 (P.L.
6, No. 2), known as the Tax Reform Code of 1971, and rules and regulations
promulgated under that section.141
NONRESIDENT — A person or business domiciled outside the political
subdivision levying the tax.
RESIDENT — A person or business domiciled in the political subdivision
levying the tax.
140. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7303.
141. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7303.
§ 394-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-57
1:385
TAX COLLECTION COMMITTEE (TCC) — The Southwest Tax Collection
Committee established to govern this tax collection district for the purpose
of income tax collection.
TAX COLLECTION DISTRICT (TCD) — The Southwest Tax Collection
District is established under Section 504 of Act 32.142
TAX OFFICER/TAX COLLECTOR — The agency engaged to administer and
collect earned income taxes for this tax collection district. Unless otherwise
specifically provided, for purposes of the obligations of an employer, the
term shall mean the tax officer for the tax collection district within which
the employer is located, or, if an employer maintains workplaces in more
than one district, the tax officer for each such district with respect to
employees principally employed therein. In addition to the above
definitions, this section incorporates by reference those words, phrases and
definitions as listed in Act 32 (53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 through 6924.901).
§ 394-58. Imposition of tax.
§ 394-59. Administration; powers and duties of officer.
The collection and administration of the tax provided for in this article shall
be performed by the Tax Officer appointed by the Tax Collection Committee.
Said Tax Officer shall receive compensation for services and expenses as
determined by agreement between the TCC and the Tax officer. The Tax
Officer shall have the powers as provided for by the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 394-60. Exemptions and credits.
No exemptions or credits based on age or income or any other conditions
are granted by this article. Nothing in this article is intended to preclude or
inhibit any credit or exemption imposed by act of law or regulation.
§ 394-61. Effective date.
This article shall be effective January 1, 2012. It is the intention of the
governing body of the Borough of Munhall that this article shall provide
procedural modifications only to the previously adopted Earned Income Tax
A. Resident tax. A tax at the rate of 1% is hereby levied on all earned
income and net profits, as defined by Act 32, on residents of the
Borough of Munhall.
B. Nonresident tax. A tax at the rate of 1% is hereby levied on all earned
income and net profits earned by nonresidents for work done or
services performed or rendered in the Borough of Munhall.
C. All changes shall remain in effect on a calendar year basis without
annual reenactment unless the rate of tax is substantially changed.
142. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.504.
§ 394-57 MUNHALL CODE § 394-61
1:386
Ordinance, and no gap as to imposition of the tax set forth herein should be
inferred.
§ 394-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-61
1:387
Chapter 401
TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 112.
§ 401-1. Tobacco use prohibited in public facilities.
From the effective date of this chapter it shall be unlawful and all persons
are prohibited from the use of tobacco or tobacco products in the public
facilities described in Exhibit A as attached hereto and made a part of this
chapter.143 This prohibition shall include, but is not limited to, smoking any
product or the use of smokeless tobacco, in the proscribed areas.
§ 401-2. Proscribed areas; notice.
The areas proscribed in Exhibit A shall include all public property which
comprises the facilities and adjacent public land or rights-of-way. Public
notices are directed to be erected in conspicuous places in each proscribed
facility which shall describe the prohibitions and fines of this chapter.
The proscribed areas may be changed from time to time by Council at
its discretion by simple resolution. However, the enforcement shall not
commence until signs are duly posted as set forth here.
§ 401-3. Violations and penalties.144
Each violation of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of
Munhall, plus costs of prosecution. Each incident shall be deemed to be a
separate violation of this chapter.
Chapter 408
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grass, weeds and other vegetation — See Ch.
248.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 350.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 385.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 389.
143. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough office.
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 394-61 MUNHALL CODE § 401-3
1:388
ARTICLE I
Trees Along Public Ways
[Adopted 6-4-1918 by Ord. No. 106; amended in its entirety at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 408-1. Definitions.
§ 408-2. Restrictions on planting and growing of certain trees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, maintain or allow to grow any
North Carolina Poplars within the lines of any street, alley or sidewalk in
the Borough, or within 100 feet of any public sewer or water line.
§ 408-3. Clearance above street and sidewalk.
Every owner of property in the Borough shall be required to keep limbs
and branches of all trees growing upon such property or along the street,
sidewalk, curb or alley abutting upon such property trimmed so that no part
of such limbs or branches, or of the foliage growing thereupon, shall have a
clearance of less than eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk or of less
than 14 feet above the surface of the roadway of any street or alley.
§ 408-4. Removal and trimming of trees.
It shall be the responsibility of property owners in the Borough to conform
to the requirements of this article as to trees upon property owned by
them, or along streets, alleys and sidewalks abutting upon such property,
and, upon notice from the Borough, to remove any tree or trees growing in
violation of § 408-2 of this article and to trim or cut the branches or limbs of
trees as required by § 408-3 hereof. Any person failing to comply with any
such notice, within the time limit stated therein, shall be guilty of a violation
of this article and, following the expiration of such time limit, the Borough
Council shall have the authority to cause the work required by such notice
to be done by the Borough or under contract therewith, and to collect the
cost of such work, with an additional amount of 10% from such property
owner in default.
§ 408-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, association, firm
or corporation.
B. The singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the
singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 408-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 408-5
1:389
Munhall, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 408-5 MUNHALL CODE § 408-5
1:390
Chapter 415
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Canvassing and soliciting — See Ch. 157. Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 310.
§ 408-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 408-5
1:391

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 415-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 415-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 415-3. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 415-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except that, in this chapter, the
word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway"
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in
the Vehicle Code.145
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Chief of Police shall have the following powers to regulate traffic
and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
145. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 415-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-4
1:393
§ 415-5. Experimental regulations.
The Borough Council may, from time to time by resolution, designate places
upon and along the highways in the Borough where, for a period of not more
than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate such locations by
proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions
shall be effective as if they had been specified in this chapter. No person
shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such regulation,
prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove, destroy or
deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this
§ 415-5. Any person who shall violate any provision of this § 415-5 shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and in case of a
violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere
in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with costs of
prosecution, provided the purpose of this § 415-5 is to allow for the test and
experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent
changes in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
§ 415-6. Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance or special events.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulations or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature, and in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25 together with costs of prosecution.
A. The Borough Council shall have authority to close any street or specific
part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police
officers at each end of the closed portion while construction or
maintenance work is under way or a special event is being conducted
on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Borough Council shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
under way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
§ 415-4 MUNHALL CODE § 415-6
1:394
§ 415-7. Use of streets by processions and assemblages.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-6 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. For the purpose of this § 415-7, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. "Procession" shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Chief of Police, which shall be issued
without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one week
in advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held,
but in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be
used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall state the place where and the date
when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the assemblage may
convene and the hour by which it shall have been completely dispersed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any
assemblage unless the permit has been granted or at any time or place
other than that authorized by the permit.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Chief of Police, which shall be issued
without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks
in advance of the day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in
any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used,
application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall specify the date on which the
procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the procession, the
hour when and place where participants may commence to assemble
and form before the procession is under way, the time when the
procession may commence to move along its route, and the time by
which the end of the procession shall have reached the end of the route
of the procession and the procession shall have been disbanded. It shall
be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any procession
unless the permit shall have been granted or under any conditions as to
time or route or otherwise than those stated in the permit.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-7 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 415-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-8
1:395
§ 415-8. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Borough are hereby given authority to direct
traffic on the highways of the Borough and at intersections thereof.
§ 415-9. Authorization for use of speed-timing devices.
§ 415-10. (Reserved)
A. The Borough of Munhall Police Department is hereby authorized to use
all speed-timing devices for the determination of speed of a motor
vehicle as are approved or will be approved by the Department of
Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance
with 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3368.
B. This § 415-9 authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within
the Borough, be they Borough, county or state highways, and does also
hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to "local authorities" under
the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 6101 et seq. (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 415-8 MUNHALL CODE § 415-10
1:396
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 415-11. Maximum speed limits established on certain streets.
A. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets,
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on
any part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
22nd Avenue West Street and dead
end
25
Cambria Street Union Street and Main
Street
15 (7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.)
Charles Street
(Extension)
Woodlawn Avenue and
James Street
15 (7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.)
East Oliver Road Main Street and Franklin
School
15 (7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.)
Longfellow Drive Entire length 25
Main Street 22nd Avenue and Brierly
Lane
25
Main Street Center Avenue south to
McKinley Street
15
Main Street James Street south to
Miller Avenue
15
Ravine Street 8th Avenue and Borough
line
25
Roberta Drive Main Street and Brierly
Lane
25
Summerfield Drive Roberta Drive and
Roberta Drive
25
West Street 18th Avenue south to
Orchard Avenue
15
West Street Borough line and 22nd
Avenue
25
Woodlawn Avenue Main Street to Charles
Street (Extension)
15 (7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.)
B. All public streets, roads, avenues, alleys and rights-of-way within the
Borough of Munhall are deemed to be "urban," as that term is used in
the laws recited above.
§ 415-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-11
1:397
§ 415-12. Maximum speed limits established on certain bridges and
elevated structures.
§ 415-13. Maximum speed limits established for certain vehicles on
hazardous grades.
C. The minimum speed limit on all public streets, roads, avenues, alleys
and rights-of-way within the Borough of Munhall is hereby established
at 35 miles per hour, except as may be otherwise established pursuant
to the authority of Borough Code, the Vehicle Code and the
Pennsylvania Code.
D. Borough officials are given authority by this section to obtain traffic
studies and to establish lower speed limits according to those traffic
studies. Approval of such lower or higher speed limits may be
accomplished by simple resolution.
E. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-11 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges
and elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure at a higher speed
than the maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
Bridge or Elevated
Structure Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-12 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. The following are declared to be hazardous grades and, upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle having a gross weight
in excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction stated for
that grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for
that grade, and if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every
such vehicle shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:
§ 415-11 MUNHALL CODE § 415-13
1:398
§ 415-14. Maximum speed limits established in parks.
§ 415-15. Traffic signals at certain locations.
§ 415-16. Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal.
Street Between
Direction
of Travel
Maximum
Gross
Weight
Maximum
Speed
Limit
Required
to Stop
Before
Proceeding
Downhill
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-13 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over
the maximum speed limit.
A. A speed limit of 35 miles per hour is established on all streets and
roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the Borough,
except in the following locations, where the lower maximums, as
specified, shall apply:
Park Street Location
Maximum
Speed Limit
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-14 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
Location Type of Signal
West Street Flashing warning device
B. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
§ 415-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-16
1:399
§ 415-17. One-way streets established.
Intersection
Vehicles Traveling
on Facing
(Reserved)
B. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this § 415-16 shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other
than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
9th Avenue McClure Street Martha Street East
10th Avenue Martha Street McClure Street West
21st Avenue Maple Street West Street West
Boon Alley McClure Street Martha Street East
Boon Way Andrew Street McClure Street West
Boon Way McClure Street Martha Street West
Center Avenue Caroline Street Main Street East
Center Avenue Caroline Street Main Street West
Charles Street Woodlawn Street James Street North
Crawford
Street
Main Street Venango Street West
East James
Street
Charles Street Main Street West
East Larkspur
Street
Riverview
Avenue (at
Marigold Street)
Orris Street West
Greene Street Lehigh Street West Run Road West
Lawrence
Avenue
Venango Street Cambria Street East
Lehigh Avenue Chester Avenue
and Green
Avenue
Oakwood
Avenue
Southeast
Longfellow
Drive
450 feet from
West Run Road
East
Margaret
Street
16th Avenue 12th Avenue North
Victor Way East Virginia
Street
Miller Avenue North
§ 415-16 MUNHALL CODE § 415-17
1:400
§ 415-18. Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted.
§ 415-19. Right turns only permitted at certain intersections.
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Victor Way West Miller
Avenue
Emerson Avenue South
Virginia
Avenue
Alberta Street Main Street East
Walnut Way West Street Maple Street East
Woodlawn
Avenue
Main Street Charles Street East
B. Any person who violates any provision of this § 207 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated,
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to
make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this § 415-18:
Vehicles
Traveling on
Direction of
Travel
Not to
Make Into
Franklin Hill
Road
— Right Homestead-
Duquesne Road
Franklin Hill
Road
— Right Homeville Road
Lawrence Avenue — Left Cambria Street,
between the hours
of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30
a.m.
Lawrence Avenue — Left Cambria Street,
between the hours
of 2:30 p.m. to 4:30
p.m.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-18 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn at any
time stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being prohibited:
§ 415-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-19
1:401
§ 415-20. U-turns prohibited at certain locations.
§ 415-21. No-passing zones established.
§ 415-22. Through highways established.
Vehicles
Traveling on
Direction of
Travel Times
Not to Make Left
Turn into or
Travel Straight
Across
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-19 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon any of
the following portions of streets in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
Street Portion Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-20 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing
zone:
Street
Direction of
Travel Between
Main Street Both 22nd Avenue and Brierly Lane
Ravine Street Both 8th Avenue and Borough line
West Street South 18th Avenue and 22nd Avenue
Whitaker Way Larkspur Street and Schwab
Avenue
B. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-21 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway, except for those
intersections with traffic signals or with exceptions or modifications as
indicated below. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield
sign authorized by this § 415-22 shall stop the vehicle or yield right-ofway
as required by § 3323(b) or (c) of the Vehicle Code, as the case may
§ 415-19 MUNHALL CODE § 415-22
1:402
§ 415-23. Stop intersections established.
be, and shall not proceed into or across the through highway until he
has followed all applicable requirements of that section of the law:
Highway Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-22 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 415-22) are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting or through street) on the firstnamed
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first-named or stop street, in the direction indicated
in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(b) of the
Vehicle Code and shall not proceed into or across the second-named or
intersecting or through street until he has followed all applicable
requirements of that section of the law.
Intersecting or Stop
Street Through Street Direction of Travel
9th Avenue Andrew Street Northeast
9th Avenue Dickson Street Northeast
9th Avenue Library Place Northeast
9th Avenue Martha Street Northeast
10th Avenue Andrew Street West
10th Avenue Dickson Street West
10th Avenue Louise Street West
10th Avenue Margaret Street West
10th Avenue Martha Street West
10th Avenue McClure Street West
11th Avenue Andrew Street East and West
11th Avenue Louise Street East and West
11th Avenue Margaret Street East and West
11th Avenue Martha Street West
11th Avenue McClure Street West
11th Avenue (Ext.) Martha Street Southwest
12th Avenue Andrew Street East and West
12th Avenue Louise Street East and West
§ 415-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-23
1:403
Intersecting or Stop
Street Through Street Direction of Travel
12th Avenue Margaret Street East and West
12th Avenue Martha Street East
12th Avenue McClure Street West
13th Avenue Andrew Street Northeast
13th Avenue Andrew Street West
13th Avenue Louise Street West
13th Avenue Martha Street East
14th Avenue Andrew Street East and West
14th Avenue Louise Street East
14th Avenue Martha Street East
16th Avenue Andrew Street East
16th Avenue McClure Street West
17th Avenue Andrew Street East
17th Avenue Martha Street East
18th Avenue (4) Andrew Street (3) 4-way
18th Avenue (4) Maple Street 4-way
18th Avenue (4) West Street West
19th Avenue Andrew Street East
19th Avenue Andrew Street Southwest
19th Avenue Maple Street Southwest
19th Avenue West Street West
20th Avenue Maple Street Northeast
20th Avenue Maple Street Southwest
21st Avenue Maple Street Southwest
21st Avenue West Street Southwest
22nd Avenue Maple Street Southwest
22nd Avenue (2) West Street East and West
Ada Street Emerson Street Northeast
Ada Street Grace Street Southwest
Alberta Street Oliver Road Northeast
Alberta Street Virginia Street South
Alberta Street (2) Marion Street Northeast and
Southwest
Alberta Street (2) Miller Avenue Northeast and
Southwest
§ 415-23 MUNHALL CODE § 415-23
1:404
Intersecting or Stop
Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Almond Way Clinton Street Southwest
Almond Way Vondera Street Southwest
Andrew Street 8th Avenue North
Andrew Street 17th Avenue 4-way
Andrew Street 13th Avenue North
Bell Way West Run Road Northwest
Bellwood Drive Duquesne Road West
Botsford Street Main Street East
Botsford Street McWhinney Street South
Brage Way Andrew Street Northeast
Calvert Drive Duquesne Road East
Calvert Drive Woodhill Drive East
Cambria Street Emerson Avenue Northwest and
Southwest
Cambria Street Main Street South
Cambria Street West Run Road North
Carnold Drive West Marion Street Southwest
Caroline Avenue Davis Avenue South
Caroline Avenue McWhinney Street Northwest
Caroline Avenue School Center Avenue South
Caroline Street Ellsworth Avenue South
Caroline Street Harvey Street South
Caroline Street Main Street North
Center Avenue Caroline Street West
Center Avenue Superior Street East
Center Street Caroline Street East
Charles Street James Street South
Charles Street Lea Street North
Charles Street Lea Street South
Charles Street Vondera Street Northeast
Charles Street (Ext.) Woodlawn Avenue North
Cherry Way (2) Larkspur Street Southeast
Chester Avenue Tioga Street Southwest
Chester Street Wayne Road Southwest
Chestnut Street Timberwood Drive Southeast
§ 415-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-23
1:405
Intersecting or Stop
Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Crawford Avenue Main Street East
Dahlia Street Vine Street East and West
Davis Avenue Caroline Avenue 3-way
Davis Avenue Fulton Street North
Davis Avenue Lehigh Avenue Southwest
Davis Avenue Leslie Avenue North
Davis Avenue Leslie Street Southwest
Davis Avenue McKinley Street East and West
Davis Avenue McKinley Street Southwest
Davis Avenue Superior Street East
Dewey Street Guy Street South
Dewey Street Main Street Northeast
Duquesne Avenue Homestead Duquesne
Road
West
East Larkspur Street Marigold Street
(West)
East
East Schwab Avenue Riverview Avenue East
East Schwab Avenue Riverview Avenue East
Edna Street (East) Main Street West
Edna Street (West) Main Street East
Edward Street Grace Street Southwest
Edward Street Miller Avenue North
11th Avenue (Ext.) Martha Street Southwest
Elizabeth Street (2) Harvey Street Northwest and
Southeast
Ellsworth Avenue Elizabeth Street Southwest
Ellsworth Avenue Lehigh Avenue
(North)
4-way
Ellsworth Avenue Superior Street East
Emerson Avenue Cambria Street West
Emerson Avenue Grace Street 4-way
Emerson Avenue Main Street Southeast
Emerson Avenue Trautman Street 4-way
Eugene Avenue Hill Street East and West
Eugene Avenue Main Street East and West
Eugene Avenue Rebecca Street East and West
§ 415-23 MUNHALL CODE § 415-23
1:406
Intersecting or Stop
Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Fairfield Avenue Caroline Avenue East
Fairfield Avenue Caroline Street West
Fairfield Avenue Lehigh Avenue
(North)
Southwest
Fairfield Avenue Leslie Avenue North
Fairfield Avenue Leslie Street Southwest
Fairfield Avenue McKinley Street East and West
Fairfield Avenue McKinley Street Southwest
Fairfield Avenue Superior Street East
Farragut Street Main Street West
Farragut Street Vondera Street Northwest
Forest Street Union Street South
Forest Street Union Street South
Forest Street Wayne Street 4-way
Forest Street York Street Northwest
Franklin Street Lea Street South
Franklin Street Vonderal Street North
Fulton Street Davis Avenue North
Fulton Street Davis Avenue Southeast
Fulton Street Main Street Northwest
Gates Drive Virginia Drive East
Gates Drive West Run Road East
Grace Street Emerson Avenue 4-way
Grace Street Main Street South
Grace Street Virginia Avenue Northwest
Grace Street Virginia Avenue South
Grace Street (2) Miller Avenue North/South
Greene Avenue West Run Road Southwest
Greentree Road West Run Road East
Guy Street Charles Street East
Guy Street Main Street West
Hamilton Road West Run Road East
Harrison Street 8th Avenue North
Harvey Avenue Caroline Avenue West
§ 415-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-23
1:407
Intersecting or Stop
Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Harvey Avenue Lehigh Avenue
(North)
Southwest
Harvey Avenue McKinley Street East and West
Harvey Avenue Superior Street Northeast
Harvey Street Caroline Street East
Harvey Street Woodhill Drive South
Hazel Street Main Street East
Highland Street McWhinney Street South
Highwood Avenue Whitaker Way Southeast
Highwood Street Hilltop Street Northwest
Hill Street McWhinney Street South
Hill Street Miller Avenue Northwest
Hillcrest Drive Brierly Lane South
Hilltop Street 8th Avenue Northeast
Homestead-Dusquesne
Road
School Street South
James Street Charles Street West
James Street Main Street 4-way
Jefferson Street Lehigh Avenue
(North)
Northeast
Jefferson Street Lehigh Avenue
(South)
Southwest
John Street Woodlawn Avenue Northeast
John Street (2) Oliver Road North and South
Kennedy Avenue McWhinney Street South
Kennedy Avenue Superior Street West
Larkspur Street Whitaker Way Northeast
Larkspur Street Whitaker Way Southwest
Lawrence Avenue Cambria Street Southeast
Lea Street Main Street Southwest
Lehigh Avenue (North) Main Street 3-way
Lehigh Avenue (North) Main Street Northeast
Lehigh Avenue (West) Chester Avenue Southwest
Lehigh Avenue (West) Main Street Southeast
Leslie Avenue Harvey Street Southeast
Leslie Avenue Main Street West
§ 415-23 MUNHALL CODE § 415-23
1:408
Intersecting or Stop
Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Library Place 8th Avenue North
Longfellow Drive Longfellow Drive Northeast
Longfellow Drive West Run Road Southeast
Louise Avenue 10th Avenue North
Louise Street 13th Avenue
Louise Street 16th Avenue South
Main Street Fulton Street North
Main Street Fulton Street/Lehigh
Avenue
Southwest
Main Street James Street 4-way
Main Street Lehigh Street/
Elizabeth Street
Northeast
Main Street McKinley Street North
Main Street Melvin Street Southwest
Maple Street (2) 19th Avenue Northwest and
southeast
Mapledale Drive Virginia Drive South
Margaret Street 10th Avenue North and South
Margaret Street 12th Avenue North
Marham Road Main Street Southeast
Marietta Street Main Street East
Marigold Street Riverview Avenue Northeast
Marigold Street Whitaker Way Northeast
Marigold Street Whitaker Way Southwest
Marigold Street (West) (Ashley)
Marigold Street (West) East Larks Drive Southeast
Marigold Street (West) West Larkspur Street Southwest
Marion Street Alberta Street East
Marion Street Main Street Southeast
Marion Street West Run Road Northwest
Marion Street West Run Road Southwest
Marion Street (4-way) Cambria Street/
McKinley
4-way
Martha Street 8th Avenue North
Martha Street 13th Avenue South
Martha Street 14th Avenue North
§ 415-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-23
1:409
Intersecting or Stop
Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Martha Street 17th Street South
Mary Street Charles Street West
Mary Street Franklin Street East
McKinley Street Fairfield Avenue Southeast
McKinley Street Shady Avenue Southeast
McWhinney Street Caroline Street Southwest
McWhinney Street Main Street West
Melvin Avenue Main Street Southeast
Mercer Avenue Chestnut Street West
Miller Avenue Alberta Street Northwest
Miller Avenue Cambria Street Southwest
Miller Avenue Main Street East
Miller Avenue Main Street Northwest
Oakwood Avenue Lehigh Street Northeast
Oliver Road Main Street East and West
Oliver Road (2) Alberta Street East and West
Oliver Road (2) Marion Street Northeast and
Southwest
Orchard Avenue West Street Northeast
Orchid Street Alberta Drive Southeast
Orchid Street Oliver Road Northwest
Orris Street East Larks Drive South
Park Square 11th Avenue Northwest
Perry Street Guy Street South
Perry Street Vondera Street North
Ravine Street Franklin Hill Road Northwest
Red Oak Lane Timberwood Drive Southeast
Ridge Way Farragut Street Northwest
Riverview Avenue Marigold Street Northwest
Roberta Drive Brierly Lane South
Rosetta Street Bell Way Northwest and
Northeast
Rosetta Street West Run Road Northwest
School Center Avenue Main Street West
Schwab Avenue Walnut Avenue Northeast
§ 415-23 MUNHALL CODE § 415-23
1:410
Intersecting or Stop
Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Schwab Avenue Walnut Street Southwest
Schwab Avenue Whitaker Way East and West
Scotia Way Harrison Street East
Shady Avenue Caroline Avenue 4-way
Shady Avenue Harvey Street Northeast
Shady Avenue Lehigh Avenue
(North)
4-way
Shady Avenue (2) Superior Street East and West
Shady Lane Brierly Lane/Roberta
Drive
Southwest
Short Street Oliver Road Northeast
Short Street Orchid Street Southwest
Smallman Street Grace Street East
Smallman Street Trautman Street West
Street Extension James Street North
Summerfield Drive At its east and west
terminus with Roberta
Drive
3-way
Summerfield Drive Main Street West
Summerfield Drive Roberta Drive South
Summerfield Drive Roberta Drive West
Sunset Drive Union Street North
Sunset Drive Wayne Road Northwest
Sunset Drive Wayne Road Southwest
Superior Street Main Street North
Superior Street McWhinney Street 4-way
Sycamore Street Main Street Southeast
Tioga Street Venango Avenue Southeast
Tioga Street Wayne Street/Chester
Street
Southeast/Northwest
Tioga Street West Run Road West
Towne Drive Brierly Lane South
Trautman Street Emerson Avenue 4-way
Trautman Street Miller Avenue North
Trautman Street Virginia Avenue Northwest
Trautman Street Virginia Avenue South
§ 415-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-23
1:411
Intersecting or Stop
Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Union Street Cambria Street Southeast
Union Street Forest Avenue East
Union Street West Run Road West
Unknown Valewood Drive East
Valewood Drive Harvey Street Southwest
Valewood Drive Woodhaven North and South
Venango Avenue Chester Street North
Venango Avenue Lehigh Avenue (West) South
Venango Avenue Mercer Avenue East
Venango Avenue Union Street 3-way
Venango Avenue Union Street South
Venango Avenue Wayne Street Northwest
Verna Drive Homestead-Duquesne
Road
West
Video Drive Karen Place West
Video Drive Verna Drive Southwest
Vine Street Larkspur Street South
Virginia Avenue Grace Street West
Virginia Avenue Hill Street East
Virginia Avenue Hill Street South
Virginia Avenue McWhinney Street East
Virginia Avenue Trautman Street Northwest
Virginia Drive Gates Drive Northeast
Walnut Avenue Larkspur Street North
Walnut Avenue Marigold Street North and South
Walnut Avenue Schwab Avenue South
Washington Street Charles Street West
Washington Street Franklin Street Northeast
Watchill Road Sunset Drive Southeast
Watchill Road Wayne Road Northwest
Wayne Road Cambria Street Southeast
Wayne Road Tioga Street Southwest
Wayne Road Union Street West
Wayne Street Main Street East
West Run Road 22nd Avenue (Ext.) South
§ 415-23 MUNHALL CODE § 415-23
1:412
§ 415-24. Yield intersections established.
§ 415-25. Operation of motor vehicles restricted on public lands.
No motor vehicle or motorcycle or minibike shall be operated on any lands
owned by the Borough or any other public body or agency within the
Borough except on those lands specifically designated for the operation
of motor vehicles, motorcycles or minibikes by resolution of the Borough
Council.
§ 415-26. Restrictions on use of pushcarts.
Intersecting or Stop
Street Through Street Direction of Travel
West Schwab Avenue Ashley Street Southwest
Woodhaven Timberwood West
Woodhaven Valewood Drive East
Woodhill Drive Calvert Drive North
Woodhill Drive Duquesne Road East
Woodhill Drive Harvey Street Southeast
Woodlawn Avenue Main Street East
Woodlawn Avenue Street extension East
York Street Cambria Street Northwest
York Street West Run Road West
B. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-23 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 415-22) are established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the through street) on the first-named street (the
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(c) of the
Vehicle Code, and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
subsection of the Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-24 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 415-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-26
1:413
§ 415-27. Skates, coasters, sleds and other toy vehicles.
A. The word "pushcart," as used in this § 415-26, shall mean a vehicle,
other than a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power and used or
intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods,
wares or merchandise.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the
pushcart to a location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from
which goods, wares or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under
permit from Borough Council as provided in § 415-26C.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any sidewalk
except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit from Borough
Council. Every such permit shall be issued to the person making
application for the permit upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the
use of the Borough, in an amount as established from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council. The permit shall be granted to the
applicant, upon payment of the fee and upon his signing an agreement
with Borough Council that he shall be bound by the conditions imposed
by Borough Council and made a part of the permit, dealing with the
following matters:
(1) Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more
stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at
each location.
(2) Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations
carried on.
(3) Requiring that there be no violation of any law, ordinance or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food
or drink.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-26 or any condition
of any permit granted under this § 415-26 shall be guilty of a summary
offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and
costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a sled upon any sidewalk in
the Borough or upon any roadway unless that roadway is on a portion of
a street blocked off for sledding by authority of § 415-5 of Article I or
§ 415-25 of Article II of this chapter, provided that nothing in this
Subsection A shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a sled, with or
without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roller-skating or to ride
upon or propel any coaster or other toy vehicle upon:
§ 415-26 MUNHALL CODE § 415-27
1:414
§ 415-28. "Caution children playing" signs.
The following locations are established for the installation of "Caution
Children Playing Signs":
Street
Dewey Street and Main Street
Forest Avenue and York Street
Forest Avenue and Wayne Road
Maple Street and 18th Avenue
Union Street and Forest Avenue
(1) Any street except in order to cross the roadway.
(2) Any sidewalk located in a business district, except that nothing in
this paragraph shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a coaster or
other toy vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, ride, propel or otherwise
operate a skateboard on public sidewalks and/or streets and war
memorials and monuments within the Borough of Munhall at the
following locations:
Street Between
Main Street 22nd Avenue to Brierly Lane
West Street 18th Avenue to 22nd Avenue
D. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-27 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
§ 415-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-28
1:415

ARTICLE III
Restrictions on Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle and Load
§ 415-29. Vehicle weight limits established on certain streets and
bridges.
§ 415-30. Restrictions on size of vehicles on certain streets and
bridges.
§ 415-31. Restrictions as to weight and size of vehicles on certain
streets and bridges.
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a gross
weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge or
street or part of street, as the case may be:
Street or Bridge Between
Maximum Gross
Weight
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-29 shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(a) and (g)(1) of the Vehicle Code and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus $150 for each
500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight, and costs.
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the size
restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
Waterfront Drive Terminus at Route 837,
also known as 8th
Avenue, to the
boundary line
separating Homestead
and Munhall, also
known as 8th Avenue
Use of FHWA, Class 5
and larger; local
deliveries only
B. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-30 shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(a) and (g)(1) of the Vehicle Code and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $300 for each offense and
costs of prosecution.
A. By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
authority granted by § 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful
§ 415-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-31
1:417
§ 415-32. Truck traffic restricted on certain streets.
for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the
restriction prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street.
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
Ravine Street Bridge
on Creek Street
2,000 lineal feet
south of the Ravine
Street intersection
with 8th Avenue
East entrance 6,000 pounds maximum
B. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-31 shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(b) and (g)(1) of the Vehicle Code and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not
more than $100, and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Street Between
(Reserved)
B. Provided that nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from
driving an emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets
or from driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or
other commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from
premises located along that street or part of a street.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this § 415-32 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 415-31 MUNHALL CODE § 415-32
1:418
ARTICLE IV
General Parking Regulations
§ 415-33. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 415-34. Angle parking required on portions of certain streets.
§ 415-35. Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations.
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
8th Avenue Both Library Place east to Borough line
8th Avenue Both Library Street east to Borough
line
8th Avenue South Brook Way and Library Place (aka
Library Street)
11th Avenue Both Andrew Street and Martha Street
11th Avenue Extension Both 8th Avenue and Brush Way
12th Avenue North Andrew Street and Martha Street
22nd Avenue Both West Street and Main Street
22nd Avenue South Main Street and Maple Street
Andrew Street Both 8th Avenue and 12th Avenue
Andrew Street East 8th Avenue and Boon Way
Andrew Street East 11th Avenue and 13th Avenue
Andrew Street West 8th Avenue and 13th Avenue
Bark Way Both Entire length
Blake Way Both Entire length
Bluff Way Both Entire length
Bond Way Both Entire length
A. Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of
streets:
Street Side Between
Library Place West 8th Avenue and 9th Avenue
Library Place Both 8th Avenue and Boon Way
B. On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked at
the angle shall be parked with its front nearest the curb.
§ 415-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-35
1:419
Street Side Between
Boon Alley Both Entire length
Boon Way Both Entire length
Brace Way Both Entire length
Brook Alley Both Entire length
Brook Way Both Entire length
Brush Way Both Entire length
Cambria Street Both Main Street and Union Street
Cambria Street East Main Street and West Run Road
Cambria Street East Main Street north to Union Street
Cambria Street West Main Street and Lawrence Avenue
Caroline Street North McWhinney Street and Center
Avenue
Caroline Street West Main Street and a point opposite
the south right-of-way line
extended of McWhinney Street
Duke Way Both Entire length
Eddy Street Both Between Hall Street and dead end
Este Way East Dead end and Munn Street
Frost Way Both Entire length
Grant Street Both 8th Avenue and Brush Way
Hall Street West Munn Street and Ravine Street
Harrison Street Both 8th Avenue and dead end
Highwood Street North Whitaker Way and Hilltop Street
Hilltop Street North and
West
From a point 100 feet south of 8th
Avenue to dead end
Iris Way Both Entire length
Ivy Way Both Entire length
Lehigh Avenue North Main Street west to Jefferson
Street
Leslie Street North Main Street east to Harvey
Avenue
Library Place Both Boon Way and 9th Avenue
Library Street Both 8th Avenue and 9th Avenue
Longfellow Drive Both West Run Road north 450 feet
Longfellow Drive East Most northeastern extremity of
said drive
Longfellow Drive East Most southwestern extremity of
said Drive
§ 415-35 MUNHALL CODE § 415-35
1:420
Street Side Between
Main Street Both 22nd Avenue and Brierly's Lane
Main Street East Between a point where the south
right-of-way line extended of
Grace intersects the curbline
along the east side of Main Street
and Caroline Street
Main Street East Center Avenue and McKinley
Street
Main Street East East Miller Avenue and Agnes
Street
Main Street East Emerson Avenue and Botsford
Avenue
Main Street East Marion Street and Miller Avenue
Main Street East Superior Street and East Virginia
Avenue
Main Street West Angle opposite Center Avenue
south to Lehigh Street
Main Street West Emerson Avenue to south line of
Botsford Avenue extension
Main Street West Marion Street and Miller Avenue
Maple Street Both 20th Avenue and 22nd Avenue
Martha Street Both 8th Avenue and 12th Avenue
Martha Street Both 11th Avenue and Duke Way
Martha Street East 8th Avenue and 11th Avenue
Extension
McClure Street East 8th Avenue and Brush Alley
McClure Street East 12th Avenue and 16th Avenue
McClure Street East 12th Avenue and 16th Avenue
McWhinney Street All sides of island and
intersections
Melvin Avenue North Jacob Way and Trautman Street
Munn Street North and
West
Este Way and dead end
Munn Street West 8th Avenue and Este Way
Park Square West 11th Avenue and 12th Avenue
Perry Street West Vondera Street and Guy Street
Race Way Both Entire length
Ravine Street Both 8th Avenue and first bridge
Ravine Street East First bridge and Borough line
§ 415-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-35
1:421
Street Side Between
Scotia Way Both Grant Street and Harrison Street
Stark Way Both Entire length
Vine Way Both Entire length
West Street East 18th Avenue and 22nd Avenue
West Street West 18th Avenue and Orchard Street
West Virginia Avenue North Main Street and Virgin Way
Whitaker Way Both 8th Avenue and Borough line
Wood Way Both Entire length
§ 415-36. Parking prohibited in certain locations certain days and
hours.
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days
and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Between Days Hours
West Street West Orchard Street
and 22nd
Avenue
Monday to
Friday
4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
§ 415-37. Parking of trucks, buses and certain other vehicles
prohibited in certain locations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or to allow to remain parked
on any of the following streets or parts of streets any vehicle other than a
passenger car or which are one-ton pickup trucks or less (which shall not
include any bus, motor home or passenger car attached to a trailer of any
kind or dual-wheel vehicles):
Street Between
Longfellow Drive Entire length
§ 415-38. Parking time limited in certain locations certain days and
hours.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked for longer than
the time indicated in any of the following locations at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
§ 415-35 MUNHALL CODE § 415-38
1:422
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
(hours)
8th Avenue Both Martha Street
and Harrison
Street
Every 24 2
9th Avenue Both Entire length Every 24 3
10th
Avenue
Both Martha Street
and eastern
terminus
Every 24 2
11th
Avenue
Both Martha Street
and Bond Way
Every 24 2
11th
Avenue
Extension
East Bond Way
south to
Martha Street
Every 24 2
12th
Avenue
South Margaret
Street and
Martha Street
Every 24 2
13th
Avenue
Both Louise Street
and Martha
Street
Every 24 2
14th
Avenue
Both Louise Street
and Martha
Street
Every 24 2
16th
Avenue
Both Louise Street
and Andres
Street
Every 24 2
16th
Avenue
North McClure Street
and Louise
Street
Every 24 2
17th
Avenue
Both Martha Street
and Borough
line
Every 24 2
18th
Avenue
Both Martha Street
and Borough
line
Every 24 2
19th
Avenue
Both Borough line
and dead end
Every 24 2
Andrew
Street
Both 13th Avenue
and its
terminus
Every 24 2
§ 415-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-38
1:423
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
(hours)
Botsford
Street
East Main Street
and a point 135
feet east of
Main Street
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
Botsford
Street
West Main Street
and Cecil Way
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
Caroline
Street
West Center Avenue
and point
opposite the
south right-ofway
on
McWhinney
Street
extended
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
Center
Avenue
Both Main Street
and a point 120
feet east of
Main Street
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
East
Eugene
Avenue
Both Main Street
and Victory
Street
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
East Miller
Avenue
Both Main Street
and Victory
Way
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
East
Virginia
Avenue
Both Main Street
and Victory
Way
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
Emerson
Avenue
Both Main Street
and Virgin Way
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
Este Way West Dead end and
Munn Street
Every 24 2
Grace
Street
West Main Street
and Smallman
Street
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
Hall Street East Munn Street
and Ravine
Street
Every 24 2
§ 415-38 MUNHALL CODE § 415-38
1:424
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
(hours)
Highwood
Street
South Whitaker Way
and Hilltop
Every 24 2
Hilltop
Street
South
and East
From a point
100 feet south
of 8th Avenue
to dead end
Every 24 2
Lawrence
Avenue
Both Venango
Avenue and
Cambia Street
Every 7:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
1
Lehigh
Avenue
South Main Street to
the west rightof-
way of
Marshall Way
extension
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
Louise
Street
Both 12th Avenue
and 16th
Avenue
Every 24 2
Main Street East Miller Avenue
and Elizabeth
Street
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
Main Street East Miller Avenue
and McKinley
Street
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
Main Street West Eugene Avenue
point 100 feet
south of Melvin
Street
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
Margaret
Street
Both 12th Avenue
and 16th
Avenue
Every 24 2
Martha
Street
Both Duke Way and
Eighteenth
Street
Every 24 2
McClure
Street
East 11th Avenue
and 12th
Avenue
Every 24 2
McKinley
Street
North Main Street
and Beech Way
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
§ 415-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-38
1:425
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
(hours)
McKinley
Street
South Main Street
and a point 120
feet east of
Main Street
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
Melvin
Street
North Main Street
and Jacob Way
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
Melvin
Street
South Main Street
and Trautman
Street
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
Munn
Street
East 8th Avenue and
Este Way
Every 24 2
Munn
Street
South
and East
Este Way and
dead end
Every 24 2
Ravine
Street
West First bridge
and Borough
line
Every 24 2
Superior
Street
East Main Street
and Kennedy
Avenue
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
Superior
Street
West Main Street
and Diamond
Way
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
West
Eugene
Avenue
Both Main Street
and Virgin Way
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
West Miller
Avenue
Both Main Street
and Virgin Way
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
West
Virginia
Avenue
Both Main Street
and Virgin Way
Monday to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
1
§ 415-39. Special purpose parking zones established; parking
otherwise prohibited.
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked
in any such zone except as specifically provided for that zone:
§ 415-38 MUNHALL CODE § 415-39
1:426
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose of Vehicle
(Reserved)
§ 415-40. Standing or parking on roadway for loading or unloading.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the
purpose of loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted on
the following named streets on Monday through Friday, between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., and for no longer than necessary for the loading
or unloading.
Street Side Location
8th Avenue South In front of 412 and 428
§ 415-41. Designation of residential permit parking areas.
A. The following areas are designated as residential permit parking areas.
All streets listed in § 415-38 with the exception of:
(1) Main Street, between Miller Avenue and a point 180 feet south of
Superior Street, on the east side of Main Street.
(2) Main Street, between West Eugene Avenue and Emerson Avenue,
on the west side of Main Street.
(3) North Lehigh Avenue (near Great American Federal), between the
west right-of-way line of Marshall Way extended and Main, on the
south side of Lehigh Avenue.
(4) Dixon Street, from 8th Avenue to 9th Avenue, on both sides of the
street.
B. Signs shall be erected along the streets in each residential permit
parking area, indicating the days, hours, locations and conditions under
which parking shall be by permit only.
C. Application for permit. Application for a residential parking permit shall
be made to the Chief of Police by the person desiring the permit, who
shall be only the owner of a motor vehicle who resides on property
immediately adjacent to a street or other location within a residential
permit parking area. A separate application shall be required for each
vehicle. Only vehicles which are registered at that specific address
within the residential permit parking area shall be eligible for the
issuance of a permit. No fee shall be required. Each application shall
contain the following information: the name of the owner or driver, as
the case may be, of the motor vehicle; the address of the resident; the
make, model and registration number of the motor vehicle and the
driver's license. At the discretion of the Chief of Police, the applicant
§ 415-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-41
1:427
shall be required, at the time of making application, to present his/her
driver's license and the vehicle registration.
D. Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of the application and determination
by him that the information upon the application shows that the
applicant is entitled to a residential parking permit, the Chief of Police
shall issue to the applicant a residential parking permit. The permit
shall display the serial and registration numbers of the motor vehicles.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to
display other than the current and valid permit while standing or
parking in a residential permit parking area at any time when those
permits are to be displayed.
E. Responsibility of permit holder.
(1) Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the
holder of a residential parking permit shall be permitted to stand or
park a motor vehicle operated by him/her in any designated
residential parking area during those times when parking of motor
vehicles is permitted in that area. While a vehicle for which a
residential parking permit has been issued is so parked, that permit
shall be displayed so as to be clearly visible through the windshield
of the vehicle. A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or
reserve to the holder a parking space within a designated
residential permit parking area.
(2) A residential parking permit shall not authorize its holder to stand
or park a motor vehicle in any place where or at any time when
stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles is prohibited or set
aside for other specified types of vehicle, nor shall the permit
exempt its holder from the observance of any traffic or parking
regulation other than residential permit parking regulation or
restriction.
(3) No person other than the permit holder whose registration appears
on the permit shall use a residential parking permit or display it on
a vehicle other than their registered vehicle. Any such use or
display by a person other than the permit holder shall constitute a
violation of this section by the permit holder and by the person
illegally using or displaying the parking permit.
(4) It shall constitute a violation of this section for any person falsely to
represent himself as eligible for a residential parking permit or to
furnish false information in an application to the Chief of Police in
order to obtain a residential parking permit.
F. Revocation of permit. The Chief of Police shall have authority to revoke
the residential parking permit for any permit holder found to be in
violation of any provision of this section. Upon written notification to
him of the revocation, the permit holder shall surrender the permit to
the Chief of Police. Failure to do so, when requested, shall constitute a
violation of this section, provided that any person receiving such a
§ 415-41 MUNHALL CODE § 415-41
1:428
§ 415-42. Parking of commercial vehicles.
For the preservation of the public peace and health and safety in the
Borough of Munhall, from and after the date of this section, motor vehicles
and other equipment defined in § 415-43 hereof shall be prohibited from
parking on all streets, ways, alleys and highways in residential areas, as
defined in § 415-44 hereof, of the Borough of Munhall from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m., prevailing time, except for and as required for local service delivery
and the removal of items requiring the use of commercial vehicles.
§ 415-43. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the vehicles prohibited from parking, as
set forth in § 415-42 hereof, shall mean and be defined as commercial
motor vehicle, house trailer, mobile home, motorbus, motorcycle, motor
omnibus, semitrailer, tractor, trailer and truck tractor, as defined in § 102
notice may, within 10 days after the date of the notice, appeal to Council
for a hearing on the revocation, and the decision of Council shall be
final.
G. General regulations.
(1) The Chief of Police or his designee shall have the authority and
responsibility of granting, regulating, recording and rescinding
permits, as the case may be. He may use such forms as he deems
reasonable, shall maintain a record of all such permits which shall
contain a photocopy of the applicant's driver's license, vehicle
registration and proof of insurance. He shall have the authority to
color code the permits for easy identification. Permitted vehicles
must be passenger vehicles, currently inspected and licensed by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and be insured in accordance
with state law.
(2) No fees shall be charged for such permits, but Council reserves the
right to reimpose a reasonable fee, in its sole discretion, in
accordance with Subsection H below.
(3) No more than two parking permits shall be issued to a single
residential living unit or to a proprietor of property abutting such
street. A residential living unit shall be deemed to be a "proprietor
of property" and shall be deemed to be the titled owner or lessee in
possession of a "zoning lot," as these terms are defined in Chapter
440, Zoning.
H. Any part of this section, including but not limited to the streets
designated, the location of parking, the days, hours, time limits,
applicable fees or any other matter, may be amended by simple
resolution of Council, from time to time. Appropriate signage must be
installed on affected streets.
§ 415-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-43
1:429
of the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and camping
equipment commonly known as "campers."
§ 415-44. Area in which parking restricted.
For the purpose of this chapter, those areas of the Borough in which parking
under the provisions of § 415-42 is prohibited shall be all streets, ways and
highways of the Borough in and abutting residential zones, as set forth and
designated in Chapter 440, the Munhall Borough Zoning Ordinance, and the
Zoning Map adopted and approved as part of said ordinance.
§ 415-45. Violations and penalties.
The violation of the provisions of §§ 415-42 through 415-44 of this chapter
or the failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a
summary offense. Any person, association, partnership or corporation
violating those sections shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less
than $10 or more than $25 and cost of prosecution and, in the event of
nonpayment of the fine and costs imposed, the Magisterial District Judge
may sentence such person to undergo imprisonment for a period of not
more than 10 days. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
§ 415-46. Handicapped parking.
A. There is hereby created in Munhall Borough specific parking spaces to
be determined and located, which will be available only for parking
motor vehicles bearing a "handicapped" or "severally disabled veteran"
vehicle registration plate or which display a "handicapped" or "severely
disabled veteran" parking placard, as such are prescribed by the
Vehicle Code. Such vehicles must be then used for transportation of a
handicapped person or a severely disabled veteran. In such instances,
parking shall not be limited to 60 minutes. Such license plate must be
affixed to the vehicle or such placard must be readily visible from
without the vehicle.
B. Borough Council may, from time to time, designate handicapped
parking spaces as near as practicable to the residence of a handicapped
person or a severely disabled veteran upon the written request of any
such person. Thereafter, following the erection of appropriate signage
in accordance with the Vehicle Code, that space may only be used by
persons who are in fact disabled persons or severely handicapped
veterans in compliance with Subsection A. The Borough shall be under
no obligation to create such spaces but may do so in its sole discretion
considering all the circumstances.
Street Name Location
Authorized Purpose
of Vehicle
8th Avenue 400 block Handicapped parking
10th Avenue 827 Handicapped parking
§ 415-43 MUNHALL CODE § 415-46
1:430
Street Name Location
Authorized Purpose
of Vehicle
10th Avenue Anna Schwartz 818 Handicapped parking
10th Avenue Carnegie Library 510 Handicapped parking
10th Avenue Christ Markoff 408 Handicapped parking
10th Avenue John Mrazak 813 Handicapped parking
13th Avenue Lenny Miriello 713 Handicapped parking
14th Avenue 711 Handicapped parking
14th Avenue Anne Randolph 602 Handicapped parking
17th Avenue Joanne Carr 709 Handicapped parking
19th Avenue Robert R.
Andrews
122 Handicapped parking
20th Street Barbara E. Lee 146 Handicapped parking
21st Avenue Anna J. Thomas 106 Handicapped parking
22nd Avenue Margaret White 129 Handicapped parking
Botsford Street Donald Nowicki 3715 Handicapped parking
Cambria Street Daniel
Tomkiewicz
3736 Handicapped parking
Center Avenue L. Jean
Ellenberger
4001 Apt. 3 Handicapped parking
Clinton Street Richard Morgan 2322 Handicapped parking
Dewey Street 2410 Handicapped parking
East 10th
Avenue
Altha P. Lee 816 Handicapped parking
East 13th
Avenue
Mary Emery 705 Handicapped parking
East 14th
Avenue
603 Handicapped parking
East 16th
Avenue
Charles McCann 601 Handicapped parking
East 18th
Street
Dennis Hamovitz 605 Handicapped parking
East 19th
Avenue
Colleen Vamos 605 Handicapped parking
East 22nd
Street
James F. Hall 335 Handicapped parking
East 9th
Avenue
Anna Ladik 551 Handicapped parking
East 9th
Avenue
John R. Shea 713 Handicapped parking
§ 415-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-46
1:431
Street Name Location
Authorized Purpose
of Vehicle
East Eugene
Avenue
224 Handicapped parking
East Eugene
Avenue
228 Handicapped parking
East Eugene
Avenue
Edward Rinyik 113 Handicapped parking
East Eugene
Avenue
Ernest Falce 224 Handicapped parking
East Marigold
Street
John Filipowski 168 Handicapped parking
East Virginia
Avenue
Raymond J.
Trageser
115 Handicapped parking
East Virginia
Avenue
Ron M. Saffer 229
Falses
Restaurant
Handicapped parking
Grace Street Leona B. Corbett 3800 Handicapped parking
Harvey Street 4205 Handicapped parking
Harvey Street Marguerite
Tierney
3905 Handicapped parking
Hilltop Street 931 Handicapped parking
Kennedy
Avenue
216 Handicapped parking
Lea Street Deborah Bartok 112 Handicapped parking
Louise Street Joann Cannon 1309 Handicapped parking
Main Street Between
3716/3802
Handicapped parking
Main Street 3409 Handicapped parking
Main Street 3912 Handicapped parking
Main Street 4121 Handicapped parking
Main Street/
Emerson
Intersection Handicapped parking
Margaret
Street
1213 Handicapped parking
Martha Street 1407 Handicapped parking
Martha Street 1409 Handicapped parking
Martha Street Joseph Yuhas 1407 Handicapped parking
Mary Street Marie Bobik 231 Handicapped parking
§ 415-46 MUNHALL CODE § 415-46
1:432
§ 415-47. Violations and penalties.
Unless otherwise prescribed in a section, any person who violates any
provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $15 and costs. Provided that it shall be the duty of
the police officers and of parking enforcement personnel of the Borough
to report to the appropriate official all violations of any provision of this
article, indicating, in each case: the section violated; the license number of
Street Name Location
Authorized Purpose
of Vehicle
North end of
Brookway
Ascension School Handicapped parking
North Leigh
Avenue
121 Handicapped parking
Orris Street Helen Ballog 117 Handicapped parking
Ravine Street Donald Sergeant 1131 Handicapped parking
Vine Street 254 Handicapped parking
West Miller
Avenue
115 Handicapped parking
West Oliver
Road
Stephen Maszle 112 Handicapped parking
C. Such handicapped parking spaces described in Subsection A or in any
other area within the Borough, either on private or public property, may
be made, approved or disapproved by a simple resolution. They shall
become effective upon erection of appropriate signage in accordance
with the Vehicle Code.
D. Owners of private commercial property using that property for the
invitation to the public in general may likewise establish handicapped
parking spaces in accordance with this section and with approval of the
Chief of Police. Such spaces shall have erected thereon signs indicating
the restricted-type parking spaces in accordance with the Vehicle Code.
Thereafter, violations as provided for herein for the unauthorized use
may be enforced as a violation of this section. The owner must erect
signs in accordance with the Vehicle Code; the erection of such signs
shall be deemed to be a dedication by the owner during the time when
the sign is present that the space is devoted to handicapped parking as
defined and circumscribed herein.
E. Handicapped persons and severely disabled veterans shall have the
right to issue statements to violators and violating vehicles for the
violation of this section. The form of such statement shall be prescribed
and prepared by the Chief of Police of Munhall Borough.
F. Penalties prescribed shall be those penalties as set forth in the Vehicle
Code, as amended from time to time.
§ 415-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-47
1:433
the vehicle involved in the violation; the location where the violation took
place; and any other facts that might be necessary in order to secure a
clear understanding of the circumstances attending the violation. The police
officer or other person making the report shall also attach to or place upon
every such vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle was parked in violation
of this article. The notice shall contain instructions to the owner or driver
of the vehicle that, if he will report to the office of the Chief of Police and
pay the sum of $5 within 48 hours after the time of the notice, or if he will
place the sum of $5, enclosed within the envelope provided, in any of the
special parking fine boxes installed at various locations within the Borough,
that act will save the violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine
and costs prescribed in the first sentence of this § 415-47.
§ 415-47 MUNHALL CODE § 415-47
1:434
ARTICLE V
On-Street Metered Parking
§ 415-48. Parking meter zones established.
Parking meter zones are established upon and along certain streets in the
Borough, as follows:
Street Between Rate
Maximum Parking
Time
(Reserved)
§ 415-49. Days and hours parking meters in operation and parking
time limits apply.
Parking meters shall be operated by the deposit of a coin in the meter as
prescribed by § 415-52, and the parking rates for specified lengths of time,
as well as the maximum parking times prescribed in § 415-48, shall apply to
the following times:
§ 415-50. Placement and characteristics of parking meters.
Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established by § 415-48
of this article shall be placed upon the curb or sidewalk and immediately
adjacent to the individual parking spaces described in § 415-51 of this
article. Each parking meter shall be placed or set so as to show that the
parking space adjacent to that meter is or is not legally occupied. Each
parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking
time established by the Borough, and when the adjacent space is occupied
by a vehicle, the parking meter shall indicate on and by its dial and pointer
the duration of the period of legal parking and, on the expiration of that
period, shall indicate illegal parking or overparking.
§ 415-51. Parked vehicles to be wholly within marked spaces.
Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the curb, sidewalk
or roadway adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of delineating
the parking space for which that meter shall be used. Every vehicle parked
at any parking meter shall be parked wholly within the lines or markings so
placed and applicable to that meter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of
this article for any person to park a vehicle across any such line or marking
A. In A Zones — Monday through Saturday, the 24 hours of each day;
B. In B Zones — Monday through Saturday, the 24 hours of each day;
C. In C Zones — Monday through Saturday, the 24 hours of each day; and
D. In all zones — not at all on Sundays and legal holidays, namely: New
Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day
and Christmas Day.
§ 415-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-51
1:435
or to park a vehicle in such a position that the vehicle is not wholly within
the area designated by those lines or markings.
§ 415-52. Coin deposit in meter; overtime parking unlawful.
Whenever a vehicle is to be parked in any space adjacent to a parking meter,
at any time in the period of limited parking as prescribed by § 415-49 of
this article, the driver of the vehicle, upon entering the parking space, shall
immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in that parking meter one or
more proper coins of the United States of America as specified in the legend
on the parking meter. Upon the deposit of the coin or coins and placing
the meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the
vehicle for the time indicated on the meter. If any vehicle shall remain in
any such parking space for such length of time that the meter shall indicate
by proper signal that the lawful parking time has expired, that vehicle shall
be considered as having been parked overtime, and the parking of a vehicle
overtime shall be a violation of this article.
§ 415-53. Unlawful to deposit substitute for coin in meter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter installed
under the provisions of this article any slug or other substitute for a coin of
the United States of America.
§ 415-54. Unlawful to deposit coin in meter to extend parking time
beyond legal limit.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to deposit or
cause to be deposited in any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this article any coin for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking
time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time of 15 minutes in any
fifteen-minute parking meter zone, 1/2 hour in any half-hour parking meter
zone, one hour in any one-hour parking meter zone, or two hours in any twohour
parking meter zone.
§ 415-55. Unlawful to remain parked at meter showing violation.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to permit a
vehicle to remain in a parking space adjacent to a parking meter installed
under this article when that meter displays a signal indicating that the
vehicle has already been parked there beyond the period of time prescribed
for that parking space or the time for which a coin or coins was deposited
in that meter for the parking of that vehicle.
§ 415-56. Unlawful to tamper with meter.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to deface,
tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any
parking meter installed under the provisions of this article, provided that
nothing in this section shall apply to the servicing or opening of parking
§ 415-51 MUNHALL CODE § 415-56
1:436
meters by officers, employees or police officers of the Borough under the
direction of the Borough Council.
§ 415-57. Ticketing of vehicles parked unlawfully; effect of payment
within 48 hours.
§ 415-58. Violations and penalties.
§ 415-59. Exceptions.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers and parking enforcement
personnel of the Borough, acting in accordance with the directions of
the Chief of Police, to report:
(1) The number of each parking meter that indicates that a vehicle
occupying the adjacent parking space is or has been parked in
violation of any provision of this article.
(2) The date and hour of the violation.
(3) The license number of the vehicle.
(4) Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
B. The police officer or other person making the report shall also place on
or attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle
that the vehicle was parked in violation of this article and instructing
the owner or driver that, if he will report to the office of the Chief of
Police and pay, for the use of the Borough, the sum of $5 within 48
hours after the time of the notice, or will place the sum of $5 enclosed
within the envelope provided in any of the special parking fine boxes
installed at various locations within the Borough within that time limit,
that act will save the violator from prosecution and from payment of the
fine prescribed in § 415-58A of this article.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article, with the exception
of § 415-56, and who fails to pay the fine set forth in § 415-57 shall be
cited within 15 days of the violation and, upon conviction, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs.
B. Any person who violates any provision of § 415-56 of this article shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and
costs and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to imprisonment for
not more than 30 days.
A. By resolution, the Borough Council may temporarily suspend the
provisions of this article by requiring coin deposit in meters and
establishing a maximum parking time at meters.
B. The Borough shall have authority to establish no-parking or special
purpose parking zones within any parking meter zone and to remove
§ 415-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-59
1:437
parking meters from those areas as previously installed there, and the
provisions of this article shall not apply in those areas where no-parking
or special purpose parking is in effect.
§ 415-59 MUNHALL CODE § 415-59
1:438
ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Metered Parking
§ 415-60. Metered parking lots established.
The following are the metered parking lots established by this Borough:
Lot Location Rate
Maximum
Parking
Time
Days in
Operation
Hours in
Operation
(Reserved)
§ 415-61. Placement and characteristics of parking meters.
Parking meters installed in the parking lots shall be placed immediately
adjacent to the individual parking spaces that shall be marked off and
maintained in the lots. For each parking meter there shall be a clear
indication, through use of a directional arrow or an identification as to
number within the parking space, to show which individual parking space
it serves. Each parking meter shall indicate by a proper legend the parking
rate and the maximum parking time established by § 415-60 of this article,
and when the parking space is occupied and the parking meter put into
operation by the insertion of one or more coins, the parking meter shall
indicate on and by its dial and pointer the duration of legal parking and,
upon the expiration of that period, shall indicate illegal parking or
overparking.
§ 415-62. Reserved parking spaces for handicapped may be
provided.
Borough Council, at its discretion, may provide at convenient and suitable
locations in any one or more of the metered parking lots reserved parking
spaces for handicapped and shall designate those spaces by appropriate
signs. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to
park in any such reserved parking space any vehicle unless that vehicle
bears or displays either a "handicapped registration plate," a "handicapped
parking placard," a "disabled veteran registration plate" or a "disabled
veteran placard."
§ 415-63. Parked vehicles to be wholly within marked spaces.
Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the surface of the
metered parking lots adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of
delineating the parking space for which that meter shall be used. Every
vehicle parked adjacent to any parking meter shall be parked wholly within
the lines or markings so placed and applicable to that meter. It shall be
unlawful and a violation of this article for any person:
A. To park a vehicle across any such line or marking.
§ 415-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-63
1:439
§ 415-64. Manner of parking at meters.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any metered parking
lot:
§ 415-65. Coin deposit in meter; overtime parking unlawful.
Whenever a vehicle is to be parked in any metered parking lot, at any time
when the lot is open for use and the meters are to be in operation, the
driver of the vehicle, upon entering the parking space, shall immediately
deposit or cause to be deposited in the proper parking meter one or more
proper coins of the United States of America as specified in the legend
on the parking meter. Upon the deposit of the coin or coins and placing
the meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the
vehicle for the time indicated on the meter. If any vehicle remains in any
such parking space for such length of time that the meter indicates that the
lawful parking time has expired, that vehicle shall be considered as being
parked overtime, and the parking of a vehicle overtime shall be a violation
of this article. Every hour that a vehicle remains parked at a meter showing
a violation shall constitute a separate violation of this article.
§ 415-66. Unlawful to deposit substitute for coin in meter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter installed
under the provisions of this article any slug or other substitute for a coin of
the United States of America.
§ 415-67. Unlawful to remain parked at meter showing violation.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to permit a
vehicle to remain in a parking space adjacent to a parking meter installed
under this article when that meter displays a signal indicating that the
vehicle has already been parked there beyond the period of time prescribed
for that parking space or the time for which a coin or coins was deposited
in that meter for the parking of that vehicle.
§ 415-68. Unlawful to tamper with meter.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to deface,
tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any
B. To park a vehicle in such a position that the vehicle shall not be within
the area so delineated by the lines or markings.
C. To park a vehicle elsewhere in any such lot than in an individual parking
space adjacent to a parking meter.
A. Otherwise than with the front of the parked vehicle nearest to the
parking meter applicable to that vehicle; or
B. With any part of the vehicle touching the meter post or head or the
raised base or barrier on which meters are erected.
§ 415-63 MUNHALL CODE § 415-68
1:440
parking meter installed under the provisions of this article, provided that
nothing in this section shall apply to the servicing or opening of parking
meters by officers, employees or police officers of the Borough under the
direction of the Borough Council.
§ 415-69. Metered parking lots for certain types of vehicles only.
The metered parking lots established by this article shall be for the use
of passenger cars, passenger vans and pickup trucks only, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to park any other type of vehicle in any of those
lots.
§ 415-70. Ticketing of vehicles parked unlawfully; effect of payment
within 48 hours.
§ 415-71. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers and parking enforcement
personnel of the Borough, acting in accordance with the direction of the
Chief of Police, to report:
(1) The number of each parking meter that indicates that a vehicle
occupying the adjacent parking space is or has been parked in
violation of any provision of this article.
(2) The date and hour of the violation.
(3) The license number of the vehicle.
(4) Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
B. The police officer or other person making the report shall also place on
or attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle
that the vehicle was parked in violation of this article and instructing
the owner or driver that, if he will report to the office of the Chief of
Police and pay, for the use of the Borough, the sum of $5 within 48
hours after the time of the notice, or will place the sum of $5 enclosed
within the envelope provided in any of the special parking fine boxes
installed at various locations within the Borough within that time limit,
that act will save the violator from prosecution and from payment of the
fine prescribed in § 415-71A of this article.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article, with the exception
of § 415-68, and who fails to pay the fine set forth in § 415-70 shall be
cited within 15 days of the violation and, upon conviction, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs.
B. Any person who violates any provision of § 415-68 of this article shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and
costs and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to imprisonment for
not more than 30 days.
§ 415-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-71
1:441

ARTICLE VII
Off-Street Unmetered Parking
§ 415-72. Unmetered parking lots established.
The following are established as the unmetered parking lots operated by the
Borough:
Lot Location
Maximum
Parking
Time
Days in
Operation
Hours in
Operation
(Reserved)
§ 415-73. Reserved parking spaces for handicapped may be
provided.
The Borough Council, at its discretion, may provide, at convenient and
suitable locations in one or both of the unmetered parking lots, reserved
parking spaces for handicapped, and shall designate those spaces by
appropriate signs. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this article, for
any person to park in any such reserved parking space, any vehicle unless
that vehicle bears or displays either: a "handicapped registration plate,"
a "handicapped parking placard," a "disabled veteran registration plate"
or a "disabled veteran placard". Provided, all provisions, requirements and
restrictions contained in the other sections of this chapter shall apply to
vehicles lawfully parked in reserved parking spaces for handicapped.
§ 415-74. Unlawful to park overtime or when lot closed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow a vehicle to
remain parked in any unmetered parking lot:
§ 415-75. Unmetered lots for certain types of vehicles.
The unmetered parking lots established by § 415-72 of this article shall be
for the use of passenger cars, passenger vans and pickup trucks only, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to park any other kind or class of vehicle in
any such lot.
§ 415-76. Manner of parking.
Every vehicle parked in an unmetered parking lot shall be parked wholly
within the lines bounding or marking the individual parking space assigned
to that vehicle and shall be parked headed into the parking space. It shall
be unlawful for any person:
A. For longer than the maximum parking time prescribed by § 415-72 of
this article.
B. At any time when the lot is not in operation and is closed to public use.
§ 415-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-76
1:443
§ 415-77. Parking on rental basis only.
The parking spaces in the unmetered parking lots shall be available for
parking on a monthly rental basis only. The rental fee shall be fixed by the
Borough Council from time to time and shall be for a calendar month or the
part of a calendar month remaining after the rental arrangements are made.
The rental fee shall be paid in advance to the Borough Secretary, for the use
of the Borough, and after the first month shall be automatically renewable
until the renter notifies the Borough that he wishes to terminate the rental
arrangements. At any time, however, the Borough may, by amending
§ 415-72 of this article, discontinue provision of a specific unmetered
parking lot or a portion of the parking spaces in any such lot, or may
change any unmetered parking lot or part of an unmetered parking lot to
a metered parking lot or to metered parking spaces. The rental parking
spaces shall be assigned by the Borough Secretary. The name of the renter
of a parking space and/or the numbers and/or letters on the registration tag
of the vehicle entitled to be parked there shall be posted by the Borough at
the rental space or shall be painted on the surface of that parking space.
§ 415-78. Violations and penalties.
A. To park a vehicle in a space not rented by him.
B. To park a vehicle otherwise than as required by this § 415-76.
C. To park a vehicle elsewhere than in an individual parking space; the
prohibited areas including, but not limited to, the access and exit
driveways and turning and maneuvering spaces.
A. The police officer or other person making the report shall also place on
or attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle
that the vehicle was parked in violation of this article and instructing
the owner or driver that, if he will report to the office of the Chief of
Police and pay, for the use of the Borough, the sum of $5 within 48
hours after the time of the notice, or will place the sum of $5 enclosed
within the envelope provided in any of the special parking fine boxes
installed at various locations within the Borough within that time limit,
that act will save the violator from prosecution and from payment of the
fine prescribed in this § 415-78B.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this article and who fails to
pay the fine set forth in this § 415-78 shall be cited within 15 days of the
violation and, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $15 and costs.
§ 415-76 MUNHALL CODE § 415-78
1:444
ARTICLE VIII
Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 415-79. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle Code
and gives authority to the Borough to remove and impound those vehicles
which are parked in a tow-away zone and in violation of parking regulations
of this chapter. Vehicles which have been abandoned (as defined by the
Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a manner as to interfere with
traffic or pose a hazard to others may be towed under the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.146
§ 415-80. Authority to remove and impound.
The Borough shall have authority to remove and impound or to order
the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 415-79 of this article. No such vehicle shall be
removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions of this
article or the provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 415-81. Tow-away zones designated.
The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established
as tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice
that their vehicles may be towed for violation of the Borough parking
regulations:
Street Parking Lot Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 415-82. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only by
"approved storage garages" that shall be designated from time to time by
Borough Council. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the Borough
Council that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount
satisfactory to the Borough Council as sufficient to indemnify owners of
impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those vehicles while in the
custody of the garage keeper for the purpose of towing or storage. The
approved storage garage shall submit to the Borough Council its schedule
of charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this chapter, and when
the schedule is approved by the Borough Council, those charges shall
be adhered to by the approved storage garage; no different schedule of
charges shall be demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is
removed or impounded under this chapter by any approved storage garage.
146. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 415-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-82
1:445
The Borough Council shall delete from its list of approved storage garages
any garage that makes any unapproved charge in connection with any
vehicle removed or impounded under this chapter.
§ 415-83. Payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provision of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or
impounded.
§ 415-84. Reclamation costs.
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage
costs, plus a twenty-five-dollar fee, of which $10 shall be transferred to
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation by the garage to which the
vehicle was taken.
§ 415-85. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Borough shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under
this Article VIII and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the
owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to
the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 415-86. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this Article VIII or the
Vehicle Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the
person for the time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses
a willingness and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 415-87. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 together with all costs
of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle Code at 75 P.S.
§ 7301 et seq. (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 415-88. Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with § 7311 of the Vehicle
Code by the person having legal custody of the vehicle. If the vehicle
has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be transferred to a
licensed salvor, who will then be responsible for filing the proper reports
and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
73 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301 et seq., as
amended).
§ 415-82 MUNHALL CODE § 415-88
1:446
ARTICLE IX
Snow and Ice Emergency
§ 415-89. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in § 415-91 of this
article, the appropriate official, in his discretion, may declare a snow and ice
emergency (designated in this article as a "snow emergency"). Information
on the existence of a snow emergency may be given by the Borough through
radio, newspaper or other available media, and information on the
termination of the emergency may be given by use of the same media.
§ 415-90. Parking prohibited, driving motor vehicles restricted on
snow emergency routes.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 415-91. Snow emergency routes designated.
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 415-92. Violations and penalties.
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in § 415-91 of this
article.
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route, unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
A. If at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 415-89 of this article a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a
motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency
route, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and
costs.
B. If at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 415-89 of this Article IX a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a
snow emergency route without having that vehicle equipped with snow
tires or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article
and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 415-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-92
1:447

ARTICLE X
Pedestrian Regulations
§ 415-93. Pedestrians to obey traffic-control signs.
At all locations in the Borough where official traffic-control signals are
installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by pedestriancontrol
signals installed under § 415-94 of this article, shall obey the
directions of those traffic-control signals, as follows:
§ 415-94. Pedestrian-control signal locations established.
§ 415-95. Locations where pedestrian crossing in unmarked
crosswalks restricted.
Except when authorized by a police officer or other appropriately attired
person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, it shall be unlawful
for any pedestrian to cross the roadway at any of the following streets at
the intersection with that street indicated.
Street Intersection Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
A. When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk.
B. When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to cross
the roadway.
C. When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
A. At the following locations, official pedestrian-control signals shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected):
B. Every pedestrian facing a steady or flashing "Don't Walk" signal shall
obey the directions of that signal, as follows:
(1) When facing a steady "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any
pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk"
signal should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't
Walk" signal is showing.
(2) When facing a flashing "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the "Walk"
indication should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone.
C. Any pedestrian who fails to obey the directions of a "Don't Walk" signal,
as indicated above, shall be guilty of a summary offense and a violation
of this article.
§ 415-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-96
1:449
§ 415-96. Locations where pedestrians may cross only in crosswalk.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian:
§ 415-97. Violations and penalties.
Any pedestrian who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$5 and costs.
A. To cross any roadway in a business district within the Borough except in
a crosswalk.
B. To cross the roadway in any of the following portions of streets in the
Borough except in a crosswalk:
Street Between
(Reserved)
C. Provided nothing in this § 415-96 shall permit any pedestrian to cross in
a crosswalk at any location where that crossing is prohibited by
§ 415-94 of this article.
§ 415-96 MUNHALL CODE § 415-97
1:450
Chapter 419
VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 168.
Solid waste — See Ch. 373.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 415.
Zoning — See Ch. 440.
§ 415-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-97
1:451

ARTICLE I
Junked Vehicles on Private Property
[Adopted 4-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1383]
§ 419-1. Definitions.
§ 419-2. Vehicles nuisances prohibited.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated.
LESSEE — The person leasing the vehicle or real property and which
for purposes of this article shall be considered synonymous with the
term "owner" when the lease holds the lessee responsible for the
maintenance and/or repair of any motor vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any type of mechanical device or vehicle propelled
by a motor, in which persons or property may be transported upon
a public street or highway; this definition shall also include non-selfpropelled
trailers or semitrailers, whether freestanding (i.e., separated
from the motor vehicle which normally tows said trailer or semitrailer)
or attached to a motorized tow vehicle.
NUISANCE — Any vehicle, condition, structure or improvement which
shall constitute a threat or potential threat to the health, safety or
welfare of the general public.
OWNER — Any person who is the owner of record, agent or custodian
of real property upon which is situated a vehicle nuisance; and which
under this article shall also include the lessee when the lease holds the
lessee responsible for the maintenance, repair or upkeep of any real
property upon which a vehicle nuisance is situated.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation or other legal entity.
VEHICLE NUISANCE — See § 419-2 for a definition of this term.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or owner to park, store or maintain a
vehicle nuisance for any period of time upon private property within the
Borough of Munhall, except when in full compliance with this article.
B. A vehicle nuisance shall be defined as any one or more of the following:
(1) Any motor vehicle which:
(a) Is unable to move under its own power.
(b) Does not bear a current valid inspection sticker.
§ 419-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-2
1:453
§ 419-3. Parking, storage or maintenance of nuisances.
Any owner of real property in the Borough of Munhall shall not cause or
permit a vehicle nuisance to be parked, stored or otherwise maintained for
any period of time upon private property anywhere within the Borough of
Munhall, except when in full and strict compliance with this article.
(2) Any motor vehicle or trailer which has any of the following physical
defects:
(a) A broken windshield, mirror or other glass with sharp edges.
(b) One or more flat or open tires or tubes which could permit
vermin harborage.
(c) A missing door, window, hood, trunk or other body part which
could permit vermin or animal harborage.
(d) A missing wheel or tire, resulting in the unsafe suspension of
the vehicle or trailer.
(e) A broken headlight or tail light with sharp edges.
(f) Any sharp object protruding from the chassis or body.
(g) A leaking or damaged oil pan or fuel tank.
(h) An exposed battery.
(i) Any such other defect which could threaten the health, safety
or welfare of the general public.
(3) Any motor vehicle or trailer which:
(a) Does not bear a current registration plate.
(b) Is propped up or otherwise supported in an unstable manner.
(4) Any wholly or partially disassembled vehicle or trailer chassis or
body part which is either separate and apart from the vehicle or
trailer or loose within, upon or adjacent to a vehicle or trailer.
(5) Any vehicle or trailer frame, engine or body which is propped up or
otherwise supported in an unstable manner.
(6) Any other defective vehicle or trailer or vehicle or trailer part
which poses a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the general
public.
A. Any vehicle nuisance shall only be permitted in any residential zoning
district in the Borough when parked, stored or otherwise maintained
entirely within a secured garage or other secured, approved and
enclosed building.
§ 419-2 MUNHALL CODE § 419-3
1:454
§ 419-4. Inspection; notice to comply.
§ 419-5. Right of appeal.
B. Any vehicle nuisance shall only be permitted in any commercial or
industrial zoning district in the Borough when parked, stored or
otherwise maintained, as follows:
(1) Within a permitted and approved junk, impounding or salvage yard.
(2) Temporarily, only when in conjunction with and as regulated under
any other permitted and approved business operation.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the parking, storage or
maintenance of any vehicle nuisance contrary to the provisions of
Chapter 440, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of Munhall.
A. All Munhall police officers are hereby empowered to enter upon
privately owned real property upon which a motor vehicle, trailer or
vehicle/trailer part is wholly or partially parked, stored or otherwise
maintained in order to determine if said motor vehicle, trailer or
vehicle/trailer part is in full compliance with the provisions of this
article.
B. If any such motor vehicle, trailer or vehicle/trailer part is found to be in
noncompliance with any provision of this article, thereby qualifying said
vehicle, trailer or vehicle/trailer part as a vehicle nuisance as herein
defined and, as such, a threat to the health, safety and/or welfare of the
general public said officer shall post a written notice which:
(1) Declares the motor vehicle, trailer or vehicle/trailer part to be a
vehicle nuisance and a violation of this article.
(2) Specifies the conditions observed in making the determination
under this article that said motor vehicle, trailer or vehicle/trailer
part is in noncompliance.
(3) Requires the owner, as herein defined, to abate the condition within
10 calendar days from the date of posting of said notice.
(4) Announces the Borough's intention to tow or otherwise remove and
store the vehicle nuisance, at the owner's expense, in the event of
noncompliance within the prescribed time period for compliance
and abatement of the nuisance.
(5) Notifies the owner of his right to appeal.
C. Said officer shall cause to be sent to the owner a registered letter
containing the same information as is contained in the posted written
notice.
A. The owner of any motor vehicle, trailer or vehicle/trailer part which has
been identified and posted as a vehicle nuisance under this article may,
§ 419-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-5
1:455
within not more than 10 calendar days from the date of receipt of the
registered letter, file a written appeal with the Chief of Police explaining
why the owner feels that:
(1) The motor vehicle, trailer or vehicle/trailer part does not meet the
definition of "vehicle nuisance" under this article.
(2) More time is needed to abate the problem.
(3) The strict enforcement of this article in this particular case would
result in a unique and unnecessary hardship for the owner.
B. Failure of the owner to file such an appeal within five calendar days of
the date of posting shall constitute a waiver of the owner's right to
appeal.
C. In any case where an appeal is filed within 10 calendar days of the date
of receipt of the registered letter, the Chief or his assigned designee
shall schedule an informal hearing to hear the appeal. Said hearing
shall be scheduled within not more than 10 calendar days of the date of
receipt of the written appeal.
D. After conducting the appeal hearing, the Chief of Police shall respond to
the appeal in writing. Said response shall be issued within not more
than five calendar days from the hearing date.
E. In order to reverse the decision, the Chief must find that either:
(1) The vehicle, trailer or vehicle/trailer part does not meet the
definition of a vehicle nuisance as herein defined.
(2) That the strict enforcement of this article would clearly result in a
unique and unnecessary hardship, rather than a general hardship
and that the reversal of this decision would not constitute the
granting of a special privilege as commonly defined in applied
zoning law by the rule of Whitemall's Line.
F. The Chief may also elect to grant an extension of the time period for
abatement of the vehicle nuisance, provided that any such extension
shall not exceed a period of 45 calendar days from the date of the
Chief's written response to the appeal.
G. If the decision is reversed, the notice of intent to tow shall be
withdrawn within the Chief's written response.
H. If the time period for compliance and abatement of the vehicle nuisance
is extended, the notice of intent to tow shall be temporarily withdrawn.
And if, for any reason, the abatement shall not have been abated by the
owner within the prescribed extended period for compliance, the
Borough shall immediately abate the nuisance in the manner as
prescribed under § 419-6 of this article.
§ 419-5 MUNHALL CODE § 419-5
1:456
§ 419-6. Abatement of nuisance.
A police officer shall revisit the site within a period of not less than 10
nor more than 30 calendar days from the date of posting, the date of the
Chief's response to the appeal or the extended deadline for compliance and
abatement of the vehicle nuisance, whichever is the later date:
§ 419-7. Abatement of immediate threats.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the right of any
Munhall police officer to have any motor vehicle, trailer or vehicle/trailer
I. If the decision is upheld, the Chief's response shall include a second
ten-day notice of intent to tow.
A. If the nuisance has already been abated, the officer shall simply note
the abatement in the appropriate file.
B. If the nuisance has not yet been abated, the officer shall issue a citation
under the provisions of this article and shall have the vehicle nuisance
towed or otherwise removed from said location and put into storage.
C. If the vehicle nuisance is towed or otherwise removed from the site and
put into storage, the police officer shall cause a second registered letter
to be sent to the owner. Said letter shall:
(1) Make specific reference to the first registered letter which was sent
to the owner.
(2) Notify the owner that:
(a) A citation has been issued. Said citation shall be mailed under
the same cover letter.
(b) The vehicle nuisance has been moved at the owner's expense.
(c) The vehicle nuisance may be claimed by the owner at a specific
location.
(d) After picking up the vehicle nuisance, the motor vehicle, trailer
or vehicle/trailer part may not be parked, stored or otherwise
maintained at any location in the Borough except in
compliance with both this article and the ordinance which
addresses the parking, storage or maintenance of a vehicle
nuisance within any public right-of-way within the Borough of
Munhall.147
D. In any event, the Borough pursuant to its statutory or otherwise
authorized police powers, shall have the right to enter upon the
offending private real property to accomplish the foregoing and thereby
abate the nuisance.
147. Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
§ 419-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-7
1:457
part, whether or not determined to be a vehicle nuisance, immediately
removed from any location wholly or partially upon private property
anywhere in the Borough where in the judgment of said police officer said
motor vehicle, trailer or vehicle/trailer part poses an immediate threat to
the health, safety and/or welfare of the general public.
§ 419-8. Authority to remedy noncompliance.
If the owner any such vehicle nuisance should fail to fully remedy said
nuisance within the prescribed time period, the Borough shall hereby have
the authority to have said vehicle towed and stored at the owner's expense.
§ 419-9. Violations and penalties.148
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine as provided
in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of
Munhall, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 419-10. Remedies not mutually exclusive.
The remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this article, or any
remedy provided by law, shall not be deemed mutually exclusive, rather
they may be employed simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of the
Borough.
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 419-7 MUNHALL CODE § 419-10
1:458
ARTICLE II
Junked Vehicles on Public Property
[Adopted 4-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1384]
§ 419-11. Definitions.
§ 419-12. Vehicles nuisances prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or owner to park, store or maintain a
vehicle nuisance for any period of time within the right-of-way of any public
thoroughfare within the Borough of Munhall. A vehicle nuisance shall be
defined as and shall include any one or more of the following:
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LESSEE — The person leasing the vehicle or real property and which
for purposes of this article shall be considered synonymous with the
term "owner" when the lease holds the lessee responsible for the
maintenance and/or repairs of any motor vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any type of mechanical device or vehicle,
propelled by a motor, in which persons or property may be transported
upon a public street or highway.
NUISANCE — Any vehicle, trailer, condition, structure or improvement
which shall constitute a threat or potential threat to the health, safety
or welfare of the general public.
OWNER — Any person who is the owner of record, agent or custodian
of the motor vehicle, trailer or vehicle part and which for purposes of
this article shall also include the lessee when the lease holds the lessee
responsible for the maintenance and/or repairs of the motor vehicle,
trailer or vehicle/trailer part.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation or other legal entity.
TRAILER — Any non-self-propelled trailer or semitrailer which is
normally towed behind by a motorized vehicle, whether freestanding
(i.e., separated from the motorized vehicle, which normally tows said
trailer or semitrailer) or attached to a motorized tow vehicle.
VEHICLE NUISANCE — See § 419-12 of this article for a definition of
this term.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. Any motor vehicle which:
(1) Is unable to move under its own power.
(2) Does not bear a current registration plate.
§ 419-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-12
1:459
§ 419-13. Parking, storage or maintenance of nuisances.
Any owner of a vehicle nuisance, as herein defined, shall not cause any
such vehicle nuisance to be parked, stored or maintained for any public
thoroughfare within the Borough of Munhall.
§ 419-14. Inspection; notice to comply.
(3) Does not bear a current inspection sticker.
B. Any motor vehicle or trailer which has any of the following physical
defects:
(1) A broken windshield, mirror or other glass with sharp edges.
(2) One or more flat or open tires or tubes which could permit vermin
harborage.
(3) A missing door, window, hood, trunk or other body part which could
permit vermin or animal harborage.
(4) A missing wheel or tire, resulting in the unsafe suspension of the
vehicle or trailer.
(5) A broken headlight/tail light with sharp edges.
(6) Any sharp object protruding from the chassis.
(7) A leaking or damaged oil pan or fuel tank.
(8) An exposed battery.
(9) Any such other defect which could threaten the health, safety or
welfare of the general public.
C. Any trailer which does not bear a current registration plate.
D. Any vehicle or trailer which is propped up or otherwise supported in an
unstable manner.
E. Any wholly or partially disassembled vehicle or trailer chassis or body
part which is either separate and apart from the vehicle or trailer or
loose within, upon or adjacent to a vehicle or trailer.
F. Any vehicle or trailer frame, engine or body which is propped up or
otherwise supported in an unstable manner.
G. Any other defective vehicle or trailer or vehicle or trailer part which
poses a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the general public.
A. All Munhall police officers are hereby empowered to inspect any motor
vehicle, trailer or vehicle/trailer part which is wholly or partially
parked, situated, stored or maintained for any period of time within the
right-of-way limits of any public thoroughfare within the Borough of
§ 419-12 MUNHALL CODE § 419-14
1:460
§ 419-15. Right of appeal.
Munhall to determine if said vehicle, trailer or part is in full compliance
with the provisions of this article.
B. If any such motor vehicle, trailer or vehicle/trailer part is found to be in
noncompliance with any provision of this article, thereby qualifying said
vehicle, trailer or vehicle/trailer part as a vehicle nuisance as herein
defined and, as such, a threat to the health, safety and/or welfare of the
general public, the police officer shall post a written notice of the
violation and an intent to tow or otherwise remove the vehicle nuisance.
C. Said written notice shall:
(1) Specify the condition observed in making the determination under
this article that said vehicle, trailer or vehicle/trailer part is in
noncompliance.
(2) Require the owner, as herein defined, to rectify the condition within
five calendar days from the date of posting of said notice.
(3) Require the owner to thereafter fully comply with the requirements
of the written notice.
(4) Notify the owner of his right to appeal.
(5) Serve notice to the owner of the Borough's intentions to tow or
otherwise remove and store the vehicle nuisance, at the owner's
sole expense, in the event of noncompliance within the prescribed
period for compliance.
A. The owner of any motor vehicle, trailer or vehicle/trailer part which has
been identified and posted as a vehicle nuisance under this article may,
within not more than five calendar days from the date of posting, file a
written appeal with the Chief of Police explaining why the owner does
not feel that the motor vehicle, trailer or vehicle/trailer part meets the
definition of "vehicle nuisance" under this article.
B. Failure of the owner to file such an appeal within five calendar days of
the date of posting shall constitute a waiver of the owner's right to
appeal.
C. In any case where an appeal is filed within five calendar days of the date
of posting, the Chief or his designee shall schedule an informal hearing
to hear the appeal. Said hearing shall be scheduled within not more
than 10 calendar days of the date of receipt of the written appeal.
D. After conducting the informal hearing and hearing the appeal, the Chief
of Police shall respond, in writing, via registered mail to the owner with
his answer to the appeal. Said response shall be issued within not more
than five days from the hearing date.
§ 419-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-15
1:461
§ 419-16. Abatement of nuisance.
§ 419-17. Abatement of immediate threats.
Nothing in this section of this article shall be construed as limiting the
right of any Munhall police officer to have any motor vehicle, trailer or
vehicle/trailer part, whether or not determined to be a vehicle nuisance,
E. If the decision is reversed, the notice of intent to tow shall be
withdrawn within the Chief's written response.
F. If the decision is upheld, the Chief's response shall include a second
five-day notice to abate the nuisance and a second notice of intent to
tow.
A. A police officer shall then revisit the site within a period of not less than
five nor more than 10 calendar days from the date of posting or the date
of the Chief's response to the appeal, which ever is the later date.
B. If the nuisance has already been abated, the officer shall note the
abatement in the appropriate file.
C. If the nuisance has not yet been abated, the officer shall:
(1) Issue a citation.
(2) Have the vehicle, trailer or vehicle/trailer part towed or otherwise
removed from the site and stored at the owner's expense.
(3) Notify the owner in writing that:
(a) A citation has been issued with the citation to be mailed under
the same cover letter.
(b) The vehicle nuisance has been moved at the owner's expense.
(c) The vehicle nuisance may be claimed by the owner at a specific
location.
(d) After picking up the vehicle nuisance, the motor vehicle, trailer
or vehicle/trailer part may not be parked, stored or otherwise
maintained at any location in the Borough except in
compliance with both this article and the ordinance which
addresses the parking, storage or maintenance of a vehicle
nuisance at any location upon private property anywhere in the
Borough of Munhall.149
D. In any event, the Borough, pursuant to its statutory or otherwise
authorized police powers, shall have the right to enter upon offending
private real property to accomplish the foregoing and thereby abate the
nuisance.
149. Editor's Note: See Art. I of this chapter.
§ 419-15 MUNHALL CODE § 419-17
1:462
immediately removed from within the right-of-way of any public
thoroughfare within the Borough where, in the sole judgement of said police
officer, said motor vehicle, trailer or vehicle/trailer part poses an immediate
threat to the health, safety and/or welfare of the general public.
§ 419-18. Authority to remedy noncompliance.
If the owner of any such vehicle nuisance should fail to fully remedy said
nuisance within the prescribed time period, the Borough shall hereby have
the authority to immediately thereafter have said vehicle towed and stored
at the owner's expense.
§ 419-19. Violations and penalties.150
In addition, any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision
of this article shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine
as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, General Penalty, of the Code of the
Borough of Munhall, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 419-20. Remedies not mutually exclusive.
The remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this article, or any
remedy provided by law, shall not be deemed mutually exclusive, rather
they may be employed simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of the
Borough.
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 419-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-20
1:463
Chapter 440
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 49.
Adult uses — See Ch. 100.
Construction codes — See Ch. 168.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 227.
Grading and excavation — See Ch. 243.
Occupancy permits — See Ch. 299.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 379.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
389.
Junked and abandoned vehicles — See Ch.
419.
§ 419-20 MUNHALL CODE § 419-20
1:464
ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 440-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Munhall Zoning
Ordinance" or the "Munhall Zoning Code," and the zoning district map shall
be known and designated as the "Munhall Zoning Map" or the "Official
Zoning Map."
§ 440-2. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is:
A. To promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and welfare.
B. To encourage the most appropriate use, reuse and development of land
throughout the Borough of Munhall.
C. To enhance, conserve and stabilize the value of property.
D. To prevent the overcrowding of land and buildings.
E. To encourage and facilitate the orderly growth, expansion, development
and redevelopment of the Borough.
F. To protect the property rights of all individuals by assuring the
compatibility of uses and practices within districts.
G. To discourage congestion on public streets, roads and highways.
H. To provide protection against fire, panic or other dangers.
I. To provide for adequate open space for light and air.
J. To facilitate the provision of public utilities and public services.
K. To provide for adequate privacy and convenience of access to property.
L. To protect and conserve life, property and natural resources.
M. To conserve the expenditure of Borough funds for public improvements.
N. To divide the Borough into zones and/or districts restricting and
regulating herein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration
and use of buildings, structures and land for residential, commercial,
industrial and other uses.
O. To regulate additions to, alterations to, or the remodeling of existing
buildings or structures such as would not otherwise comply with the
restrictions and limitations hereinafter imposed.
P. To provide for the gradual elimination of those uses of land, buildings
and structures which do not conform with the standards of the district
in which they are located.
§ 440-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-2
1:465
§ 440-3. Intent.
This chapter pledges the intention of the Borough, its officers, boards and
commissions:
§ 440-4. Community development objectives. [Amended 9-17-1997
by Ord. No. 1414; 12-29-1997 by Ord. No. 1420]
The Borough of Munhall's generalized land use and development objective
is to promote the highest and best use of the land in the Borough in a
manner which is consistent with the following specific objectives:
Q. To encourage the efficient circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
in public rights-of-way by providing for adequate off-street parking for
vehicles and for adequate off-street loading facilities for commercial
vehicles.
R. To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers,
boards and commissions of the Borough.
S. To provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter,
including the provision of penalties for its violation.
T. For any other purpose provided in this chapter, the statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or under common law rulings.
A. To practice all reasonable care in the stewardship of the land.
B. To carefully regulate the use of the land and its resulting impacts.
C. To apply the highest and best professional standards of land use
practice.
D. To administer this chapter in a uniform manner.
A. Residential objectives.
(1) To maintain, enhance and upgrade the Borough's established
residential areas.
(2) To provide for a diversity of housing types meeting the needs of
various age and income groups while assuring that each type of
housing develops in appropriate locations consistent with existing
neighborhood character and site suitability.
(3) To prevent the intrusion of incompatible land uses into residential
areas.
(4) To promote the use of previously used but currently vacant
residential infill sites, as follows:
(a) To encourage the reuse and/or redevelopment of these sites for
the development and/or expansion of compatible land uses,
buildings and/or structures.
§ 440-2 MUNHALL CODE § 440-4
1:466
(b) To develop strategies for promoting the reuse of these sites in a
manner that is consistent with the Borough's Comprehensive
Plan and land use planning objectives.
(c) To establish performance standards which include provisions
for adequate traffic access, parking, utility connection and
usage, landscaping, buffer areas and signage and which
regulate traffic, noise and similar negative environmental
effects.
(5) To support the development of a residential/professional office
district in which a mix of residential uses, professional offices and
personal services in areas separating high-volume traffic corridors
from residential neighborhoods.
B. Commercial objectives.
(1) To support and encourage the continued development of the Eighth
Avenue and Main Street business districts while recognizing the
importance of maintaining the mixed-use (residential, office,
personal services, and retail commercial) character of the Main
Street district.
(2) To encourage the establishment of a limited number of suitable
locations on arterial streets bordering residential areas for
convenience commercial uses to serve nearby residential
neighborhoods.
(3) To ensure the provision of adequate off-street parking and loading
facilities for all new commercial development.
(4) To promote the expansion of existing off-street parking and loading
facilities where needed for existing commercial development.
C. Riverfront Development District objectives.
(1) To support and encourage expansion of the Borough's economic
base through the quality redevelopment of the former USX site on
the Monongahela River by encouraging the development and
expansion of well-planned mixed land uses (commercial, residential
and/or flex office space) in the RDD.
(2) To develop strategies for promoting the development of the RDD in
a manner that is consistent with the Borough's overall land use
objectives.
(3) To establish development and performance standards for the RDD
which include provisions for adequate access, off-street parking
and loading, buffer areas, landscaping and signage, as well as
standards to prevent air, noise and water pollution and similar
negative environmental effects.
D. Community facilities and services objectives.
§ 440-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-4
1:467
§ 440-5. General provisions.
(1) To assure that all areas of the Borough have reasonable access to
public utility services (water, sewage, gas, electric, etc.) and that
the future use, reuse, development and/or redevelopment in the
Borough includes provisions for the proper extension and/or
upgrading of these services, as needed.
(2) To maintain and upgrade Borough streets and to plan for the
orderly extension of streets to serve areas scheduled for
development.
(3) To ensure that all areas of the Borough are well served by police,
fire, emergency medical and other municipal services.
E. Environmental resources objectives.
(1) To recognize the Monongahela River as an important resource for
the Borough.
(2) To develop standards which limit the use and development of
sensitive environmental areas in the Borough, such as floodplains,
steep slopes (over fifteen-percent grade), landslide-prone areas,
and other undeveloped areas which have unique environmental
barriers to development.
(3) To develop standards which minimize potential hazards from
inadequately controlled stormwater runoff and excessive soil
erosion and/or sedimentation resulting from the alteration of the
land associated with development-related activities.
A. Interpretation.
(1) Wherever the regulations within this chapter are at variance with
other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, deed restrictions or
covenants, that regulation, rule, ordinance, deed restriction or
covenant which imposes the more restrictive requirement(s) shall
prevail and govern.
(2) No structure or use which was not lawfully existing at the time of
the adoption of this chapter shall become or be made lawful solely
by reason of the adoption of this chapter; and further, to the extent
that said unlawful structure or use is in conflict with the
requirements of this chapter, said structure or use shall remain
unlawful hereunder.
B. Validity. Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any
part thereof. And the parts or sections remaining shall remain in full
force and effect, as if the part or section declared unconstitutional had
never been a part thereof.
§ 440-4 MUNHALL CODE § 440-5
1:468
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 440-6. Rules of interpretation.
For the purpose of interpretation of this chapter, certain terms and words
used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
§ 440-7. Definitions. [Amended 3-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1409;
9-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1414; 12-29-1997 by Ord. No. 1420;
2-16-2000 by Ord. No. 1458; 3-15-2000 by Ord. No. 1461; 9-19-2001
by Ord. No. 1469; 10-17-2001 by Ord. No. 1470; 2-20-2002 by Ord.
No. 1474]
In addition to the following definitions, diagrams illustrating key lot, area
and dimensional terms appear in this article. In case of any difference in
meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any caption or
illustration, the text shall prevail and control.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — Any use, object or structure
constructed or installed on, or above, or below the surface of a parcel, which
is located on the same lot as a principal use, object or structure, and which
is subordinate to or serves the principal use, object or structure, and is
customarily incidental to the principal use, object or structure. Among other
things, "accessory use" includes anything of a subordinate nature attached
to or detached from a principal structure or use, such as fences, walls,
sheds, garages, parking places, decks, poles, poster panels and billboards.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an accessory use shall be a
permitted use.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT — Any theater, magazine
shop, bookstore, nude model studio, sexual encounter center, escort
service, adult cabaret, adult motel or other establishment which at any time
A. Words in the present tense includes the future tense, the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular.
B. The word "person" shall include a firm, association, corporation,
company, trust or partnership as well as an individual.
C. The word "lot" shall include the words "plot," "tract" or "parcel."
D. The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement, the word "may" is a
permissive requirement, and the word "should" is a preferred
requirement.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, arranged
or designed to be used or occupied."
F. The masculine gender shall also include the feminine gender.
G. The particular shall control the general.
§ 440-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:469
displays motion pictures, videotapes, compact discs (CDs), digital video
disks (DVDs), television programs or feeds, books, magazines or any other
forms of live, filmed or illustrated entertainment of a sexual nature or
content, including dancing, nude or seminude lap dances, or any other form
of entertainment which would be considered X-rated or adult in nature,
regardless of whether the same has been judged to be pornographic or
obscene, or any other type of action or material that depicts any live or
simulated sex act or entertainment that includes exposed male or female
genitalia or exposed female nipples.[Amended 9-27-2006 by Ord. No.
1509]
ALLEY — See "thoroughfare."
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — Any business or portion thereof having on its
premises for use by the public four or more skill or amusement games,
including, but not limited to, pool, foosball and air hockey tables, video
or electromechanical devices operated by inserting a coin or token,
mechanical rides for children, and including any establishment licensed by
the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board for the public use of mechanical or
electrical devices, machines, tables and apparatus of any kind for playing
games of skill and amusement.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — See "clinic, veterinary."
APARTMENT — See "dwelling."
APPLICANT — Any landowner, agent for a landowner, person having a
leasehold interest in the land or person having an option to purchase the
land who has filed an application for development, including his heirs,
successors and assigns.
ARC HOUSE OR HALFWAY HOUSE — A facility that houses persons who
are in an accelerated rehabilitative disposition (ARD) program or persons
convicted of violating a crime, whether the Pennsylvania Crimes Code or
any other state or federal statutes — the Controlled Substance, Drug,
Device and Cosmetic Act, the driving under the influence provisions of the
Motor Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any similar
federal or any other state of commonwealth of these United States laws or
statutes, which housing is a part of their sentence or is required prior to
their release into society from an imposed sentence or in lieu of a sentence
or trial.[Added 9-27-2006 by Ord. No. 1509]
ART, MUSIC OR PHOTOGRAPHY STUDIO — Any establishment, or portion
thereof, which is used for the education, display and/or creation of art,
music and/or photography, and including incidental sales of related items.
ARTERIAL STREET — For the definition of "arterial street," see
"thoroughfare." The following Borough streets are hereby classified as
"arterial streets":
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:470
Brierly Lane (all)
Eighth Avenue (all)
Farragut Street (part) and Vondera Street (all); connecting Main Street
and Homestead-Duquesne Road
Homestead-Duquesne Road (all)
22nd Avenue (part); connecting Main Street and West Street
22nd Avenue Extension (all); connecting West Street with West Run Road
Main Street (all)
Ravine Street (all)
West Street (all)
West Run Road (all)
Whitaker Way (all)
ATM — Any automatic teller machine (as used in the finance industry).
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR — The major or minor repair, rebuilding or
reconditioning of motor vehicles or parts thereof, including collision (body
and frame) service, painting, and steam cleaning of vehicles.
AUTOMOTIVE, MOBILE HOME, BOAT, CAMPER OR TRAILER SALES —
Any business in which new or used motor vehicles, mobile homes, boats,
campers or trailers (under 9,000 pounds GVW) are offered for sale, rental
or lease, which may also include the use of a paved area in an open
yard for display purposes and a building(s) for offices, showrooms and/or
service repair areas, provided that any such service/repair area is contained
entirely within an enclosed building, and provided that all items offered for
sale, rental or lease are displayed and offered only on the premises.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION OR GARAGE —
Any retail business, including buildings and premises, where gasoline,
oil, grease, antifreeze, other coolants, batteries, tires, spark plugs,
bulbs, fuses, exhaust systems, water hoses, fan belts, brake and
transmission fluids, brakes, windshield wipers and blades, wheel
bearings, suspension systems, mirrors, radiators, heating and airconditioning
systems, electrical systems, fuel/oil pumps and lines, and
other motor vehicle parts or accessories may be sold, supplied, cleaned,
repaired, serviced and/or dispensed at retail; and where, in addition,
the following services may be rendered and sales made:
(1) Minor vehicle repair work.
Soft drinks or other nonalcoholic beverages, packaged food,
tobacco products, and similar convenience goods for service
station customers, as accessory uses clearly incidental to the
principal use.
(2)
Vehicle washing and waxing, by hand; service to be provided by the
employee(s), not the customer.
(3)
A.
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:471
AUTOMOTIVE WRECKING OR SALVAGE — Any establishment which
includes the dismantling or wrecking of motor vehicles, mobile homes,
boats, campers or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled,
partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked motor vehicles, mobile homes,
boats, campers, trailers or their parts.
BANNER — A sign mounted with metal brackets to a streetlight within
the Borough. Banners may only be used to identify a specific area of the
Borough or to acknowledge a specific season or holiday or promote a
(4) Road maps and other informational material.
(5) Public rest rooms.
(6) Warranty maintenance.
(7) Safety inspections.
And, in addition, the following sales and services shall be expressly
excluded from this definition:
(1) Recapping or regrooving tires.
(2) Painting, of any kind.
Collision work, of any kind; including, but not limited to, body and/
or frame work.
(3)
Major engine repairs which require the removal of the head or
crankcase or which require storage of the vehicle or accessory
vehicle anywhere on the premises for any period of time in excess
of two calendar weeks.
(4)
(5) Any work which requires racing the motor.
The sale of any motor vehicle, motor home, mobile home, boat,
camper, trailer or other vehicle or accessory vehicle from any
location inside or outside a structure on the lot.
(6)
The permanent or temporary storage of any vehicle, motor home,
mobile home, boat, camper, trailer or other vehicle or accessory
vehicle which is unlicensed, inoperable or partially dismantled for
any period exceeding two calendar weeks.
(7)
The dismantling, salvaging or storage of any vehicle, motor home,
mobile home, boat, camper, trailer or other accessory vehicle or
used vehicle part.
(8)
(9) The sale of any alcoholic beverage.
Automatic vehicle washing and/or waxing devices; except as may
be provide elsewhere in this chapter as an approved conditional
use accessory to the automotive service station or service station
garage.
(10)
B.
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:472
community event and may not be used to advertise a specific individual
commercial use or sales event.
BANNER CLUSTER — A grouping of banners located along a specific street
or within a specific district in the Borough, all containing the same design
and/or wording. A banner cluster shall consist of no less than two banners
and no more than 100 banners. Banner clusters may not be co-located with
banners which are not part of the banner cluster.
BASEMENT or CELLAR — Any story, wholly or partly underground, but
having at least 1/2 of its height below the average level of the adjoining
ground.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — Any single-family dwelling which is the principal
residence of the owner/operator, where no more than four sleeping rooms
are offered to transient overnight guest for compensation and where the
only meal available to overnight guests is breakfast.
BILLBOARD — Any off-premises sign which advertises an establishment,
activity, person, product or service which is unrelated to or unavailable on
the premises on which it is situated and which may be either freestanding
or attached to or applied directly to the surface of a building or other
structure.
BOARD — Any body granted jurisdiction under this chapter or under the
Municipalities Planning Code to render final adjudications.151
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any building, structure or part thereof in which
more than four sleeping rooms are provided by the owner or operator
for compensation to transient or nontransient individuals and where meals
are available or provided. A boardinghouse shall not include dormitories,
fraternity or sorority houses, or any residence that provides personal
services associated with group residences, group care facilities, transitional
dwellings or personal care homes, as defined by this chapter.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Munhall, Pennsylvania.
BUFFER YARD — Any landscaped area of certain specific dimensions as
may be required by this chapter, which shall be planted and maintained
with approved landscaping materials and which is designed to serve as
a buffer between adjacent uses of differing character; a plan for which
has been designed by the owner or a certified landscape architect under
contract from the owner and which has been reviewed and approved by the
Commission.
BUILDABLE LOT AREA — The area of the lot, exclusive of all required
yards, setbacks and buffers, upon which a building may be constructed.
BUILDING — Any structure designed or intended for the support,
enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattel or property.
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:473
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — Any subordinate building detached from, but on
the same lot as, the principal building; the use of which is incidental and
accessory to that of the main building or use.
BUILDING, HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the
highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deckline of mansard roofs, and
the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE — See "setback line."
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — Any building in which the main or principal use
of the lot upon which said building is situated is conducted.
BUILDING SPACING — The minimum distance between two buildings at
their closest points, measured from the outermost wall or projection of each
building, excluding bay windows, chimneys, flues, columns, ornamental
features, cornices and gutters, and provided that any such exception does
not encroach more than two feet into the required minimum distance
between the buildings.
BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS — The term used to describe the
requirements outlining the size of permitted structures in a district and the
relationship between permitted structures, required open space, required
buffer areas, and lot lines. Requirements may include standards outlining
the maximum or minimum size and dimensions of permitted structures,
zoning lots, yard areas, buffers or other open spaces.
BUSINESS CLASSIFICATIONS —
CONVENIENCE BUSINESS — Commercial establishments situated
along high-volume traffic corridors (arterial streets) only, which are
generally located in close proximity to residential districts.
Convenience business classification uses generally include, but are
not necessarily limited to, a mix of residential, professional office,
personal service and convenience retail uses (including drugstores,
branch financial institutions, ATMs, beauty and/or barber shops, carryout
establishments, dry cleaning and laundry pickup establishments,
florists, newsstands, eating establishments with less than 5,000 square
feet of GFA, and grocery and convenience stores with less than 10,000
square feet of GFA, but specifically excluding fast food and drive-in
restaurants and drinking establishments). Uses in this classification
tend to serve daily consumer needs.
A.
GENERAL BUSINESS — Commercial uses situated along high-volume
traffic corridors (arterial streets) or near major thoroughfares and/
or their intersections, and which, in addition to serving day-to-day
needs of a neighborhood or smaller community, also supply the more
durable and permanent needs of the entire community. Uses generally
include, but are not necessarily limited to, supermarkets, business
services, hardware, apparel, footwear, appliances, furniture, discount
and department stores, all types of eating and drinking establishments,
B.
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:474
BUSINESS DISTRICTS —
BUSINESS SERVICES — Any profit-making activity which renders services
primarily to other commercial or industrial enterprises, or which services
and repairs appliances and machines used in homes and/or business.
Business services uses generally include, but are not limited to, advertising
and public relations firms, management and consulting services, security
and maintenance services, equipment rental/leasing, and computer- and
data-processing-related sales and services.
BUSINESS, WHOLESALE — Any business establishment that sells
commodities in large quantities or by the piece to retailers, jobbers, other
wholesale establishments, or manufacturing establishments, where these
commodities are intended for further resale, use in the fabrication of a
product, or use by a business service establishment.
CANOPY — Any lightweight structure attached to the ground and/or to a
wall and which is extended over a sidewalk or other pedestrian walkway,
where such structure is used primarily for purposes of shelter and not
advertising.
CARPORT — Any structure used for the shelter of a vehicle, which includes
a roof attached to the side or back of the principal building and/or is
supported by columns, and which is substantially open to light and air on
two or more sides.
CARTWAY — That portion of a public street right-of-way used for vehicular
traffic; usually the inside curb-to-curb width of the roadway.
CAR WASH — Any structure, or portion thereof, either fully or partially
enclosed, where one or more vehicles may be washed using mechanized
equipment, either manual (self-service) or automated.
CASINO — A place for gambling, including off-track betting, provided said
place is licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to conduct
gambling on said premises.[Added 9-27-2006 by Ord. No. 1509]
CELLAR — See "basement."
CEMETERY — Any land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
human or animal dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including
crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries if operated in connection with
and within the boundaries of such cemetery.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate of use, occupancy and
compliance issued by the Chief Building Officer upon site inspection,
attesting that the structure and/or the proposed use:
financial institutions, theaters, automobile service stations, truck and
auto sales and service, hotels and motels and commercial recreation.
A. B-1 Convenience Business District.
B. B-2 General Business District.
A. Meets all requirements of this chapter.
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:475
CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL — The person appointed by Council to review
and approve all proposed plans for new construction in the Borough to
assure compliance with all applicable construction standards, to monitor
construction progress in accordance with the approved plans, and to issue
a certificate of occupancy certifying completion of the project in accordance
with the approved construction plans and all applicable construction
standards.
CHILD DAY CARE — Administering to the needs of infants, toddlers,
preschool children and children outside of normal school hours by persons
other than the parents, guardians, custodians or relatives by blood,
marriage or adoption of the children for any part of the twenty-four-hour
day at a location other than the child's personal residence.
CHURCH — Any building, other than a dwelling used primarily as a place
of worship for a recognized religious denomination, which may also include
as accessory uses rooms for religious education, social or recreational
activities, administrative facilities, and child or elderly day care.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — The unobstructed line of sight along both
roads or driveways at an intersection and across their included corner
for distances sufficient to allow the operators of vehicles approaching
simultaneously to see each other in time to prevent a collision. The
minimum sight triangle may vary according to the type of street and the
posted legal speed limit. Sight distance along the street shall be measured
at the height of the driver's eye, which is assumed for purposes of this
definition to be 3.75 feet above the surface of the roadway.
CLINIC, MEDICAL — Any establishment for the examination, diagnosis and
treatment of human outpatients by doctors or dentists, including doctor,
dental or medical offices, provided that patients are not kept overnight
except under emergency conditions.
CLINIC, VETERINARY — Any establishment where veterinarians examine
and treat animals, including the temporary boarding of not more than eight
animals during treatment.
CLUB — Any building or portion thereof or premises used for social, literary,
political, educational or recreational purposes primarily for the exclusive
use of members or their guests.
COLLECTOR STREET — For the definition of "collector street," see
"thoroughfare." The following Borough streets are hereby classified as
"collector streets":
9th Avenue (all)
10th Avenue (all)
22nd Avenue (Maple to Main)
Complies with all approved and completed construction plans in
accordance with applicable construction standards.
B.
C. May be occupied for the specific proposed use.
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:476
Andrew Street (8th Avenue to 18th Avenue)
Calvert Drive (all)
Cambria Street (all)
Caroline Avenue (Main to Shady)
Charles Street (Woodlawn to James)
Crawford Avenue (all)
Elizabeth Street (Main to Shady)
East Eugene Street (Main to Valewood)
Superior (Main to Harvey)
Franklin Street (all)
Gates Drive (West Run Road to Vivian)
Grace Street (all)
Green Avenue (all)
Hamilton Road (all)
Harvey Avenue (Superior to Caroline)
Highwood Street (Hilltop to Whitaker Way)
James Street (Main to South Charles Extension)
W. Larkspur Street (West Vine to Whitaker Way)
Lawrence Avenue (all)
Lea Street (Main to Franklin)
Lehigh Avenue (all)
Longfellow Drive (all)
Maple (all)
Marion Street (all)
Martha Street (all)
McClure Street (all)
McKinley (Main to Shady)
McWhinney Street (all)
Miller (Grace to Cambria)
Oliver Road (Main to Marion)
Roberta Drive (all)
Shady Avenue (all)
Tioga Street (all)
Union Street (all)
Valewood Drive (Eugene to Harvey)
Venango (Crawford to Union and Lehigh to Tioga)
Verna Drive (all)
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:477
Virginia (Grace to McWhinney)
Wayne Road (all)
Woodhill Drive (all)
Woodlawn Avenue (Main to Charles Extension)
York Street (all)
COMMERCIAL — Engaging in a business, enterprise, activity or other
undertaking for profit.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION — Any enterprise operated for profit by other
than a public entity, indoors or outdoors, for the pursuit, with or without
an admission charge/fee, of sports or leisure activities, including, but not
limited to, golf or batting practice facilities, miniature or regulation golf
courses, bowling alleys, ice or roller skating rinks, playing fields, racquet
clubs, swimming pools, billiard or pool halls, dance halls, amusement parks,
amphitheaters, stadiums, amusement arcades, spas and health clubs where
the principal use includes a gymnasium, exercise room, swimming pool and/
or other sports facilities and other similar facilities.
COMMERCIAL OR BUSINESS SCHOOL — Any establishment operated for
profit which provides primarily nonacademic vocational or trade education
courses, training and/or programs.
COMMISSION — The Munhall Borough Planning Commission.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Any parcel of land, area of water or combination
of land and water within a development which has been designated for and
is intended to be used for the enjoyment and use of residents or occupants
of the development, but excluding streets, off-street parking and loading
areas, and areas set aside for public facilities.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN or MASTER PLAN — A plan, or any portion
thereof, which has been adopted by the Commission and Council, showing
the general location and extent of present and proposed physical facilities
including residential, industrial and commercial land uses, major
thoroughfares, parks, schools, and other community facilities. This plan
establishes the goals, objectives and policies of the community.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted within a district, other than a
principally permitted use, which requires the issuance of a conditional use
permit by the Zoning Officer which has first been authorized by Council
assuring compliance with specific standards and criteria established for the
subject use.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Zoning Officer upon
approval by Borough Council to allow a conditional use to be established
within a zoning district.
CONDOMINIUM — A form of property ownership in which units in a
building or group of buildings are individually owned while the structure(s),
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:478
common areas and facilities are owned on a proportional, undivided basis
by all of the owners in common.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or other
structure, including the placement and/or securing of manufactured homes.
CONSTRUCTION TRAILER — Any vehicle or accessory trailer which is used
as a temporary field office or for storage purposes during the period of
construction at the construction site.
CORNER LOT — See "lot types."
COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Munhall.
COUNTY — The County of Allegheny, Pennsylvania.
CUL-DE-SAC — See "thoroughfare."
DAY — Defined and measured as one calendar day wherever referenced in
this chapter.
DAY-CARE CENTER (ADULT) — Any facility providing personal care for a
period of time which is less than 24 consecutive hours for more than two,
but not more than six, adults who are not relatives of the operator and who,
because of physical or mental infirmity, require assistance to meet personal
needs, but who do not require nursing care.
DAY-CARE CENTER (CHILD) — Any facility providing child day care,
supervision and/or instruction for seven or more children under the age of
16, and for a period of less than 24 hours, and which has been licensed by
the commonwealth.
DAY-CARE HOME (CHILD) — See "group day-care home (child)."
DEAD-END STREET — See "thoroughfare."
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under this chapter or the Municipalities Planning Code to do
so, either by reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of
appeals from determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the Court
of Common Pleas of Allegheny County and the Magisterial District Judge
serving the Borough of Munhall.152
DENSITY — A unit of measurement expressing the number of dwelling units
per acre of land. Unless otherwise specified, any reference in this chapter
to density shall be interpreted as meaning the "gross density."
DENSITY, GROSS — The number of dwelling units per gross (total) acreage
of the land to be developed.
DENSITY, NET — The number of dwelling units per net acre of land to
be developed (only the particular parcel being proposed for development,
excluding proposed streets, etc.).
152. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:479
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania's
Department of Education.
DEPARTMENT STORE — Any retail establishment which sells a variety of
personal and household merchandise, including clothing, shoes, cosmetics,
jewelry and other fashion accessories, furniture, appliances, linens,
glassware and china, kitchenware, housewares, notions, sporting goods, dry
goods, luggage, candy, cards and gifts, toys, games and books, photographic
equipment and similar items. Such an establishment may also include the
following accessory uses: restaurant, snack shop, retail bakery, travel
service, ticket agency, beauty/barber shop(s), automobile service center,
community meeting rooms, catalog shopping service and other similar uses.
DEP — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania's Department of Environmental
Protection or any successor agency.
DETERMINATION — 153
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent for the landowner, or leaseholder
or tenant with the permission of the landowner, who undertakes a
development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any change to real estate, including, but not limited
to, the erection, construction or placement of a structure; the building of
utilities, streets, off-street parking and loading areas, or other paved areas;
filling, grading, excavation, mining, drilling, or dredging operations; the
placement or securing of manufactured homes; and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for the development of a site,
including a plat or subdivision, all covenants relating to the use, location
and bulk and area of any structure, intensity of use or density of the
development, streets, public ways and parking facilities, common open
space and public facilities.
DISH, SATELLITE — That part of a satellite-signal-receiving antenna which
is shaped like a saucer or dish, whether it is spherical, parabolic or similar
in shape.
DISTRIBUTION FACILITY — Any establishment in which goods
manufactured on or off site are temporarily stored prior to being shipped
out or picked up for delivery to retail or wholesale businesses or the
ultimate purchaser.
Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with the
administration of this chapter or applications thereunder, except the
following:
(1) The Borough Council of the Borough of Munhall.
(2) The Zoning Hearing Board of the Borough of Munhall.
A.
Determinations shall be appealable only to the boards designated as
having jurisdiction for such appeal.
B.
153. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:480
DISTRICT — A part, zone or geographic area within the Borough within
which certain zoning or development regulations apply.
DUPLEX — Any two-family dwelling in which each unit has its own separate
floor(s) and in which no one story or floor of a building is shared by both
units. For a definition of "two-family dwelling," see "dwelling."
DWELLING — Any building or structure (except a house trailer or mobile
home) which is wholly or partly used for living or sleeping by one or
more human occupants, but not including hotels, motels, lodging houses or
boardinghouses.
DWELLING TYPES — Types of dwellings as referenced in this chapter
are defined as follows: (Note: See also, the definition for "transitional
dwelling.")
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — Any residential building or part thereof
containing not more than one dwelling unit and which is the only
principal building on the lot.
A.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — Any residential building containing two
independent attached dwelling units, each having a separate entrance,
and which is the only principal building on the lot.
B.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — Any residential building or portion
thereof containing three or more dwelling units. Types of multifamily
dwellings as referenced in this chapter are defined as follows:
Garden apartment building. Any multifamily residential building
which:
Contains at least five, but not more than 24, individual dwelling
units.
(a)
Has dwelling units on not more than three separate floor levels
or stories and is not more than 2 1/2 stories in total abovegrade
height.
(b)
Is not more than 180 feet in length and not more than 60 feet
in width.
(c)
In which dwelling units share a common entrance to the
outside, usually through a common corridor.
(d)
In which each unit:
[1] Is wholly contained on one floor or story of the structure.
[2] May have other unit(s) either below, alongside, or above it.
Is separated from any and all abutting unit(s) on the same
floor by either a common corridor or an approved fire wall.
[3]
(e)
(1)
High-rise apartment building. Any multifamily residential building
which:
(2)
C.
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:481
(a) Contains five or more individual dwelling units.
Is at least six, but not more than seven, stories in above-grade
height.
(b)
In which each unit may assume either single-story or
multistory configurations.
(c)
Mid-rise apartment building. Any multifamily residential building
which:
(a) Contains five or more individual dwelling units.
Is at least three, but no more than five, stories in above-grade
height.
(b)
In which each unit may assume either single-story or
multistory configurations.
(c)
(3)
Townhouse building. Any multifamily residential building which:
(a) Is not more than 2 1/2 stories in total above-grade height.
Contains at least five, but no more than eight, attached
dwellings per building.
(b)
In which each unit:
Is separated from the adjoining unit(s) by a continuous,
unpierced vertical wall extending from the basement to
the roof.
[1]
[2] Has independent access directly to the outside.
[3] Has no other units either above or below.
(c)
(4)
Triplex. Any single multifamily residential building which:
(a) Contains three attached dwelling units.
(b) Is the only principal building on the lot.
(c) Is not more than 2 1/2 stories in total above-grade height.
In which each unit:
[1] Has at least two walls exposed to the outside.
Shares one or two common walls, floors or ceilings with an
adjoining unit(s)
[2]
[3] May be above or below each other or side by side.
(d)
(5)
Quadruplex. Any single multifamily residential building which:
(a) Contains four individual attached dwelling units.
(6)
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:482
DWELLING UNIT — Any dwelling or part thereof which is designed for use
by not more than one family unit as a single dwelling unit; may also be
abbreviated as "d.u."
EASEMENT — Any written and recorded authorization by a property owner
for the limited use by another party and for a specified purpose of any
designated part of his property.
EATING AND/OR DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT — Any retail service
establishment which is open to the general public for the preparation,
sale and consumption on the premises of food and/or beverages, includes
restaurants, bars, taverns, cocktail lounges, bistros/sidewalk cafes and
other similar establishments.
EGRESS, MEANS OF — A continuous and unobstructed path of travel from
any point in a building or a structure to a public way. A means of egress
consists of three separate and distinct parts, the exit access, the exit and
the exit discharge. A means of egress comprises the vertical and horizontal
means of travel and shall include intervening room spaces, doors, hallways,
corridors, passageways, balconies, ramps, stairs, enclosures, lobbies,
horizontal exits, courts and yards.
ELDERLY HOUSING FACILITY — Any multifamily residential building
containing 12 or more dwelling units where occupancy is restricted to
elderly persons or households (not more than three persons related or
unrelated who occupy a single dwelling unit, at least one of whom is
elderly). Such facilities may include provisions for emergency first aid care,
adult day care, therapy, personal care, nursing, common dining, recreation
and independent or semi-independent living. For purposes of this definition,
"elderly housing facility" shall not include convalescent homes, nursing
homes, group residential facilities or homes for the aged.
ELDERLY PERSON — Any person who is 60 years of age or older or any
person under 60 years of age who is handicapped such that his physical
impairments are of a long-term nature and which impede his ability to live
independently without a suitable special housing environment.
ENGINEER — Any person who is a registered professional civil engineer
licensed by the commonwealth.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — Any engineer appointed by Council to serve as
the Borough's Municipal Engineer.
(b) Is the only principal building on the lot.
(c) Is not more than 2 1/2 stories in total above-grade height.
In which each unit:
[1] Has at least two walls exposed to the outside.
Shares one or two common walls, floors or ceilings with an
adjoining unit(s).
[2]
[3] May be above or below each other or side by side.
(d)
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:483
ESSENTIAL PUBLIC SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by licensed or publicly franchised public utilities, the Borough
or any other governmental agency, of underground natural gas, electrical,
telephone, cable television, steam or water transmission, distribution,
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems or sites, including
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm,
traffic signals, hydrants, or other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith which are reasonably necessary for the furnishing
of adequate service by such public utility or municipality or other
governmental agency, their contractors or agents for the public health,
safety or general welfare, but not including buildings.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
FACADE — Any exterior wall of a building exposed to public view.
FACTORY-BUILT HOUSING — Any factory-built structure designed for longterm
residential use, the components of which are essentially constructed
or assembled off site and then delivered and installed on site, including
manufactured, modular and mobile homes.
FAMILY — Any person living alone or two or more persons living together
as a single housekeeping unit in one dwelling unit, as distinguished from
a group occupying a "group residence," "rooming house," "personal care
home," "club," "group care facility," "motel or hotel," "dormitory," "fraternity
house," "sorority house," "nursing home" or "transitional dwelling"; and
provided, however, that the term "family" shall not include more than six
persons unrelated to each other by blood, marriage or legal adoption living
together as a single housekeeping unit.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — See "day-care center, adult."
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT or DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — Any restaurant
where prepared or premeasured food items are prepared and sold, where
items are ordered by the customer at a window, counter or from a vehicle
rather than from a table, and which has been designed to facilitate quick
service and which sells takeout or sit-down food orders for consumption
on and/or off the immediate premises; provided, however, that "fast-food
or drive-in restaurant" does not include sit-down buffet or cafeteria-style
restaurants.
FENCE — Any structure constructed of wood, metal, wire, mesh, plastic
materials or masonry erected for the purpose of screening, privacy,
protection, delineation or confinement of the property.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION OR INDUSTRY — Any bank, savings and loan
association, credit union or other similar institution or use that lends money
or is engaged in a finance-related activities.
FLOODPLAIN — That land, including the floodway fringe and the floodway,
which is subject to inundation by a regional flood.
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT — All areas subject to inundation by the waters
of a regional flood; including areas identified as floodway (FW), and floodfringe
(FF) areas. The basis for delineation of this district shall be the
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:484
same as that designated in the documentation of the Flood Insurance Study,
the Flood Insurance Rate Map, and the Flood Boundary and Floodway
Map for the Borough, as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Administration (FEMA).
FLOOD, REGIONAL — Large floods which have previously occurred or
which may be expected to occur on a particular stream because of like
physical characteristics. The regional flood generally has an average
frequency of the one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood.
FLOODWAY — That portion of the floodplain, including the channel, which
is reasonably required to convey the regional floodwaters. Floods of lessfrequent
recurrence are usually contained completely within the floodway.
FLOODWAY FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain, excluding the
floodway, where development may be allowed under certain restrictions.
FLOOR AREA, USABLE — The measurement of "usable floor area" shall
be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building,
measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls; in establishing
minimum usable floor areas for dwellings, this measurement shall exclude
all basement or cellar floors.
FOOD PROCESSING — The preparation, storage or processing of food
products. Examples of these activities include bakeries, dairies, canneries
and other similar businesses.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involve any land development.154
FREIGHT TERMINAL — Any building and the adjacent loading area(s)
where cargo is temporarily stored and where commercial vehicles load and
unload cargo on a regular basis, which may or may not include facilities for
the maintenance, fueling, temporary storage or dispatching of the vehicles.
FRONT YARD — See "yard, front."
FUNERAL HOME — Any building which is used for the embalming and
temporary display of deceased human beings in preparation for burial,
including ceremonies normally associated therewith, but not including
facilities for the cremation of the deceased.
GARDEN APARTMENT — See "dwelling."
GARAGE, COMMUNITY — Any accessory building used for the temporary
storage of motor vehicles owned by and used by the owner or tenants of the
lot and for the storage of two or more, but not more than four, additional
motor vehicles which may be owned by persons other than the owner or
tenants, but who are residents of the immediate neighborhood.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — Any detached accessory building or portion of a
principal building in a residential district for the parking or temporary
154. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:485
storage of automobiles, travel trailers, campers, and/or boats of the
landowners or occupants of the premises only, and wherein:
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any principal or accessory building, other than a
private garage available to the general public and used for parking or
temporary storage of motor vehicles, but which is not used for the
commercial repair, maintenance or long-term (periods in excess of one
calendar week) storage of motor vehicles.
GFA — See "gross floor area."
GARAGE, SERVICE STATION — See "automotive service station."
GENERAL COMMERCIAL — Any authorized commercial use which is not
included in the definition of "commercial recreation," "shopping center,"
"retail business," "personal service" or "business service."
GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA) OF A RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — The sum
of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a residential building,
excluding any basement floor areas, but including the area of roofed
porches and roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured between
interior faces of exterior wall or from the center line of a common wall
separating two buildings.
GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA) OF A NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING — The
sum of the gross horizontal area(s) of several floors of a nonresidential
building measured from the interior faces of exterior walls or from the
center line of a common wall separating two buildings. In calculating the
parking requirements of any such building, the "gross floor area" shall
include all floor areas devoted to the principal use, including accessory
storage areas on any floor other than the basement level, basement-level
areas devoted to the principal use, areas on any level devoted to the
production or processing of goods or to business/professional offices and
similar areas; and shall exclude stairs, rest rooms, washrooms, elevator
shafts, maintenance areas, machine and equipment rooms, display
windows, fitting rooms, and similar areas on any level, and accessory
storage areas on the basement level only (except where storage is the
principal use).
GROSS LEASABLE AREA (GLA) — The sum of the total floor areas designed
for or intended for the exclusive use of building occupant(s), including
basements, mezzanines and multiple stories, but excluding public or
common areas such as public rest rooms, corridors, stairs, elevator shafts,
machine and equipment rooms, lobbies or mall areas (whether open or
enclosed). The GLA shall be measured from the center line of common walls
Not more than one space is rented for parking to a person who is not a
resident of a dwelling on the same lot.
A.
No more than one commercial vehicle per dwelling unit is parked or
stored.
B.
The commercial vehicle permitted does not exceed two tons of rated
capacity.
C.
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:486
or joint partitions and from the inside face of exterior walls. It is generally
the area for which tenants pay rent, including sales and integral stock
areas.
GROUP RESIDENCE — Any dwelling unit licensed for the entire period of
occupancy by the commonwealth, where room and board is provided to not
more than six mentally or physically handicapped or disabled persons of
any age who are permanent residents in need of supervision and specialized
services and where qualified supervisors on any shift provide health, social
and/or rehabilitative services to the residents.
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME (CHILD) — Any facility licensed for the entire
period of occupancy by the commonwealth, where care is provided to at
least six, but not more than 12, children at any one time and where childcare
areas are also used as a family residence.
GROUP CARE FACILITY (ADULT) — Any facility licensed for the entire
period of occupancy by the commonwealth, in which resident care is
provided for more than six mentally or physically handicapped or disabled
persons of any age who are permanent residents in need of supervision and
specialized services and qualified supervisors on any shift provide health,
social and/or rehabilitative services to the residents.
GVW — The gross vehicle weight.
HEARING — An administrative proceeding conducted by a board pursuant
to § 909.1 of the Municipalities Planning Code.155
HEAVY INDUSTRY — Any manufacturing, assembly, fabricating,
processing, service, research and development, or distribution activity or
facility which is not included in the definition of the "general service"
industrial classification but which complies with the performance standards
of this chapter.
HEIGHT, MAXIMUM — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation(s) of the proposed finished grade(s) immediately adjacent to all
exterior walls of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs,
to the deckline of mansard roofs, and to the mean height between eaves
and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. Chimneys, flues, stacks, fire
escapes, elevator penthouses, ventilators, skylights, standpipes, elevated
water tanks and similar roof structures required for the subject building's
operation and/or maintenance, and which are not intended for human
habitation, and church spires and towers, flagpoles and/or other approved
unique design features and which are not intended for human habitation
shall not be included in calculating maximum height.
HIGH-RISE APARTMENT — See "dwelling."
HISTORIC AREA — Any area, district or zone within the Borough
designated by a unit of local, state or federal government as a historic
district within which certain buildings, structures, appurtenances and/or
places are of basic and vital importance because of their:
155. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:487
HISTORIC STRUCTURE OR SITE — Any structure or site within the
Borough designated by any unit of local, state or federal government as
a significant historic structure or site and/or which has been listed on the
National Register of Historic Places.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any activity, profession, occupation, service, craft,
revenue-enhancing hobby or other activity which:
HOSPITAL — Any public or private establishment (including sanitariums)
which is used for the short-term care and treatment of patients who have
physical or mental illnesses (excluding patients who have been found to be
criminally insane), and which may or may not include facilities for major
surgery.
HOTEL, MOTEL or APARTMENT HOTEL — Any building or group of
buildings containing sleeping rooms and supporting services which are
offered for rent to the general public on a daily or weekly basis and which
may include support services such as restaurants, cocktail lounges, meeting
rooms, recreational facilities, laundry facilities, and/or living quarters for a
resident manager or proprietor; also includes motor lodges, tourist courts
and inns, but specifically excludes boardinghouses or rooming houses,
fraternities or sororities, and dormitories.
INDUSTRIAL — See "manufacturing."
A. Association with history.
Unique architectural style and scale (including materials, proportion,
form and architectural detail).
B.
Being a part of or related to a square, park or area, the design or
general arrangement of which should be preserved and/or developed
according to a fixed plan based on cultural, historical or architectural
motives or purposes.
C.
D. Specific designation as a historic site or structure.
Is clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the
premises as a dwelling.
A.
B. Is conducted entirely within the principal structure.
C. Is conducted by members of the family residing on the premises only.
Is conducted in a manner which does not produce any significant
adverse effect on the surrounding residential neighborhood.
D.
Does not involve retail sale of goods or commodities from any location
on the premises.
E.
Does not involve the provision of services to more than three persons
or "customers" at any one time.
F.
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:488
INDUSTRIAL AND MIXED-USE CLASSIFICATIONS —
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS —
INSTITUTION — Any building or land which is designed and intended to be
used to aid people in need of mental, therapeutic, rehabilitative counseling
or other correctional services.
JUNK BUILDINGS, SHOPS AND/OR YARDS — Any building, structure,
property, land or combination of the same upon or within which junk is
stored, salvaged or processed. See also "salvage yard."
KENNEL — Any lot, dwelling, business or other premises where four or
more dogs, cats or other domesticated animals more than four months of
age, whether or not for profit, are kept, bred, trained, boarded or sold,
and which may also offer provisions for minor medical treatment of these
animals.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
GENERAL SERVICE — Restricted light-manufacturing- and servicerelated
uses which are generally clean, quiet and free of objectionable
or hazardous conditions or nuisances; which operate primarily within
enclosed structures, have limited outside storage, and generate only
light vehicular traffic; includes all types of construction or building
contractor- and subcontractor-related businesses, building material
suppliers, lumberyards, horticultural nurseries, and auto body and
paint shops; these uses may serve as a transitional buffer between
industrial uses and residential or commercial districts.
A.
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL — Industrial uses with relatively few restrictions,
which may include, but are not necessarily limited to, a variety of
manufacturing, assembly, compounding, fabricating, processing,
treatment and/or other related heavy industrial activities which are
not included in the definition of either the "general service" industrial
classification or the term "light industry," but which otherwise conform
with the performance standards of this chapter.
B.
RIVERFRONT DEVELOPMENT — A mixed-use classification which is
intended to facilitate the redevelopment of the former USX industrial
site along the Monongahela River by encouraging a variety of wellplanned,
larger-scale and high-quality mix of commercial, residential
and flex office uses; requiring a detailed overall site development land
planning process and forethought assuring the quality of
redevelopment of the site.
C.
A. GS — General Service District.
B. HI — Heavy Industrial District.
C. RDD — Riverfront Development District.
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:489
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan prepared by a prospective developer
in accordance with the application requirements of the Borough of
Munhall's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Chapter 389 of
the Code, for review by the Commission and the subsequent approval or
rejection by Council of a proposed land development as defined herein.
LAND OWNER or LANDOWNER — The legal owner of record of land or
the beneficial owner of land, including the holder of an option to purchase,
a lessee (if authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the
landowner), or such other person as may have a proprietary interest in the
land.
LANDSCAPING PLAN — A plan identifying each tree, shrub and other
planting by size, type and scientific name; a diagram or plot plan identifying
the location of each planting and such other diagrams, graphics, or reports
as are necessary to show the method of planting, staking and mulching,
grass seeding or sodding specifications and mixtures, and existing trees to
be preserved. Such plans shall be prepared by a registered professional
landscape architect for all developments of two or more acres in size.
LIGHT INDUSTRY — Industrial uses restricted to those which do not
produce noise, odors or vibrations, air or water pollution, fire hazards or
other disturbances or dangers to other properties in the vicinity. Light
industrial uses may include the manufacture, assembly or fabrication of
small home appliances, office machines, computers, electrical instruments,
timepieces, precision instruments, electronic devices, jewelry, optical
goods, musical instruments, novelties, lithographic plates, wood products,
printed materials, type composition, machine tools, dies, gauges, ceramics,
apparel, film processing, food products, plastic goods, pharmaceutical
goods, computer software and computer peripherals.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET — Off-street (not in the public right-ofway)
space conveniently located, accessible, and properly designed for the
temporary use by vehicles making bulk pickups or deliveries of merchandise
or materials.
LOCAL STREET — See "thoroughfare."
LOT — Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, "lot" shall be
interpreted as meaning a zoning lot.
LOT TYPES — Types of lots as referenced in this chapter are defined as
follows:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on
a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or the tenure of the
occupancy.
A.
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective
occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
B.
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:490
LOT AREA — The total area within the boundary of a lot and excluding any
area of land within any dedicated public street right-of-way.
LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT — The quotient obtained by dividing the
total lot area by the total number of dwelling units to be located on any such
lot.
LOT COVERAGE, MAXIMUM — The ratio of enclosed ground-floor area of
all buildings on a lot to the horizontally projected area of the lot, expressed
as a percentage.
LOT DEPTH — The distance between the midpoints of straight lines
connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in the front of the lot and
the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear of the lot.
LOT FRONTAGE — The front of a lot shall be construed to be that portion
nearest the street. For purposes of determining yard requirements on
corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be
LOT OF RECORD — Any lot or parcel of land which is separately
recorded in the office of the County Recorder and which may or may
not be under common ownership with a contiguous lot(s) of record. A
lot of record may or may not be a zoning lot under this chapter and,
therefore, may or may not be a suitable building lot or buildable lot
under the requirements of this chapter.
A.
ZONING LOT — A parcel of land which is of sufficient size to meet
the minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area and to
provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required;
commonly also referred to as a "building lot" or a "buildable lot."
Any such lot shall have frontage on a dedicated and improved public
street or an approved private street and may consist of any one of the
following:
(1) A single lot of record.
(2) A portion of a lot of record.
A combination of complete lots of record, complete lot(s) of record
and portion(s) of lots of record, and/or portions of lots of record.
(3)
B.
CORNER LOT — A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.
A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner
lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines
to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than
135°.
C.
INTERIOR LOT — A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on only
one street.
D.
THROUGH LOT — A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more
than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may also be referred
to as "double frontage lots."
E.
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:491
considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under "yards"
in this article.
LOT LINES — The recorded or proposed boundary lines of a lot.
LOT LINE TYPES — The types of lot lines are as follows:
LOT LINE, FRONT — A lot line which is also the street right-of-way line
forming the boundary of the lot.
A.
LOT LINE, REAR — Normally the lot line that is most distant from and
most nearly parallel to the front lot line; except that, if a rear lot line
is less than 15 feet long or if the lot comes to a point at the rear, the
rear lot line shall be a line at least 15 feet long, lying wholly within the
lot, which is parallel to the front lot line; and except that, in the case of
either a through lot or a corner lot only, there shall be no rear lot line.
B.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is neither a front lot line nor a
rear lot line.
C.
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:492
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:493
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:494
LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF — The minimum area of any lot, as required by
this chapter, shall be computed exclusive of any portion of the right-of-way
of any public or private street.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between straight lines connecting the front
and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured at a right angle to the
line used in determining the lot depth at a distance equal to the required
minimum building setback (front building line) distance.
MAINTENANCE AND STORAGE FACILITIES — Land, buildings and
structures devoted primarily to the maintenance and storage of
construction equipment and materials.
MANUFACTURING — Businesses engaged in the mechanical or chemical
transformation of materials or substances into new products or engaged in
the processing or assembly of component parts of manufactured products,
provided that the new product is neither a structure nor other fixed
improvement.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Any factory-built home which:
MARINA — Any recreational boat docking and service facility for the
launching, mooring, servicing and/or storage (wet and dry) of recreational
boats and/or other water vehicles and also including the ancillary sale
of provisions, supplies and fuel. Such use may also include a restaurant,
ancillary boat and motor sales facilities and/or live-aboards.
MEDICAL OFFICE OR CLINIC — See "clinic, medical."
METHADONE TREATMENT FACILITY — Any facility that uses the drug
methadone in the treatment, maintenance or detoxification of a person; all
such facilities must be licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Health
or its successor, and the definition for this facility is not included in the term
"clinic, medical."[Added 9-27-2006 by Ord. No. 1509]
MID-RISE APARTMENT — See "dwelling."
A. Is a non-self-propelled vehicle transportable in one or more sections.
Is, in its traveling mode, eight feet or more in width or 40 or more feet
in length.
B.
C. Is built on a permanent chassis.
Is designated to be used as a dwelling unit, when connected to the
required utilities.
D.
Shall be secured and attached to a permanent foundation after having
had its towing apparatus and wheels removed.
E.
Bears a label which certifies that its construction is in full compliance
with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards of 1974 (effective June 15, 1976).
F.
G. After installation, is considered both a structure and real property.
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:495
MINERALS — Any aggregate or mass of mineral matter, whether or not
coherent. The term includes, but is not limited to, limestone and dolomite,
sand and gravel, rock and stone, earth, fill, slag, iron ore, zinc ore,
vermiculite and clay, anthracite and bituminous coal, coal refuse, peat and
crude oil and natural gas.156
MIXED USE OR OCCUPANCY — Conducting two of more different uses in
one building or on one lot.
MOBILE HOME — Any non-self-propelled vehicle or trailer, which:
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any site, or tract of land under single ownership,
upon which three or more mobile homes are parked and intended to be used
for habitation, either free or for a fee, including any roadways, structures,
vehicles or improvements which are used or are intended for use as part of
the park's facilities.
MODULAR HOME — Any factory-built home, which:
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — See "dwelling, multifamily."
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE or MPC — Also referred to in this
chapter as the "Planning Code" or the "MPC." The Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code under Act 247 of 1968 (P.L. 805, as amended,
53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.).
MUSEUM — Any public, private or quasi-public institution or building
intended for the acquisition, preservation, study and exhibition of works of
historical, artistic or scientific value.
Is designed, constructed, reconstructed or added to by means of
accessories in such manner as will permit the use and occupancy
thereof for human habitation when connected to utilities.
A.
B. Is resting on wheels, jacks, blocks or some other temporary foundation.
Exceeds a gross weight of 4,500 pounds and an overall length of 30
feet.
C.
May or may not (for any reason) be in full compliance with the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974.
D.
Is certified as meeting the applicable modular home building standards
as adopted by the commonwealth.
A.
Once certified, shall be subject to the same standards as site-built
homes.
B.
Shall be secured and attached to a permanent foundation after having
had its towing apparatus and wheels, if any, removed.
C.
D. After installation, is considered both a structure and real property.
156. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:496
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises in excess of those normally associated
with residential use. No-impact home-based businesses shall be permitted
as an accessory use. The following regulations shall apply to all no-impact
home-based businesses permitted under the provisions of this chapter. The
business or commercial activity must satisfy the following requirements:157
NONCONFORMITIES — Lots, uses of land, structures, signs or any
combination thereof which do not comply with the applicable bulk and area,
use, sign, or other provisions of this chapter, but which lawfully existed
prior to the enactment of this chapter or its amendments hereafter enacted.
NURSERY (HORTICULTURAL) — Land, buildings, structures or any
combination thereof designed, used or intended for use in storing,
cultivating or transplanting live trees, shrubs, flowers or other plants
offered for retail sale on the premises, including products used for
gardening, lawn care or landscaping.
NURSING HOME — A facility which is licensed by the commonwealth,
located within a dwelling to provide room and board, skilled or intermediate
nursing care and related medical or other health care services to five or
more permanent residents, excluding facilities for acute care or institutions
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
A.
The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
B.
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
C.
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
D.
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood.
E.
The business activity must not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
F.
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
G.
H. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
157. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:497
for the care and treatment of mental illness, alcoholism or narcotics
addiction.
OFFICE — Any room, set of rooms, building or part thereof, or place
wherein business of a clerical nature is transacted as part of or in support
of any public or private profession, business or industry.
OFFICE (ANCILLARY USE) — Any office which is not the principal use of
the building but which provides support services for the principal use.
OFFICE, FLEX — Any building(s) which may be leased to one or more
tenants, each of which may use their respective space for any combination
of office, manufacturing, research and development and/or warehousing
uses, provided only that:
OFF-TRACK-BETTING ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment which
includes off-track betting, under an approved license issued by the
commonwealth, as either a principal or accessory use, excluding dog- or
horse-racing tracks of any kind.
OPEN YARD OR SPACE — An area substantially open to the sky which may
be on the same lot with a building. The open space area may include, along
with the natural environmental features, recreational features (e.g., water
areas, swimming pools, and tennis courts) and/or facilities and structures
A minimum of 10% of the GFA in each individual building and a
minimum of 20% of the total GFA of all such buildings located in the
RDD (including any buildings in the RDD used only as offices) shall be
actually utilized as office space.
A.
The front building facade for any such building shall be designed and
constructed as if the building were to be used solely for office space.
B.
If any such building or use has a loading dock or platform which would
otherwise be visible from any public street right-of-way north of SR
837 (Eighth Avenue), it shall be screened from view by an approved
landscaped, earthen mound which is at least six feet in height.
C.
All truck access to any manufacturing or warehousing use shall be
limited to the rear of any such building or, if the front of the building
does not face the public right-of-way, truck access may be permitted on
the side of such building not facing the public right-of-way; provided,
however, that if the project is to be completed in phases, interim
truck access shall be permitted from the rear and/or both sides of
such building until all phases of the project are complete; and further
provided that such areas are screened from public view through
berming or landscaping, with all berming removed upon completion of
the project.
D.
"Front," for purposes of determining the front yard and front building
facade, shall mean that portion of the building which either fronts on
a public right-of-way or provides the main permanent source of ingress
and egress to the building, as identified in the building plans submitted
by the developer.
E.
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:498
that the Commission deems permissive, excluding streets, parking areas,
structures for habitation, and similar uses.
ORDINANCE, THE OR THIS — The Munhall Zoning Code or Zoning
Ordinance; this chapter.
OVERLAY DISTRICT — Any special purpose district described by the Zoning
Map, within which, through the superimposition or overlaying of a special
designation, special supplemental regulations and requirements apply in
addition to those of the underlying district.
PARKING LOT — Any lot, parcel of land or yard used regularly, in whole
or in part, for the off-street storage or parking of more than two vehicles,
where such usage is not an approved accessory use for a one- or two-family
dwelling.
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET — For the purpose of this chapter, an "offstreet
parking space" shall consist of an area having dimensions which are
at least nine feet wide and 19 feet in length; each such space shall be
adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both
sides, shall have access to a public thoroughfare with both the space and
its accessway having an adequate maneuvering area located totally outside
of any public right-of-way, and shall have an approved impervious, hard, allweather
surface.
PENNDOT — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania's Department of
Transportation.
PERFORMANCE BOND or SURETY BOND — A written agreement between
a subdivider or developer with the Borough, whereby the subdivider or
developer posts a performance or surety bond with the Borough for the
estimated amount of the total cost of construction, thereby guaranteeing
the completion of the physical improvements according to approved plans
and specifications and within the prescribed time period specified in the
agreement.
PERIMETER — The outer boundary of a development, site or area.
PERMANENT OPEN SPACE — See "open space."
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
PERSONAL CARE BOARDINGHOME — Any facility licensed by the
commonwealth, located within a dwelling, where room and board is
provided to five or more permanent residents who are mobile or semimobile
and require specialized services such as bathing, dressing, diet and
medication prescribed for self-administration for a period exceeding 24
hours, but who are not in need of hospitalization or skilled or intermediate
nursing care.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Any enterprise conducted for a fee which provides
personal services to the general public, such as shoe repair, watch repair,
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:499
dry cleaning (for pickup and delivery only), barber and beauty shops, travel
agencies and similar activities.
PILOT MANUFACTURING — Any establishment or part thereof used to
test concepts and ideas, determine physical layouts, material flows and
processes, types of equipment required, costs and other information
necessary prior to undertaking full-scale manufacturing/production of a
product or commodity.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area of land in which a variety
of housing types, commercial or industrial facilities are permitted in a
preplanned environment under more flexible bulk and area standards than
those normally applied under this chapter. The procedure for approval
of such a development contains requirements in addition to those of the
standard subdivision, such as building design principles and landscaping
plans.
PLANNING COMMISSION — See "commission."
PORCH — A roofed, open structure projecting from any wall of a building
and having no enclosed feature more than 30 inches above the floor thereof,
except awnings, screening or the columns necessary to support the roof.
PRESERVATION or PROTECTION — When used in connection with natural
and historic resources, shall include means to conserve and safeguard these
resources from wasteful or destructive use, but shall not be interpreted to
authorize the unreasonable restriction of forestry, mining or other lawful
uses of natural resources.158
PRINCIPAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any building or structure in
which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot upon which said
building or structure is situated.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main or principal use of the land or structures on
the land, as distinguished from a subordinate, ancillary or accessory use of
same.
PRIVATE — Of or pertaining to any building, structure, use or activity which
is limited to members of an organization or to other persons specifically
invited as guests, and where no advertisement or other inducement has
been made to the general public.
PRIVATE CLUB — An association organized and operated not for profit for
persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues, and which owns,
hires or leases premises, the use of which is restricted to such members
and their guests. The affairs and management of such an association are
conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body
which is chosen by the members. Food, meals and beverages may be served
on such premises, provided adequate cooking and dining room facilities are
available. Alcoholic beverages may be sold or served to members and their
guests, provided such service is secondary and incidental to the promotion
of some other common objective of the organization, and further provided
158. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:500
that such sale or service has been properly licensed by the Commonwealth
and is otherwise in full compliance with other applicable local, state and
federal laws.
PRIVATE GARAGE — See "garage, private."
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — Any accounting, general administrative,
architectural, bookkeeping, clerical services, dental, drafting, engineering,
executive, insurance, institutional, legal, medical, professional, real estate,
research, stenographic, veterinary medicine (excluding kennels) or writing
and editing office.
PUBLIC — Of or pertaining to any building, structure, use or activity owned,
controlled by or undertaken by any duly authorized governmental body.
PUBLIC BUILDING OR USE — Any publicly owned or operated park, school,
library, administrative and/or maintenance building, facility and/or
structure; not including public land, buildings or structures devoted solely
to the storage and maintenance of equipment and materials.
PUBLIC GARAGE — See "garage, public."
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by Council, the Zoning Board or the Commission intended to inform the
public and to solicit public comments and input prior to taking action on a
particular issue in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — Any public meeting or forum held pursuant to public
notice under the "Sunshine Act" of July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84).159
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Borough in accordance with the procedures outlined under the MPC.
PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY — See "essential public services."
PUBLIC UTILITY STRUCTURE — Any administrative, maintenance or
service building or structure operated by a public utility which does not
meet the definition of "essential service."
QUADRUPLEX — See "dwelling."
QUASI-PUBLIC USE — Any private or parochial school, private college or
university, or other similar facility of an educational, religious, charitable,
philanthropic or private nonprofit nature, and specifically excluding church
and hospital.
RDD — See "Industrial Districts, Riverfront Development District."
RECEIVER — Any apparatus which transforms a signal (transmitted or
relayed from or through a satellite system, cable system, the open air wave
or some other source and received by a signal-receiving antenna system)
into a telephone, radio, television or data transmission signal.
159. Editor's Note: The Sunshine Act, 65 P.S. § 271 et seq., 1986, July 3, P.L. 388, No. 84, was
repealed 10-15-1998 by P.L. 729, No. 93; see now the Sunshine Act, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et
seq.
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:501
RECREATION, PASSIVE — Recreational areas designed for leisure and
entertainment which generally do not involve active participatory sports,
but which may include sitting and picnic areas, benches, tables, walkways,
bikeways, fishing areas or accessways, scenic vistas or overlooks,
amphitheaters, wildlife sanctuaries, landscaped areas, architectural
features and similar facilities.
RECREATIONAL CAMPGROUND — Any land upon which two or more
travel trailers, campers, tents or other similar temporary seasonal
recreational structures and/or facilities are regularly accommodated with
or without charge, including any building, structure, facility or permanent
fixture which is related to and used or intended for use in providing such
accommodations.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY — Any publicly owned land, building, facility
or structure used or intended for use in serving the passive or active
recreational needs of the general public, including parks, swimming pools,
playgrounds, playing fields and courts, and specifically excluding
commercial recreation.
RECYCLING COLLECTION FACILITY — Any center for the acceptance
and processing of recyclable materials from the public, including glass or
plastic containers, aluminum or bimetal beverage cans or other containers,
newsprint, high-grade office paper and corrugated cardboard boxes, or
paper, where the processing shall be limited to separating, crushing, baling,
chipping, shredding, or other operations which physically reduce the mass
of materials but which do not alter their composition in any way.
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing
made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to
any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination.
All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall
not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or agency, nor shall
any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used, received or considered by the
body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision shall
be made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to
any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost
of reproduction.160
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITY — Any establishment which
carries on basic, applied, industrial and/or scientific investigations and/
or research, including laboratories and testing facilities, in the natural,
physical or social sciences or engineering, and development and/or testing
as an extension of such research with the objective of creating end products
and which may include "pilot manufacturing" as an accessory use. The
term also includes medical laboratories where prosthetic devices or medical
equipment testing takes place exclusively on written work order of a
licensed member of the dental or medical profession, but excludes other
medical testing.
160. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:502
RESIDENTIAL CLASSIFICATIONS —
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS —
RESIDENTIAL USE — Those activities customarily conducted in living
quarters in an urban setting and specifically excluding activities such as the
SINGLE FAMILY — The most restrictive residential use classification.
The primary principal use on each lot is a one-family dwelling unit.
Other permitted uses include churches, schools, recreational facilities,
other essential public services and approved customary accessory uses.
Other types of residential, industrial and commercial development and
uses are excluded. This district may include more than one subdistrict.
A.
TWO FAMILY — A generally less-restrictive residential use
classification than the single-family classification, with other permitted
(principal and accessory) and excluded uses being generally the same
as those for the single-family classification, except that row houses and
two-family dwellings are also permitted.
B.
MULTIFAMILY — A generally less-restrictive residential use
classification than the two-family classification, in which a variety of
dwellings are permitted, including one- and two-family units and the
following multifamily dwelling unit types: triplex, quadruplex, garden,
townhouse and mid-rise units, whether separately or commonly owned.
The other permitted (principal and accessory) uses are generally the
same as those for the one-family classification.
C.
GENERAL RESIDENTIAL — The least-restrictive residential use
classification, in which a variety of dwellings are permitted, including
those permitted in the multifamily classification and high-rise
apartments, whether separately or commonly owned.
D.
RESIDENTIAL/PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — A residential use
classification which provides for a mix of residential, personal services
and professional office uses, particularly in areas separating highvolume
traffic corridors from residential neighborhoods. Uses generally
include, but are not necessarily limited to, dwellings, accounting,
architectural, bookkeeping, clerical services, dental, drafting,
engineering, insurance, legal, medical, real estate, stenographic,
veterinary medicine (excluding kennels) and writing and editing offices,
photographers' studios, and personal services, limited to barbershops,
beauty shops, travel agencies and watch repair shops. Financial
institutions are expressly excluded from this classification.
E.
A. R-1 — Single-Family Residential District.
B. R-2 — Single-Family/Two-Family Residential District.
C. R-3 — Multifamily Residential District.
D. R-4 — General Residential District.
E. R-5 — Residential/Professional Office District.
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:503
keeping of livestock or fowl, those which result in noise which constitutes
a nuisance in a residential area, and activities which involve the storage
in an open yard of unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicles, vehicle parts,
machinery or machinery parts, junk, refuse, garbage, trash or scrap
materials.
RESIDENTIAL/MIXED USE — Any group of lots in the RDD containing
primarily multifamily dwellings and/or a mix of residential and commercial
and/or business uses.
RETAIL BUSINESS — Any establishment, other than an eating or drinking
establishment, located entirely within an enclosed building (except for
temporary outdoor sales as defined and authorized elsewhere under this
chapter), which sells goods, services or merchandise to the general public
for personal, household or office consumption, but not including
wholesaling, manufacturing or processing of the goods offered for sale.
ROADSIDE STAND — Any temporary structure designed or used for the
display or sale of seasonal products, including agricultural products.
ROW HOUSE — Any single-family dwelling unit which:
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public
way. In addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn
strips, sidewalks, lighting, landscaping, drainage facilities, public utilities
(above or below grade), and public traffic control signage; may also include
special features (required by the topography or treatment), such as grade
separation, additional landscaping, viaducts and/or bridges.
SAFETY SERVICES — Any facility used for the conduct of public safety and/
or emergency services, including police and fire protection services and
emergency medical (EMS) and ambulance services.
SALVAGE YARD or JUNKYARD — Any area wholly or partly in an open
yard where scrap metal, paper, rags, tires and/or other waste and/or used
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packaged,
disassembled or handled, or where inoperable machinery or motor vehicles
are collected, dismantled, stored or sold as parts. Any use conducted
entirely within an enclosed building is not a salvage yard.
SATELLITE SIGNAL RECEIVER — An antenna dish that is designed to
receive direct-to-home broadcast satellite service, video programming
service by way of MMDS (wireless cable) or local television broadcast
signals, is one meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter or diagonal
measurement, is mounted on a mast no higher than 12 feet above a roofline,
is not mounted so as to block a means of egress for the purposed of ensuring
public safety, health and welfare, is mounted in a rear yard or upon the
A. Has fewer than two side yards.
Shares a common wall(s) with and is attached to a similar adjoining
unit(s) within the same building.
B.
C. Is the only dwelling unit on the same zoning lot.
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:504
rear portion of a roof unless otherwise necessary to establish line-of-sight
contact with a transmitter, and is forest green, dark brown or black in color.
SEAT — For purposes of determining the required number of off-street
parking spaces for certain uses, the number of seats shall be the number
of seating units installed or indicated or each 24 lineal inches of benches,
pews or space for loose chairs.
SECURITY FACILITY — An establishment used for the protection of people
and property.
SETBACK LINE — A line established by this chapter, generally parallel with
and measured from a particular lot line, defining the limit(s) of a yard, in
which no structure, other than an approved accessory building, may be
located above ground, except as may be otherwise provided in this chapter.
See also "yard."
SCHOOL — A licensed and accredited publicly or privately funded place
of instruction, having regularly scheduled sessions, employing certified
instructors, and meeting all of the requirements of Department of Education
for providing primary, secondary, vocational or postsecondary education,
but excluding commercial or business schools, as elsewhere herein defined.
SCREEN or SCREENING — Decorative fencing, evergreen vegetation or a
combination of the two, which is designed and maintained for the purpose
of concealing from view the area behind same.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of four or more retail businesses developed
as a single entity, sharing a common design theme, and sharing a common
off-street parking area(s) and/or other common facilities.
SIDEWALK — That portion of the public street right-of-way outside the
cartway which is graded and improved with an approved all-weather
surface for use by pedestrian traffic.
SIGN — Any visual communication display, object, device, graphic,
structure or part thereof situated outdoors, whether separate from or
attached to, painted on or displayed from a building or structure in order to
direct, attract attention to, announce or promote an object, person, service,
product, event, location and/or organization by means of letters, words,
designs, colors, symbols, fixtures, images or illuminations. For purposes
of removal, the term "sign" shall also include any and all supporting sign
structures. "Sign" shall not include any visual communication display,
object, device, graphic, structure or part thereof which does not contain
any component that promotes an object, person, service, product, event,
location, organization, etc., but is intended solely for aesthetic purposes.
SIGN AREA —
In determining the allowable sign area under this chapter.
For a sign with a frame or edge or for which the individual
components are mounted on a backboard and which consists of a
single side, sign face, section, channel letter and/or module, the
allowable sign area shall be measured along the outer limits of
(1)
A.
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:505
SIGN LIGHTING DEVICE — Any light, string of lights or group of lights
located or so arranged so as to cast illumination on a sign.
SIGN STRUCTURE — Any structure that is specifically intended for,
designed for, or used to support, frame, house, bracket, display or provide
the base for a sign.
SIGN TYPES — Types of signs, as herein referenced, are defined as follows:
the edge, frame or backboard for a sign, excluding the necessary
supports or uprights upon which the sign is placed.
For a sign which has no frame or edge and which consists of a
single side, sign face, section, channel letter and/or module, the
allowable sign area shall be the projected, enclosed, straight-line
geometric shape which most closely outlines the outermost limits
of the letters and/or graphics of said sign.
(2)
For a sign which has multiple sides, sign faces, sections, channel
letters or modules, each having a frame or edge, or a sign with
no frame or edge and which consists of multiple sides, sign faces,
sections, channel letters and/or modules, the aggregate area of the
building facade obscured by each side, sign face, section, channel
letter and/or module.
(3)
For freestanding signs in which both sides are the same, the
measurable sign area shall be the sign area on only one side of such
sign.
(4)
In determining the permissible sign area, the front building facade to
be used shall be either the facade of the building facing the public rightof-
way or the facade which includes the main source of ingress and
egress to the building, whichever permits the largest sign area.
B.
AWNING; CANOPY SIGN — A sign consisting of individual cutout
letters and/or symbols which are painted, stenciled or otherwise placed
on a permanent awning or canopy.
A.
SPECIAL ADVERTISING DISPLAYS — Any banner, pennant, flag (other
than the national colors, the flag of the commonwealth, etc.), balloons,
streamers, wind socks, bunting or other similar item which serves as a
temporary advertising display in any commercial or industrial district
in the Borough. Displays of this type are generally prohibited, whether
they are of a temporary or permanent nature and regardless of their
design or the materials from which they are made.
B.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — A temporary sign announcing the name of
contractors, mechanics or artisans engaged in performing work on the
premises only.
C.
D. DEVELOPMENT SIGN — Either:
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:506
A temporary sign erected during the period of construction and/or
development of a property only by the contractor, developer and/or
agent.
(1)
(2) A permanent sign erected to identify entrances to the development.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign which is intended to assist pedestrians
and/or drivers in locating a specific destination.
E.
FLASHING OR ANIMATED SIGN — Any illuminated sign on which
the artificial light is not maintained stationary at a constant level of
intensity and color at all times; time, temperature and/or approved
public service signs which are otherwise in accordance with the bulk
and area limitations and requirements of this chapter are excluded
from this definition.
F.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any detached (not attached to another
structure) sign erected on a freestanding frame, base or poles and not
attached to another structure, includes ground, monument, pylon and
pole signs.
G.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Any sign indicating only the name of the
individual or organization occupying the premises, the profession or the
occupant, or the name and/or address of the building or management
thereof. Identification signs may be either large identification signs or
small identification signs. Large identification signs shall be no larger
than 50 square feet. Small identification signs shall be no larger than
16 square feet.
H.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas or other
artificial light source, including reflecting or phosphorescent light.
I.
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign placed on or under the edge of any canopy
of permanent construction projecting from the wall of a building.
J.
MEMORIAL OR HISTORIC PLAQUE — Any commemorative plaque
placed by the Borough, the county, the commonwealth or the federal
government to identify locations with historical or local significance.
K.
L. MENU BOARD — An exterior sign for drive-through customers.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — Any sign which provides information relative
to an establishment, activity, person, product or service which is
unrelated to or unavailable on the lot upon which said sign is situated.
M.
OFF-PREMISES DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign which provides
information relative to a business, commodity or service which is
conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises where the
sign is displayed.
N.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — Any sign which provides information relative to
an establishment, activity, person, product or service which is related
to or available on the lot upon which the sign is situated.
O.
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:507
SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC STRUCTURE OR SITE — See "historic structure
or site."
ON-PREMISES DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign which conveys
instructions or directions with respect to the use of the lot or building
upon which the sign is situated, including, but not limited to, signs
which indicate street addresses and the availability of parking,
telephones, rest rooms, direction of traffic flow, points of ingress/
egress, and other conveniences for the general public.
P.
Q. OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN — See "billboard."
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign which indicates the name, cause
and/or affiliation of anyone seeking public office or which refers to a
ballot issue relating to a scheduled public election in the Borough.
R.
PORTABLE SIGNS — Any portable sign or message board mounted on
wheels, skids or a frame and designed to be movable and not anchored
to the ground, whether leased or owned. Any such sign shall be limited
to an area of not more than 24 square feet per sign face and more
than two sign faces per sign. In addition, any proposed temporary
use of such a sign shall be limited to a period not exceeding one
thirty-consecutive-day period in any one calendar year and to not more
than one sign per lot or per use, whichever is more restrictive. Any
portable sign or message board proposed to be used for any period in
excess of the time limitation for its temporary use shall be considered a
permanent sign and shall be required to meet all of the limitations and
restrictions for permitted signs in the district in which it is situated.
S.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign which projects a distance of not more
than six feet from the exterior of a building.
T.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — Any temporary sign advertising the sale or
rental of the premises. Any such sign may also bear the words "sold,"
"sale pending," "rented" or "open house" across its face.
U.
SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — Any temporary or portable sign whose sole
purpose is advertising a special event.
V.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign which is intended to identify or
announce a short-term and/or temporary activity or use of the premises.
W.
WALL SIGN — Any sign attached to or erected against a wall of a
building or other separate structure, with the face generally horizontal
to the finished grade and parallel to the wall.
X.
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign or group of signs affixed to the inside
of a display window in a commercial establishment which advertises
a product or service available on the premises or which announces
business hours or other information about the establishment.
Y.
WINDOW GRAPHIC SIGN — Any permanent sign which is painted on
or similarly applied to the inside or outside of a window.
Z.
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:508
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — See "dwelling, single-family."
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface creates an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are expressed
as a percentage based upon vertical distance in feet per 100 feet of
horizontal distance.
SPECIAL OR SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICT — See "overlay district."
STEPS — A construction or series of constructions placed for a foot support
to assist a person in ascending or descending from one level or elevation to
another.
STORAGE SHED OR CONTAINER — Any small accessory structure, either
wholly or in part enclosed, serving as a storage facility for tools, equipment,
supplies or other similar materials for safekeeping.
STORY — That portion of a building between the surface of a floor and the
ceiling immediately above.
STREET — Any public way having a right-of-way width of no less than 40
feet between property lines on opposite sides designated for vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, whether or not designated as a street, highway, parkway,
road, avenue, boulevard, circle, lane, etc. For a definition of types of streets,
see also "thoroughfare."
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon which
a lot fronts. The street grade shall be the existing street grade where there
is no officially established grade.
STREET LINE — Any line defining the edge of any dedicated street right-ofway.
STRUCTURE — Any assembled, constructed or erected object having a
fixed or stationary location on or in land (the ground) or water, whether or
not it is affixed to the land (the ground), or an object attached to something
having a fixed location on land (the ground). Among other things, the term
"structure" includes buildings of all kinds, carports, porches, decks, storage
sheds or containers, freestanding posts or pillars, manufactured or modular
homes, walls, fences, billboards, and/or other similar items, but excluding
sidewalks, driveways or in-the-ground patio surfaces.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel by any
means into two or more lots, tracts or parcels or other divisions of land for
sale, development or lease, but excluding the leasing of land for agricultural
purposes only into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or any residential dwelling.
SUBSTANTIAL VARIATION — Any change in an approved land development
plan which involves or results in:
A. A change(s) in the means of ingress/egress.
B. An increase in dwelling unit density.
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:509
SUPERMARKET — Any retail establishment having more than 10,000
square feet of floor area which, as its principal use or activity, sells food,
groceries, food-related products or household goods, and which may
include, but shall not be limited to, one or more of the following: bakeries,
pharmacies, video rentals, book, magazine and/or newspaper sales, travel
services, floral and plant sales, banking services (including ATMs) or other
customary accessory uses.
SUPPLY YARD — Any commercial establishment where building supplies,
steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and/or grain and/or similar
goods are wholly or partly stored in an open yard and/or offered for sale,
but not including salvage yards or junkyards.
SWIMMING POOL — Any man-made body of water, including a pool, pond,
lake, open tank or other container, whether indoors or outdoors, which is
used as a recreational facility for swimming, bathing, wading or fishing and
which has a depth at any point of 24 inches or more, and including all
structures, equipment and appurtenances incidental to any such pool.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — Any swimming pool exclusively used,
without the required payment of any additional charge for admission, by
the residents and guests of a single place of residence, a development or
a community, or the members and/or guests of a club, or the patrons of a
motel or hotel, and only where any such use is an accessory use.
SWIMMING POOL, COMMERCIAL — Any swimming pool operated publicly
or privately where a separate admission fee may be charged and/or where
such use is the principal use.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SIGNAL-RECEIVING TRANSMISSION OR
RELAY TOWER — Any freestanding telecommunications signal receiving,
transmission or relay tower which is used for receiving, transmitting or
relaying analog or digital radio, data or cellular telephone and/or television
signals.
TEMPORARY OR INTERIM STRUCTURE OR USE — Any structure or use
which, by virtue of the type of material used in its construction, or which,
by virtue of its intended purpose, is erected or located for not more than
six months, including tents, stands, construction trailers and/or other
structures or uses of a similar character.
THEATER — Any indoor establishment, building or other facility of any kind,
whether or not a fee is charged for admission, devoted to the display of
motion pictures and/or live entertainment, including dramatic, comedic or
An increase in the required number of off-street parking and/or loading
spaces.
C.
An increase of 10% or more in the total floor area of all buildings
originally proposed in the land development plan.
D.
A use which was not originally proposed as part of a conditional use,
use by special exception, or permitted use application for approval filed
prerequisite to or concurrent with the land development plan.
E.
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:510
musical performances; any such establishment may include one or more
screens, a snack bar(s) and an amusement arcades, but shall exclude any
adult entertainment establishment.
THEATER, DRIVE-IN — Any outdoor theater in which patrons sit in their
individual private vehicles in a parking area, on the ground or in seats which
are provided by the proprietor, and which is generally open to the sky and
which may include stage areas; the screen upon which:
THOROUGHFARE — The full width of the dedicated right-of-way between
property lines bounding every public way of whatever nature with part
thereof being used for vehicular traffic, and designated as follows:
A. Is generally open to the sky.
May include stage areas, the screen upon which the file is projected,
ticket booths, a projection facility, rest room facilities, snack bar(s) and/
or other customary accessory uses or structures.
B.
At no time may be defined as an "adult entertainment establishment"
under this chapter.
C.
ALLEY — A general term denoting any minor thoroughfare used
primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties
abutting on a street.
A.
ARTERIAL STREET — A general term denoting a dedicated public
street which serves large volumes of long-distance traffic, usually on a
continuous route. For a listing of the arterial streets in the Borough, see
"arterial street."
B.
COLLECTOR STREET — A general term denoting a dedicated public
street which, in addition to providing access to abutting properties or
lots, intercepts local streets, provides a through or connecting route
for nonresident traffic, and may carry considerable volumes of local
traffic to and from other local streets, collector streets, arterial streets
or community facilities. For a listing of the "collector streets" in the
Borough, see "collector street."
C.
LOCAL STREET — A general term denoting any dedicated public street
which is not otherwise classified as an alley, arterial or collector street.
Types of "local streets" include the following:
CUL-DE-SAC — Any local street of relatively short length with one
end open to traffic and the other end terminating in a vehicular
turnaround.
(1)
DEAD-END STREET — Any street which temporarily has only one
end open to traffic and is usually intended to be extended or
continued in the future.
(2)
LOOP STREET — Any local street each end of which terminates
at an intersection with the same arterial or collector street, and
whose principal radius points of the one-hundred-eighty-degree
(3)
D.
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:511
THROUGH LOT — See "lot types."
TOWNHOUSE — See "dwelling."
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — Any building or portion thereof used or
intended for use as an area for the ticketing, loading, unloading and/or
interchanging of transit passengers using public or private transportation,
including, without limitation, bus terminals, rail stations, taxi stands and/or
other mass transit facilities.
TRAVEL TRAILER — Any vehicular, portable structure or trailer built on
a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and
recreational purposes, and having a body width which does not exceed eight
feet.
TRANSITIONAL DWELLING — Any dwelling unit occupied on a shortterm
basis by persons of any age assigned by a court of law or public
or semipublic agency responsible for the occupants' care, safety, conduct,
counseling and supervision for a specified period of time, including
alcoholic or drug recovery, shelters for battered adults and their children,
dependent or delinquent children, community reentry services following
incarceration or other court-ordered treatment, or other short-term
supervised assignments.
TRIPLEX — See "dwelling."
TWINPLEX — Any two-family dwelling in which both dwelling units share
one or more floors or stories of the building with the other unit. For a
definition of "two-family dwelling," see "dwelling."
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — See "dwelling."
UNNECESSARY OR UNDUE HARDSHIP — For a definition of this term, see
§ 440-88C.
USE — The specific purposes for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
USE BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION — Any specifically authorized use which may
be granted only by the Board in accordance with standards and criteria
specified in this chapter and after a public hearing.
VARIANCE — Any modification of the strict terms and conditions of the
relevant regulations of this chapter by the Board in accordance with the
criteria specified in the MPC, where such modification will not be contrary
system of turns are not more than 1,000 feet from said arterial
or collector street, and whose intersections with the arterial or
collector street are normally not more than 600 feet from each
other.
MARGINAL ACCESS OR FRONTAGE STREET OR ROAD — Any
local or collector street, parallel and adjacent to an arterial or
collector street, providing access to abutting properties and
protection from the higher volumes of traffic on the parallel arterial
or collector street.
(4)
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:512
to the public interest and the spirit and intent of this chapter, and where,
owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of any action
of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in
unnecessary or undue hardship.
VETERINARY OFFICE OR CLINIC — See "clinic, veterinary."
VICINITY MAP — A drawing or map drawn to scale which is to be submitted
with the plot plan or to be located on the plat, and which sets forth by
dimensions or other means the relationship of the proposed subdivision,
development or use to other nearby developments or landmarks and
community facilities and services within the general area, in order to better
locate and orient the area in question.
WALKWAY — Any public way, four feet or more in width, designed and
intended for use as a pedestrian way only; whether or not along the side of
a street or roadway.
WAREHOUSE — Any structure designed, intended for use as, or used for
the storage and handling of freight or merchandise, within an entirely
enclosed structure, but not including the maintenance or fueling of
commercial vehicles.
WHOLESALE BUSINESS — See "business, wholesale."
YARD — A required open space other than a court, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any structure or portion thereof from the ground upward,
except as otherwise provided herein.
YARD TYPES — The types of yards referenced in this chapter are as follows:
YARD, FRONT — A yard normally extending between side lot lines
across the front of a lot, from the front lot line to either the front of
the principal building or the required building setback line; except that
through lots or corner lots with frontage on more than one street, shall
have a front yard along each side of the lot upon which the lot has street
frontage.
A.
YARD, REAR — Normally a yard extending between side lot lines across
the rear of a lot and from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal
building; except that neither through lots nor corner lots shall have a
rear yard.
B.
YARD, SIDE — Normally a yard extending from the principal building
to the side lot line on both sides of the principal building between the
lines establishing the boundaries for the front and rear yards.
For purposes of this definition, any lot line not a rear or front lot
line shall be deemed a side lot line.
(1)
In the case of a through lot only, a side yard extends from the
principal building to the side lot lines on both sides of the principal
building between the lines establishing the boundaries for the front
yards.
(2)
C.
§ 440-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-7
1:513
ZERO-LOT-LINE DEVELOPMENT — An arrangement of housing on
adjoining lots in which the required side yard is reduced on one side and
increased on the other so that the sum of the offsets on any lot is not less
than the sum of the required offsets. In a zero-lot-line development only,
no building or structure shall be closer to a lot line than five feet unless it
is placed directly on (immediately abuts) the lot line and is provided with
an access easement of five feet on the adjoining lot. The offset adjacent to
property not included in the zero-lot-line development or a street shall not
be less than that required under this chapter for the district in which the
property is located.
ZONING CERTIFICATE OR PERMIT — A certificate or document issued by
the Zoning Officer stating that the purpose for which a building or land is to
be used complies with all of the applicable requirements of this chapter for
the zoning district in which it is located.
ZONING CODE, THE — The Munhall Zoning Code/Ordinance; this chapter.
ZONING DISTRICT — Administrative areas within the Borough designating
the uses to which land can legally be utilized and for which the boundaries
are shown on the Zoning Map.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — See "board."
ZONING MAP — The Official Map delineating the zoning districts of the
Borough, together with all amendments subsequently adopted. A part of
this chapter.161
ZONING OFFICER, ADMINISTRATOR OR INSPECTOR — The person
designated by Council to administer and enforce this chapter in conjunction
with the various sections or articles thereof defining said duties.
In the case of a corner lot only, those yard areas not defined as front
yards and not having frontage on a street shall be designated as
side yards.
(3)
161. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 440-7 MUNHALL CODE § 440-7
1:514
ARTICLE III
General District Regulations
§ 440-8. Establishment of district classifications. [Amended
9-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1414; 12-29-1997 by Ord. No. 1420162]
The Borough is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
R-1 — Single-Family Residential District
R-2 — Single-Family/Two-Family Residential District
R-3 — Multifamily Residential District
R-4 — General Residential District
R-5 — Residential/Professional Office District
B-1 — Convenience Business District
B-2 — General Business District
GS — General Services District
HI — Heavy Industrial District
RDD — Riverfront Development District
HO — Historic Overlay District
LH — Local Historic District
§ 440-9. Zoning District Map and boundaries.
A. Boundaries established. The boundaries of the various zoning districts
are hereby established on the map entitled "Official Zoning Map" on file
in the office of the Borough Manager. The Zoning Map with all
explanatory matter thereon is hereby made part of this chapter. The
Map shall be dated and shall carry the Borough Seal and the signature
of the President of Council and the Borough Secretary certifying that it
is the true map adopted by Council. A record of all amendments to the
Map shall be kept on file in the Borough Manager's office. All such
amendments shall be identified on the Map and similarly certified. The
boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise specifically
indicated, either the center line of street rights-of-way or such other
lines extended, or parallel lines thereto, or property lines or other
physical boundaries or features. Where streets, property lines or other
physical boundaries or features are not applicable, boundaries shall be
determined using the scale shown on the Map.
B. Interpretation. Where physical boundaries or features existing on the
ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map or
in other circumstances not specifically covered above, the Planning
Commission shall interpret the district boundaries.
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-9
1:515
C. Future street vacation. In the event that a thoroughfare shown on the
Official Zoning Map is vacated, the property formerly in said right-ofway
shall be included within the zoning district of the adjoining
property on either side of said vacated right-of-way. Where said
thoroughfare forms a district boundary, the new boundary shall be the
new property line created by the former center line of the vacated
thoroughfare.
§ 440-9 MUNHALL CODE § 440-9
1:516
ARTICLE IV
Residential Zoning Districts
§ 440-10. Special requirements and regulations.
A. Other requirements and regulations. All buildings and uses in any
residential district shall, in addition to the requirements and
regulations outlined in this article, comply with all of the other
requirements and regulations of this chapter.
B. Accessory structures. The following special regulations shall apply to
accessory structures in residential districts:
(1) Accessory structures may not be situated within any front yard in
any residential zoning district.
(2) Any accessory structure situated in a side yard in any residential
district shall meet the side yard setback requirement for principal
structures in the same district.
(3) Any accessory structure situated in a rear yard in any residential
district shall meet the side and rear yard setback requirements
established herein for accessory structures in the district.
(4) Any accessory structure situated within a side or rear yard shall be
separated from the principal structure by a minimum distance of 10
feet.
(5) See also Article VIII, § 440-34.
C. One principal structure per lot. No more than one single- or two-family
dwelling may be constructed upon any lot in any R-1 or R-2 Residential
District. Rear dwellings, alley houses, garage apartments and coach
houses shall be prohibited.
D. Special setback between structures. Where more than one multifamily
residential structure is to be constructed upon a single lot, the
minimum distance between structures shall be the greatest of:
(1) Thirty feet.
(2) The height of the higher of the two structures, measured at its
highest point above grade.
(3) Any greater minimum distance between structures required by the
adopted building code.163
E. Schedule of minimum usable floor areas. In order to promote healthful
living environments and to stabilize the value and character of
residential neighborhoods, the following minimum usable floor areas
per dwelling unit type in each residential district shall be required:
163. Editor's Note: See Ch. 168, Construction Codes.
§ 440-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-10
1:517
§ 440-11. Single-Family District (R-1). [Amended 3-19-1997 by Ord.
No. 1409; 3-15-2000 by Ord. No. 1461]
Minimum Usable Floor Area for Each Dwelling Unit
District
Dwelling
Type
One-Story
Building
(square feet)
More than
One-Story
Building
(square feet)
Minimum
First Floor
Area for
Dwelling Unit
Which is
More Than
One Story in
Height
(square feet)
R-1-70 1-family 1,250 1,500 for 1 1/2
stories
875
1,750 for 2
stories
875
R-1-60 1-family 1,000 1,250 for 1 1/2
stories
750
1,500 for 2
stories
750
R-1-50 1-family 850 1,100 700
R-1-40 1-family 800 1,000 650
R-2 1-family 750 950 600
2-family 700 900 550
R-3 1-family 850 950 600
2-family 750 900 550
Multifamily 700 average
for all units
R-4 1-family 850 950 600
2-family 750 900 550
Multifamily 400, no
bedroom/
efficiency
400
600, onebedroom
unit
300
700, twobedroom
unit
350
A. Purpose. The primary purpose of the Single-Family Residential District
is to provide suitable locations and development standards for singlefamily
dwellings in the Borough. Certain other compatible or related
uses may also be permitted in this district.
§ 440-10 MUNHALL CODE § 440-11
1:518
B. Subdistricts. The following subdistricts of the R-1 Residential District
are hereby established:
(1) R-1-70 Single-Family Residential District.
(2) R-1-60 Single-Family Residential District.
(3) R-1-50 Single-Family Residential District.
(4) R-1-40 Single-Family Residential District.
C. Permitted uses. The following principal and accessory uses, permitted
and conditional uses, and uses by special exception shall be permitted
in the R-1 Residential District.
(1) Principal uses. The following principal uses shall be permitted in
the R-1 Residential District:
(a) Single-family dwelling.
(b) Church.
(c) Essential services.
(d) Recreational facilities.
(e) School.
(f) Temporary uses: Article VIII, § 440-49A(1), (2) and (4).
(2) Accessory uses. The following accessory uses, as elsewhere herein
regulated, shall be permitted in the R-1 Residential District:
(a) Home occupations.
(b) Private garages, carports and/or off-street parking areas in any
side or rear yard only.
(c) Driveways and driveway turnarounds.
(d) Private flower or vegetable gardens.
(e) Private lawn and garden storage sheds with a total floor area of
80 square feet or less.
(f) Private swimming pools.
(g) Signs, as regulated under Article VII.
(h) Walls and fences.
(i) Other customary architectural design or landscaping features.
(j) Satellite-signal-receiving antennas.
(k) No-impact home-based businesses.164
§ 440-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-11
1:519
(3) Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted as
conditional uses in the R-1 Residential District, subject to the
regulations and procedures outlined under Article IX of this
chapter:
(a) Quasi-public uses.
(b) Telecommunications signal receiving, transmission or relay
tower.
(4) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
uses by special exception in the R-1 Residential District, subject to
the regulations and procedures outlined under Article X of this
chapter:
(a) Adult or child day-care center.
(b) Public utility structures.
D. Bulk and area requirements. The following bulk and area requirements
are hereby established for all permitted principal and accessory
residential structures and uses in any subdistrict of the R-1 Residential
District:
(1) Minimum lot dimensions and setbacks. The minimum lot frontage,
depth, width and area (in square feet or acres) dimensions and
minimum front, rear and side yard setbacks shall be as follows:
Lot Dimensions 
District Frontage Lot Area Setback Side Yard
1-family
R-1-70 70/120 8,400
square
feet
25/30*/7** 3/3
R-1-60 60/120 7,200
square
feet
25/30*/6** 3/3
R-1-50 50/120 6,000
square
feet
25/30*/5** 3/3
164. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-11 MUNHALL CODE § 440-11
1:520
Lot Dimensions Required Setbacks
Principal
Use
Frontage/
Depth
(feet) Lot Area
Principal
Building(s)
Front/Rear/
Side
(feet)
Accessory
Structures
Rear/Side
(feet)
R-1-40 40/120 4,800
square
feet
25/30*/5** 2/2
Essential
services
None/none 400
square
feet
10/5/5 5/5
Church 150/120 18,000
square
feet
25/30*/5** 3/15***
School 300/250 2 acres 25/30*/5** 3/15
Recreational
facilities
None/none 11,000
square
feet
10/5/5 5/5
NOTES:
* Or 25% of the total lot depth, whichever is greater.
** Or 10% of the total lot width, whichever is greater.
*** Except that the minimum required side and rear yard setbacks
for approved off-street parking areas and driveways only shall
be five feet.
(2) Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be as
follows:
(a) Single-family.
[1] R-1-40: 28%.
[2] R-1-50: 24%.
[3] R-1-60: 23%.
[4] R-1-70: 23%.
(b) All others: 30%.
(3) Maximum height. The maximum height shall be as follows.
(a) Principal structures: 36 feet and three stories; except schools
or churches which may be constructed to a height not to
exceed 50 feet and three stories.
§ 440-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-11
1:521
§ 440-12. Single-Family/Two-Family Residential District (R-2).
[Amended 3-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1409; 3-15-2000 by Ord. No. 1461]
(b) Accessory buildings: 15 feet and one story.
(c) Walls or fences: four feet in any required front yard and six feet
in any required side or rear yard; except that recreational
facilities and schools may have open chain-link security fencing
in any required side or rear yard to a height not to exceed 10
feet.
A. Purpose. The primary purpose of the R-2 Single-Family/Two-Family
Residential District is to provide suitable locations and development
standards for both single-family and two-family dwellings in the
Borough. Certain other compatible or related uses may also be
permitted in this district.
B. Permitted uses. The following principal and accessory uses, permitted
and conditional uses, and uses by special exception shall be permitted
in the R-2 Residential District.
(1) Principal uses. The following principal uses shall be permitted in
the R-2 Residential District:
(a) Single-family dwelling.
(b) Row house (single-family attached) dwelling.
(c) Two-family dwelling.
(d) Essential services, churches, schools, recreational facilities
and temporary uses as regulated in the R-1 Residential
District.
(2) Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the R-2 Residential District:
(a) All accessory uses listed in the R-1 District.
(3) Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted as
conditional uses in the R-2 Residential District, subject to the
regulations and procedures outlined under Article IX of this
chapter:
(a) Quasi-public uses.
(b) Public library.
(c) Telecommunications signal receiving, transmission or relay
tower.
(4) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
uses by special exception in the R-2 Residential District, subject to
§ 440-11 MUNHALL CODE § 440-12
1:522
the regulations and procedures outlined under Article X of this
chapter:
(a) Adult or child day-care center.
(b) Public utility structures.
(c) Community garage.
(d) Group residence.
C. Bulk and area requirements. The following bulk and area requirements
are hereby established for all permitted principal and accessory
structures and uses in the R-2 Residential District.
(1) Minimum lot dimensions and setbacks. The minimum lot frontage,
depth, width and area in square feet (sf) dimensions and minimum
front, rear and side yard setbacks shall be as follows:
Lot Dimensions Required Setbacks
Principal
Use
Frontage/
Depth
(feet) Lot Area
Principal
Building(s)
Front/Rear/
Side
(feet)
Accessory
Structures
Rear/Side
(feet)
1-family 30/110 3,300
square
feet
20/30*/5** 2/2
1-family
row house
30/110 3,300
square
feet
20/30*/0*** 2/2
2-family 60/110 6,600
square
feet
20/30*/6** 3/3
Quasipublic
uses
300/250 2 acres 20/30*/30** 3/15***
NOTES:
* Or 25% of the total lot depth, whichever is greater.
** Or 10% of the total lot width, whichever is greater.
*** Except that the minimum required side and rear yard setbacks
for approved off-street parking areas and driveways only shall
be five feet.
(2) Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be as
follows:
(a) Single-family (all) and two-family: 38%.
§ 440-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-12
1:523
§ 440-13. Multifamily Residential District (R-3). [Amended
3-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1409; 6-19-1999 by Ord. No. 1447; 3-15-2000
by Ord. No. 1461]
(b) All others: 30%.
(3) Maximum height. The maximum height in the R-2 Residential
District shall be the same as that established for permitted
principal and accessory structures and uses in the R-1 Residential
District.
A. Purpose. The primary purpose of the Multifamily Residential District is
to provide suitable locations and development standards for mediumdensity
multifamily dwellings and/or a mix of medium-density
multifamily, single-family, two-family, three-family and four-family
dwellings in the Borough. Certain other compatible or related uses may
also be permitted in this district.
B. Permitted uses. The following principal and accessory uses, permitted
and conditional uses, and uses by special exception shall be permitted
in the R-3 Multifamily Residential District
(1) Principal uses. The following principal uses shall be permitted in
the R-3 Residential District:
(a) Single-family dwelling.
(b) Two-family dwelling.
(c) Triplex.
(d) Quadruplex.
(e) Garden apartments.
(f) Townhouse apartments.
(g) Bed-and-breakfasts.
(h) Essential services, church, school, recreational facilities, and
temporary uses as regulated in the R-1 Residential District.
(2) Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the R-3 Residential District:
(a) All accessory uses listed and as otherwise regulated in the R-2
District; except that off-street parking for any multifamily
dwelling only may be permitted in a required front yard,
provided only that said off-street parking area shall be set back
a minimum of eight feet from the front property line, and
provided that any such setback area shall be fully landscaped
in accordance with plans approved by the Zoning Officer.
(b) Clinic, only where ancillary to housing for the elderly.
§ 440-12 MUNHALL CODE § 440-13
1:524
(3) Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted as
conditional uses in the R-3 Residential District, subject to the
regulations and procedures outlined under Article IX of this
chapter:
(a) Quasi-public uses.
(b) Public library.
(c) Telecommunications signal receiving, transmission or relay
tower.
(4) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
uses by special exception in the R-3 Residential District, subject to
the regulations and procedures outlined under Article X of this
chapter:
(a) Adult or child day-care center.
(b) Public utility structures.
(c) Community garage.
(d) Group residence, personal care boardinghome, group care
facility, boardinghouse or nursing home.
(e) Mid-rise apartments, including elderly housing facilities.
C. Bulk and area requirements. The following bulk and area requirements
are hereby established for all permitted principal and accessory
structures and uses in the R-3 Residential District.
(1) Minimum lot dimensions, setbacks and densities. The minimum lot
frontage, depth, width and area in square feet (sf) dimensions;
minimum front, rear and side yard setbacks and densities shall be
as follows:
Lot Dimensions Required Setbacks
Principal
Use
Frontage/
Depth
(feet) Lot Area
Principal
Building(s)
Front/Rear/
Side
(feet)
Accessory
Structures
Rear/Side
(feet)
1-family 50/110 5,500
square
feet
20/30*/5** 2/2
2-family 65/110 7,200
square
feet
20/30*/6** 3/3
§ 440-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-13
1:525
§ 440-14. General Residential District (R-4). [Amended 3-19-1997
by Ord. No. 1409; 4-16-1997 by Ord. No. 1410; 3-15-2000 by Ord.
No. 1461]
Lot Dimensions Required Setbacks
Principal
Use
Frontage/
Depth
(feet) Lot Area
Principal
Building(s)
Front/Rear/
Side
(feet)
Accessory
Structures
Rear/Side
(feet)
Triplex 80/110 9,000
square
feet
20/30*/7** 3/3
Quadruplex 80/110 12,000
square
feet
20/30**/8** 3/3
Bed-andbreakfasts
80/110 12,000
square
feet
20/30*/8** 3/3
Garden
apartments
100/110 0.5
acre***
20/30*/10** 5/5
Townhouse
apartments
100/110 0.5
acre***
20/30*/10** 5/5
NOTES:
* Or 25% of the total lot depth, whichever is greater.
** Or 10% of the total lot width, whichever is greater.
*** Not less than 3,630 square feet (sf) of lot area per dwelling
unit (d.u.), and a maximum density not greater than 12
dwelling units per acre.
(2) Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be as
follows:
(a) Single-family and two-family: 38%.
(b) Three- and four-family: 40%.
(c) Multifamily units: 41%.
(d) All others: 30%.
(3) Maximum height. The maximum height shall be the same as that
established for all permitted principal and accessory structures and
uses in the R-2 Residential District.
§ 440-13 MUNHALL CODE § 440-14
1:526
A. Purpose. The primary purpose of the General Residential District is to
provide suitable locations and development standards for high-density
multifamily dwellings and/or a mix of medium- and high-density
multifamily, single-family, two-family, three-family and four-family
dwellings in the Borough. Certain other compatible or related uses may
also be permitted in this district.
B. Permitted uses. The following principal and accessory uses, permitted
and conditional uses and uses by special exception shall be permitted in
the R-4 General Residential District:
(1) Principal uses. The following principal uses shall be permitted in
the R-4 Residential District:
(a) Single-family dwelling.
(b) Two-family dwelling.
(c) Triplex.
(d) Quadruplex.
(e) Garden apartments.
(f) Townhouse apartments.
(g) Bed-and-breakfast.
(h) Mid-rise apartments, including elderly housing facilities.
(i) Essential services, church, school, recreational facilities, and
temporary uses as regulated in the R-1 Residential District.
(2) Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the R-4 Residential District:
(a) All accessory uses listed and as otherwise regulated in the R-3
District.
(3) Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional
uses in the R-4 Residential District, subject to the regulations and
procedures outlined under Article IX of this chapter:
(a) Quasi-public uses.
(b) Public library.
(c) Cemetery.
(d) Telecommunications signal receiving, transmission or relay
tower.
(4) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
uses by special exception in the R-4 Residential District, subject to
§ 440-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-14
1:527
the regulations and procedures outlined under Article X of this
chapter:
(a) Adult or child day-care center.
(b) Public utility structures.
(c) Community garage.
(d) Group residence, personal care boardinghome, group care
facility, boardinghouse or nursing home.
(e) High-rise apartments.
(f) Transitional dwelling.
C. Bulk and area requirements. The following bulk and area requirements
are hereby established for all permitted principal and accessory
structures and uses in the R-4 Residential District.
(1) Minimum lot dimensions, setbacks and densities. The minimum lot
frontage, depth, width and area (in square feet or acres)
dimensions; minimum front, rear and side yard setbacks and
maximum densities shall be as follows:
Lot Dimensions Required Setbacks
Principal
Use
Frontage/
Depth
(feet) Lot Area
Principal
Building(s)
Front/Rear/
Side
(feet)
Accessory
Structures
Rear/Side
(feet)
1-family 50/100 5,000
square
feet
20/30*/5** 2/2
2-family 65/100 7,200
square
feet
20/30*/6** 2/2
Triplex 80/100 9,000
square
feet
20/30*/7** 3/3
Quadruplex 80/100 10,000
square
feet
20/30*/8** 3/3
Bed-andbreakfasts
80/110 10,000
square
feet
20/30*/8** 3/3
Garden
apartments
100/100 0.5 acre*** 20/30*/10** 5/5
Townhouses 100/100 0.5 acre*** 20/30*/10** 5/5
§ 440-14 MUNHALL CODE § 440-14
1:528
§ 440-15. Residential/Professional Office District (R-5). [Amended
3-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1409]
Lot Dimensions Required Setbacks
Principal
Use
Frontage/
Depth
(feet) Lot Area
Principal
Building(s)
Front/Rear/
Side
(feet)
Accessory
Structures
Rear/Side
(feet)
Mid-rise
apartments
200/200 0.1 acre# 40/40*/20** 5/5
NOTES:
* Or 25% of the total lot depth, whichever is greater.
** Or 10% of the total lot width, whichever is greater.
*** Not less than 2,420 square feet (sf) of lot area per dwelling
unit (d.u.), and having a maximum density of not more than 18
dwelling units per acre.
# Not less than 1,815 square feet (sf) of lot area per d.u., and a
maximum density of not more than 24 units per acre.
(2) Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be as
follows:
(a) Single-family: 41%.
(b) Two-, three- and four-family: 47%.
(c) Garden apartments and townhouses: 49%.
(d) Mid-rise apartments: 35%.
(e) All others: 30%.
(3) Maximum height. The maximum height shall be the same as that
established for all permitted principal and accessory structures and
uses in the R-3 Residential District and, in addition, mid-rise
apartments shall not exceed 55 feet and five stories in height.
A. Purpose. The R-5 Residential/Professional Office District is a residential
district which has as its primary purpose providing suitable locations
and development standards for a mix of residential uses and
professional offices, particularly in areas separating high-volume traffic
corridors from residential neighborhoods. The preservation of the
residential character of any neighborhood designated as R-5 is strongly
emphasized. Other compatible or related uses may also be permitted in
this district.
§ 440-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-15
1:529
B. Permitted uses. The following principal and accessory uses, permitted
and conditional uses, and uses by special exception shall be permitted
in the R-5 Residential District.
(1) Principal uses. The following principal uses shall be permitted in
the R-5 District:
(a) Buildings and uses of the type permitted and as regulated in
the least-restrictive residential district which is contiguous to
the specific lot in question.
(b) Professional offices, limited to accounting, architectural,
bookkeeping, clerical services, dental, drafting, engineering,
insurance, legal, medical, real estate, stenographic, veterinary
medicine (excluding kennels), and writing and editing offices.
(c) Personal services, limited to barbershops, beauty shops, travel
agencies, and watch repair.
(d) Photographer's studio.
(e) Temporary uses: Article VIII, § 440-49A(1), (2) and (3).
(2) Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the R-5 District:
(a) All accessory uses listed and as regulated.
(b) Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities, as required
and regulated under Article VIII of this chapter.
(c) Signs, as elsewhere herein regulated.
(d) Other comparable or customary architectural, design or
landscaping features or uses consistent with the maintenance
of the residential character of the neighborhood, subject to the
approval of the Zoning Officer.
(3) Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted as
conditional uses in the R-5 District, subject to the regulations and
procedures outlined under Article IX of this chapter:
(a) Those conditional uses listed and as regulated in the leastrestrictive
contiguous residential district.
(b) Hospital.
(c) Telecommunications signal receiving, transmission or relay
tower.
(4) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
uses by special exception in the R-5 District, subject to the
regulations and procedures outlined under Article X of this
chapter:
§ 440-15 MUNHALL CODE § 440-15
1:530
(a) Those uses by special exception listed and as regulated in the
least-restrictive contiguous residential district.
(b) Retail sales, limited to antiques, art, crafts, flowers, greeting
cards and small gifts, jewelry and watches and over-thecounter
and prescription drugs.
C. Bulk and area requirements. The bulk and area requirements for all
permitted principal and accessory structures and uses in the R-5
District (including the minimum lot dimensions, setbacks and densities,
the maximum lot coverage, and the maximum height) shall be the same
as those established and as regulated in the least-restrictive residential
district which is contiguous to the specific lot in question.
D. Additional standards, requirements and regulations.
(1) General. All operations, activities, sales, services and ancillary
storage related to any business activity of any kind shall be
conducted only within an enclosed and approved structure.
(2) Signs. In addition to the standards, requirements and regulations
outlined under Article VII, § 440-25, of this chapter, the following
additional standards shall apply to any nonresidential use in the
R-5 District:
(a) The illumination of any sign shall be prohibited.
(b) Not more than one freestanding monument or flush-mounted
(on the front wall only of the principal building only) sign shall
be permitted, and then only if in compliance with either of the
following standards:
[1] Any monument sign shall be not more than five feet in
width, three feet in height, 15 square feet in area, 42
inches in height above finished grade (measured from the
highest point on the sign), and shall have no more than two
sides (one or both of which may have printing).
[2] Any flush-mounted sign shall be not more than five feet in
width, three feet in height, 15 square feet in area, 42
inches in height above the first-floor elevation of the
principal structure (measured from the highest point on
the sign), and shall have no more than one side.
[3] The printing on any such sign shall be limited to:
[a] The occupant's name or the name of the business.
[b] The street number and name.
[c] The business's telephone number.
[d] The occupation, service or business type.
§ 440-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-15
1:531
[4] The printing on any such sign shall exclude any and all
advertising of product(s), whether or not said product is
available on the premises.
(3) Design. Any business use may only be housed in a structure which
is residential by design.
(4) Conversion. Any structure which is to be converted in whole or in
part from a dwelling to a business use shall only be converted in
such a way so as to preserve and enhance the residential character
of the structure's original design.
(5) New construction. Any new structure which is proposed for a
business-related use shall be subject to design review and approval
by the Commission prior to the issuance of a building permit to
assure that any such structure shall be residential in character and
designed so as preserve and enhance the residential character of
the neighborhood.
(6) Number of nonresidential uses per principal structure. Not more
than one permitted nonresidential use shall be permitted within
any principal structure within the R-5 District.
(7) Mixed uses. A permitted business use may be combined with a
permitted residential use or uses within a principal structure in the
R-5 District.
(8) Landscaping. Any business use shall include provisions for the
complete landscaping of all required yards and the establishment
of landscaped buffers where said use or its ancillary off-street
parking area(s) is adjacent to any residential district or use.
(9) Number of principal structures per lot. Not more than one principal
structure shall be permitted on any zoning lot.
(10) Supplemental off-street parking requirement. All off-street parking
areas shall be situated in a side and/or rear yard only. Off-street
parking in any front yard shall be prohibited in the R-5 District.
(11) Hours of operation. No business use in the R-5 District may be
open:
(a) Earlier than 9:00 a.m. nor remain open later than 9:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
(b) Earlier than 9:00 a.m. nor remain open later than 5:00 p.m., on
any Saturday.
(c) At any time on any Sunday or national holiday.
§ 440-15 MUNHALL CODE § 440-15
1:532
ARTICLE V
Business/Commercial Zoning Districts
§ 440-16. Special requirements and regulations for all business
districts.
All buildings and uses in any business district in the Borough shall, in
addition to the requirements and regulations outlined in this article, comply
with all of the other requirements and regulations of this chapter.
§ 440-17. Convenience Business District (B-1). [Amended 7-19-1995
by Ord. No. 1390; 3-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1409; 9-17-1997 by Ord.
No. 1414; 3-15-2000 by Ord. No. 1461]
A. Purpose. The primary purpose of the B-1 Business District is to provide
suitable locations and development standards for a limited variety of
convenience sales and services along high-volume arterial streets only
which are generally located in close proximity to residential districts in
the Borough. The district is designed to include a mix of residential,
professional office, personal service and convenience retail uses.
Convenience retail uses in the B-1 District are intended by design to be
limited to relatively small businesses which serve daily consumer
needs.
B. Permitted uses. The following principal and accessory uses, permitted
and conditional uses, and uses by special exception shall be permitted
in the B-1 Business District.
(1) Principal uses. The following principal uses shall be permitted in
the B-1 Business District:
(a) Buildings and uses of the type and as regulated in the R-3
Multifamily Residential District.
(b) Art, music or photography studios.
(c) Professional offices.
(d) Retail business and sales which occupy less than 4,000 square
feet of GFA.
(e) Business services, limited to advertising, public relations and
management consulting firms and offices only for security and/
or maintenance services establishments.
(f) Financial institutions.
(g) Funeral home.
(h) Personal services.
(i) Public parking garage.
§ 440-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-17
1:533
(j) Other comparable uses not specifically listed and subject to
approval by the Zoning Board.
(k) Adult or child day-care center.
(l) Temporary uses under Article VIII, § 440-49A(1), (2) and (4).
(2) Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the B-1 Business District:
(a) Accessory buildings and uses of the type permitted and as
regulated in the least-restrictive contiguous residential
district.
(b) Off-street parking and loading facilities, as required and
regulated under §§ 440-27 and 440-28 of this chapter.
(c) Signs, as elsewhere herein regulated.
(d) Other comparable or customary architectural, design or
landscaping features or uses.
(3) Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted as
conditional uses in the B-1 Business District, subject to the
regulations and procedures outlined under Article IX of this
chapter:
(a) Buildings and uses of the type permitted and as regulated as
conditional uses in the least-restrictive contiguous residential
district.
(b) Hospital.
(c) Telecommunications signal receiving, transmission or relay
tower.
(4) Use by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
uses by special exception in the B-1 Business District, subject to the
regulations and procedures outlined under Article X of this
chapter:
(a) Buildings and uses of the type permitted and as regulated as
special exceptions in the least-restrictive contiguous
residential district.
(b) Pet grooming and kennels. [Amended 1-16-2013 by Ord. No.
1560]
(c) Eating and drinking establishments, including restaurants
(excluding fast-food or drive-in restaurants), taverns, bars and
cocktail lounges.
(d) Car wash.
(e) Automotive service station.
§ 440-17 MUNHALL CODE § 440-17
1:534
(f) Any business of any kind which includes one or more outdoor
ATM(s) or drive-through window(s) as a principal or accessory
use.
C. Bulk and area requirements. The following bulk and area requirements
are hereby established for all permitted principal and accessory
structures and uses in the B-1 Business District.
(1) Minimum lot dimensions, setbacks and densities. The minimum lot
frontage, depth, width and area (in square feet or acres)
dimensions; minimum front, rear and side yard setbacks and
densities shall be as follows:
Lot Dimensions Required Setbacks
Principal
Uses
Frontage/
Depth
(feet)
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Principal
Uses Front/
Rear/Side
(feet)
Accessory
Uses Rear/
Side
(feet)
Off-street
parking
NA/NA NA 8/5/5** NA
Public
parking
garages
NA/NA NA 8/none/none NA
All others 30/100 3,000 None/none/
none
3***
NOTES:
NA Not applicable.
* Includes both principal and accessory off-street parking areas
(lots).
** No side yard setback is required where any such off-street
parking area is adjacent to an existing building on a
neighboring lot which is both under separate ownership and
built on the lot line separating the two uses.
*** Except required setbacks for approved off-street parking
areas and driveways, as otherwise herein regulated.
(2) Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be 90%,
except for those buildings and uses of the type and as regulated in
the least-restrictive contiguous residential district.
(3) Maximum height. The maximum height for all permitted principal
and accessory structures and uses permitted in the B-1 District
shall be 36 feet and three stories.
(4) Additional standards, requirements and regulations.
§ 440-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-17
1:535
§ 440-18. General Business District (B-2). [Amended 3-19-1997 by
Ord. No. 1409; 9-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1414; 3-15-2000 by Ord. No.
1461]
(a) All operations, activities, sales, services and ancillary storage
related to any business activity of any kind shall be conducted
only within an enclosed and approved structure.
(b) Signs. In addition to the standards, requirements and
regulations outlined under Article VII, § 440-25, of this chapter,
the following standards shall apply to nonresidential uses in
the B-1 District:
[1] Freestanding pole signs shall be prohibited.
[2] Not more than one freestanding monument sign shall be
permitted in any front yard.
[3] Any conversion use (nonresidential use of an existing
principal structure which is residential by design) shall
comply with the additional signage standards outlined in
Article IV, § 406-15D(2), except that the indirect
illumination only of such sign shall be permitted.
(c) Conversion. The conversion standards outlined under Article
IV, § 406-15D(4), shall apply.
(d) Number of principal structures. No more than one principal
structure shall be permitted on any zoning lot.
(e) Supplemental off-street parking requirements. In any case
where a permitted use is to be situated in a principal building
which is residential by design only, all required off-street
parking shall be situated in a side or rear yard only.
A. Purpose. The primary purpose of the B-2 Business District is to provide
suitable locations and development standards for a wide variety of
retail commercial uses, professional offices, personal and business
services, financial services, entertainment and related business uses
which have frontage on or are in very close proximity to high-volume
arterial streets in the Borough. The district is designed to accommodate
high volumes of pedestrian and vehicular (both local and through
traffic) and relatively large-scale high-intensity commercial
development.
B. Permitted uses. The following principal and accessory uses, permitted
and conditional uses, and uses by special exception shall be permitted
in the B-2 Business District.
(1) Principal uses. The following principal uses shall be permitted in
the B-2 Business District:
(a) Adult or child day-care center.
§ 440-17 MUNHALL CODE § 440-18
1:536
(b) Art, music or photography studios.
(c) Automotive service station.
(d) Bowling alleys.
(e) Business services.
(f) Community or business school.
(g) Commercial recreation.
(h) Commercial swimming pool.
(i) Department stores.
(j) Eating and drinking establishments of any size, including the
sale of alcoholic beverages, includes fast-food and drive-in
restaurants.
(k) Essential services.
(l) Financial institutions.
(m) Funeral home.
(n) Garden apartments as regulated in the R-4 Residential District,
except that no dwelling shall be permitted on the ground floor
of any structure in the B-2 District.
(o) Hospital.
(p) Hotel/motel, including customary ancillary retail and service
uses.
(q) Museum.
(r) Nursing home.
(s) Personal services.
(t) Pet grooming (excluding kennels).
(u) Private club.
(v) Professional offices.
(w) Public parking garage.
(x) Public utility substations and structures.
(y) Retail business and sales of any size.
(z) Shopping center.
(aa) Temporary uses under Article VIII, § 440-49A(1) through (4).
§ 440-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-18
1:537
(bb) Theater, excluding adult entertainment establishments.
(cc) Other similar retail business or service establishments, subject
to approval by the Zoning Board.
(2) Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the B-2 Business District:
(a) All uses listed as permitted accessory uses in the B-1 Business
District.
(b) Indoor or outdoor ATMs and/or drive-through service or
payment windows; provided, however, that the waiting or
standing line for any such window shall be accommodated and
contained entirely within the boundaries of the lot.
(3) Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted as
conditional uses in the B-2 Business District, subject to the
regulations and procedures outlined under Article IX of this
chapter:
(a) Buildings and uses of the type permitted and as regulated as
conditional uses in the least restrictive contiguous residential
district.
(b) Hospital.165
(c) Telecommunications signal receiving, transmission or relay
tower.
(4) Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
uses by special exception in the B-2 Business District, subject to the
regulations and procedures outlined under Article X of this
chapter:
(a) Buildings and uses of the type permitted and as regulated as
special exceptions in the least-restrictive contiguous
residential district.
(b) Amusement arcade.
(c) Automotive repair establishment.
(d) Automotive, mobile home, boat, camper or trailer sales.
(e) Any wholesale business.
(f) Freight terminal.
(g) Lumber or supply yard.
(h) Maintenance and storage facility.
165. Editor's Note: Original Part 5, § 3Bciii, Adult entertainment establishment, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 9-27-2006 by Ord. No. 1509.
§ 440-18 MUNHALL CODE § 440-18
1:538
(i) Horticultural nursery.
(j) Research and development facility.
(k) Roadside stand.
C. Bulk and area requirements. The following bulk and area requirements
are hereby established for all permitted principal and accessory
structures and uses in the B-2 Business District.
(1) Minimum lot dimensions, setbacks and densities. The minimum lot
frontage, depth, width and area (in square feet or acres)
dimensions, minimum front, rear and side yard setbacks and
densities shall be as follows:
Lot Dimensions Required Setbacks
Principal
Use
Frontage/
Depth
(feet) Lot Area
Principal
Uses Front/
Rear/Side
(feet)
Accessory
Uses Rear/
Side
(feet)
Hospital 300/250 2 acres 20/20/30* 10**
Hotel/motel 150/250 1,400
square
feet per
unit
50/30/40 10**
Auto
service
station
200/200 40,000
square
feet
60/35/20* 10**
Shopping
center
300/250 2 acres 50/20/30* 10**
Fast-food
or drive-in
restaurant
200/110 22,000
square
feet
20/30/20* 10**
Funeral
home
200/110 22,000
square
feet
20/40/20* 10**
Off-street
parking
NA/NA NA 8/5/5**** NA
Public
parking
garage
NA/NA NA 8/none/none NA
All others 40/100 4,000
square
feet
none/none/
none
3**
§ 440-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-18
1:539
NOTES:
NA Not applicable.
* Or 10% of the total lot width, whichever is greater.
** Except required setbacks for approved off-street parking
areas and driveways, as otherwise herein regulated.
*** Includes both principal and accessory off-street parking
areas (lots).
**** No side yard setback is required if any such off-street
parking area is adjacent to an existing building on a
neighboring lot which is both under separate ownership and
built on the lot line separating the two uses.
(2) Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be as
follows:
(a) All residential uses shall be as regulated in the least-restrictive
contiguous residential district.
(b) Hospital: 40%.
(c) Shopping center: 30%.
(d) Fast-food or drive-in restaurant: 30%.
(e) Funeral home: 40%.
(f) All other uses: 90%.
(3) Maximum height. The maximum height in the B-2 Business District
shall be five stories and 60 feet.
(4) Additional standards, requirements and regulations.
(a) The gross floor area of each individual rental unit in any hotel
or motel shall be not less than 300 square feet.
(b) Others: none.
§ 440-18 MUNHALL CODE § 440-18
1:540
ARTICLE VI
Industrial and Mixed-Use Districts
§ 440-19. Special requirements and regulations for all industrial
districts.
All buildings and uses in any industrial district or mixed-use district in the
Borough shall, in addition to the requirements and regulations outlined in
this article, comply with all of the other requirements and regulations of this
chapter.
§ 440-20. General Service District (GS). [Amended 3-19-1997 by
Ord. No. 1409; 9-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1414]
A. Purpose. The General Service District is an industrial district which is
intended to provide suitable locations and development standards for a
variety of retail businesses, business services, light industrial, limited
production and processing and general service facilities and uses along
high-volume arterial traffic corridors in the Borough. This district is
also designed primarily to serve vehicular rather than pedestrian
traffic.
B. Permitted uses. The following principal and accessory uses, permitted
and conditional uses, and uses by special exception shall be permitted
in the General Service District.
(1) Principal uses. The following principal uses shall be permitted in
the General Service District:
(a) Buildings and uses of the type permitted and as regulated as
principal uses in the B-2 Business District, excluding all types
of dwellings, hospitals, nursing homes, clinics, hotels and
motels, public library and eating and drinking establishments
of any kind.
(b) Automotive and machinery repair establishments.
(c) Commercial or business school.
(d) Commercial laundry, dry cleaning, dyeing, drapes and carpet
cleaning.
(e) Electrical and household appliance repair.
(f) Essential services.
(g) Food-processing establishments.
(h) Freight terminal.
(i) Horticultural nursery.
(j) Light industry.
§ 440-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-20
1:541
(k) Lumber and/or building material supply yard.
(l) Maintenance and storage facilities.
(m) Manufacturing of clothes, leather goods, furniture, wood
patterns and other wood products, mattresses, upholstery,
brushes and brooms.
(n) Offices and storage building for general construction and/or
building contractors.
(o) Parcel delivery stations.
(p) Petroleum distribution facilities.
(q) Pilot manufacturing facilities.
(r) Public utility substations and structures.
(s) Rental storage facilities for the storage of household goods.
(t) Research and development facilities and laboratories.
(u) Uniform and towel cleaning and supply establishments.
(v) Warehouse, storage as a principal use contained entirely
within an enclosed building.
(w) Wholesale businesses.
(x) Temporary uses under Article VIII, § 440-49A(1), (2) and (3).
(2) Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the General Service District:
(a) Accessory buildings and uses of the type permitted and as
regulated as in the least-restrictive contiguous residential
district.
(b) Off-street parking and loading facilities, as required and
regulated under Article VIII, §§ 440-27 and 440-28, of this
chapter.
(c) Signs, as elsewhere herein regulated.
(d) Other comparable or customary architectural, design or
landscaping features or uses.
(3) Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted as
conditional uses in the General Service District, subject to the
regulations and procedures outlined under Article IX of this
chapter:
(a) Quasi-public uses.*
§ 440-20 MUNHALL CODE § 440-20
1:542
(b) Mobile home park and mobile home (only as permitted and
regulated in an approved mobile home park).
(c) Auto wrecking or salvage.
(d) Junk buildings, shops or yards.
(e) Kennel.
(f) Drive-in theater.
(g) Adult entertainment establishment.
(h) Telecommunications signal receiving, transmission or relay
tower.
* As required in the R-1 Residential District.
(4) Use by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as
uses by special exception in the General Service District, subject to
the regulations and procedures outlined under Article X of this
chapter:
(a) Buildings and uses of the type permitted and as regulated as
special exceptions in the least-restrictive contiguous
residential district.
(b) Automotive, mobile home, boat, camper or trailer sales.
(c) Billboard.
(d) Recycling collection facility.
(e) Satellite-signal-receiving antennas.
(f) Roadside stand.
C. Bulk and area requirements. The following bulk and area requirements
are hereby established for all permitted principal and accessory
structures and uses in the General Service District.
(1) Minimum lot dimensions, setbacks and densities. The minimum lot
frontage, depth, width and area (in square feet or acres)
dimensions and minimum front, rear and side yard setbacks shall
be as follows:
§ 440-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-20
1:543
§ 440-21. Heavy Industrial District (HI). [Amended 12-29-1997 by
Ord. No. 1420; 8-19-1998 by Ord. No. 1431]
Lot Dimensions Required Setbacks
Principal
Use
Frontage/
Depth
(feet) Lot Area
Principal
Buildings
Front/Rear/
Side
(feet)
Accessory
Structures
Rear/Side
(feet)
Shopping
center
300/300 2 acres 30/30/30 10*
Funeral
home
100/150 0.5 acres 30/0/10 10*
Auto service
station
200/200 40,000
square
feet
60/35/20 10*
Off-street
parking
NA/NA NA 8/5/5*** NA
All others 100/150 0.5 acres 30/30/10 10*
NOTES:
NA Not applicable.
* Except required setbacks for approved off-street parking
areas and driveways, as otherwise herein regulated.
** Includes both principal and accessory off-street parking areas
(lots).
*** No side yard setback is required where any such off-street
parking area is adjacent to an existing building on a
neighboring lot which is both under separate ownership and
built on the lot line separating the two uses.
(2) Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be as
follows:
(a) Shopping center: 30%.
(b) Funeral home: 40%.
(c) All other uses: 90%.
(3) Maximum height. The maximum height in the General Service
District shall be five stories and 60 feet.
A. Purpose. The Heavy Industrial District is an industrial district which is
intended to provide suitable locations and appropriate development
standards for a variety of light and heavy industrial manufacturing,
assembly, fabricating, processing, production and treatment, pilot
§ 440-20 MUNHALL CODE § 440-21
1:544
manufacturing and research and development related uses and/or
facilities. This district is also designed primarily to serve vehicular
rather than pedestrian traffic.
B. Permitted uses. The following principal uses shall be permitted in the
Heavy Industrial District.
(1) Principal uses. The following principal uses shall be permitted in
the Heavy Industrial District:
(a) Assembly, compounding, fabricating, processing and treatment
facilities.
(b) Essential services.
(c) Heavy industry, including manufacturing facilities.
(d) Laboratories and testing facilities.
(e) Light industry.
(f) Museums.
(g) Offices, other than professional offices.
(h) Pilot manufacturing.
(i) Public utility substations and structures.
(j) Research and development facilities.
(k) Safety services.
(l) Security facilities.
(m) Temporary uses under Article VIII, § 440-49A.
(2) Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Heavy Industrial District:
(a) Employee restaurants and cafeterias which are not open to the
general public, when located within a permitted structure
housing a permitted principal or conditional use or a use by
special exception.
(b) Fences and/or walls, as follows:
[1] Security fencing in any yard at any location on the site.
[2] Other approved fences and/or walls which are to serve in
conjunction with approved landscaping as screening for
ancillary storage in an open yard, at approved locations in
any side or rear yard only.
(c) Off-street parking and loading facilities.
§ 440-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-21
1:545
(d) Office(s), ancillary.
(e) Radio, television and/or satellite signal-receiving antenna.
(f) Signage, including shared signage.
(g) Storage of petroleum and/or petroleum by-products (other
than in an auto parts store or in conjunction with an
automotive sales and service facility):
[1] For on-premises use only;
[2] In an amount not to exceed a ninety-day supply; and
[3] Contained wholly within an approved structure.
(h) Storage, ancillary:
[1] Inside, only when contained within an approved enclosed
structure.
[2] Outside, only when:
[a] Situated at an approved location in an open side or
rear yard on the same lot as the principal use.
[b] Enclosed entirely by an approved solid wall or fence
which meets or exceeds the HI District's required
front yard setback distance.
[c] Screened by an approved, landscaped, earthen mound
which assures that all of the items/materials stored on
site are not visible at or below a point located six feet
above the finished center-line grade of each and every
public street upon which the lot has frontage.
(i) Vehicle service and maintenance.
(j) Other customary architectural, design or landscaping features
or uses.
(k) Such other compatible uses and structures as may be approved
by the Zoning Board.
(3) Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted as
conditional uses in the Heavy Industrial District, subject to the
regulations and procedures outlined in Article IX of this chapter.
(a) Distribution facilities.
(b) Marinas, recreational boat docking and servicing facilities.
(c) Recreational facilities.
(d) Storage and warehousing facilities.
§ 440-21 MUNHALL CODE § 440-21
1:546
(e) Wholesale facilities.
(f) Telecommunications signal receiving, transmission or relay
tower.
(4) Use by special exception. The following uses by special exception
shall be permitted in the Heavy Industrial District:
(a) None.
(5) Prohibited uses. The following principal uses shall be specifically
prohibited in the Heavy Industrial District:
(a) Adult entertainment establishments.
(b) Automotive service stations.
(c) Arsenals.
(d) Billboards and all other forms of off-site advertising.
(e) Car wash.
(f) Coal, bones, wood or tar distillation.
(g) Coke ovens.
(h) Fish or other meat smoking or curing.
(i) Funeral homes.
(j) Garbage disposal, incineration or processing.
(k) Manufacturing, processing or treatment of any toxic or
hazardous chemical, acetylene, acid, ammonia, bleach,
candles, celluloid, chlorine, creosote, disinfectants, dyestuffs,
emery cloth, explosives, fertilizer, fireworks, grease,
insecticides, lamp black, lard, linoleum, matches, natural gas,
oil, oil cloth, paint, paper, pulp, pyroxline, roofing or
waterproofing materials or products, rubber, sandpaper,
shellac, tallow, tar, turpentine, varnish, vinegar and yeast.
(l) Natural gas storage exceeding 10,000 cubic feet.
(m) On-site disposal of wastes of any kind.
(n) Ore reduction and smelting.
(o) Petroleum refineries.
(p) Plating or potash works.
(q) Recycling collection or processing facilities.
(r) Residences, residential uses of any kind.
§ 440-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-21
1:547
(s) Retail sales and/or businesses.
(t) Roadside stands.
(u) Slaughterhouse, meat packing or stockyards.
(v) Storage in an open yard, as a principal use.
(w) Tanning, curing or storage of leather, rawhide or skins.
(x) Vehicle storage compounds, except as part of an automobile
sales and service facility where completely enclosed.
(y) Any use not listed above which is identified as producing
hazardous waste of any kind by regulations promulgated under
§ 3301 of the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
of 1976, as amended,166 or any subsequent federal or
commonwealth statute or regulation.
C. Bulk and area requirements. The following bulk and area requirements
are hereby established for all permitted principal and accessory
structures and uses in the Heavy Industrial District:
(1) Minimum lot dimensions, setbacks and densities. The minimum lot
frontage, depth, width and area (in square feet or acres)
dimensions and minimum front, rear and side yard setbacks shall
be as follows:
Lot Dimensions Required Setbacks
Principal
Use
Frontage/
Depth
(feet) Lot Area
Principal
Buildings
Front/Rear/
Side
(feet)
Accessory
Buildings
Rear and
Side
(feet)
Off-street
parking
NA/NA NA 5/5/5** NA
All others 200/200 1 acre 30/0/0 10***
NOTES:
NA Not applicable.
* Includes both principal and ancillary off-street parking areas
(lots).
** No side yard setback is required where any such off-street
parking area is adjacent to an existing building on a
neighboring lot which is both:
(1) Under separate ownership.
(2) Built on the lot line separating the two uses.
166. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
§ 440-21 MUNHALL CODE § 440-21
1:548
§ 440-22. Riverfront Development District (RDD). [Amended
3-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1409; 9-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1414;
12-29-1997 by Ord. No. 1420; 3-15-2000 by Ord. No. 1459;
9-19-2001 by Ord. No. 1469; 2-20-2002 by Ord. No. 1474]
NOTES:
*** Except required setbacks for off-street parking areas and
driveways as otherwise herein regulated.
(2) Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be as
follows.
(a) All uses: 70%.
(3) Maximum height. The maximum height in the Heavy Industrial
District shall be seven stories and 84 feet.167
(4) Special setback requirements.
(a) Monongahela River. No structure in the Heavy Industrial
District, except one which is clearly related to an approved
water-dependent use, may be located within 25 feet of the top
edge of the river's bank.
(b) Railroad. No structure in the Heavy Industrial District may be
located within 30 feet of any railroad right-of-way line, other
than a privately owned spur servicing the specific use in
question.
A. Purpose. The Riverfront Development District is a mixed-use district
which is intended to facilitate the redevelopment of large, underutilized
or vacant, former industrial sites along the Monongahela River which
may be suitable for a variety of large-scale commercial, residential and
flex office uses, provided that the arrangement and design of those uses
are carefully planned and implemented. These regulations are further
intended to allow considerable flexibility within the RDD in the specific
types of uses, their arrangement and their intensity while assuring that:
(1) Uses are either compatible in scale, intensity, visual and
operational characteristics or, if different, are so arranged that
adverse impacts on adjacent properties are minimized.
(2) All necessary utilities, facilities and site improvements are provided
in accordance with the requirements of the Borough's Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance, Chapter 389.
(3) Negative environmental impacts are avoided.
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-22
1:549
(4) Provision is made for the safe movement of people, goods and
vehicles without increasing congestion or creating hazards within
the RDD or within the area of impact in the larger community.
(5) Each building site has adequate off-street parking and loading
facilities, safe pedestrian circulation, light and air, access for
emergency vehicles and landscaped areas and open space as may
be required by other articles of this chapter.
(6) The improvement and use of land within the RDD does not
adversely affect existing development in adjacent areas.
B. Community development objectives.
(1) Development within the RDD should be physically integrated with
the community in the following ways:
(a) A system of public or approved and improved private streets
should be constructed in a way so as to ensure coordination
with the Borough's Land Use and Thoroughfare Plan.
(b) All utilities should be designed and installed in a manner which
ensures coordination with the infrastructure systems serving
the Borough.
(c) Pedestrian and vehicular access to the riverfront should be
provided through the RDD.
(d) Land uses along the riverfront which permit public access to
the river should be encouraged.
(2) In order to enhance the Monongahela River as a scenic and
recreational community resource, the following criteria shall be
adhered to:
(a) Development is encouraged which is visually and aesthetically
oriented toward the river by enhancing views and creating new
ones.
(b) Development shall provide for the establishment and
maintenance by each individual abutting property owner or an
owners' association of a landscaped buffer area which is not
less than 25 feet in width measured from the river's edge at
"normal pool"; this requirement may, however, be waived by
the Borough for water-dependent uses, provided that
alternative plans for access to the riverfront have been
approved by the Borough.
(c) Development shall focus on water-dependent and waterrelated
uses along the river by creating a balance of retail,
residential, office and recreational uses which will bring
residents and visitors to the riverfront.
§ 440-22 MUNHALL CODE § 440-22
1:550
(d) Development shall include a wide variety of waterfront spaces
such as promenades, plazas and tree lawns for walking,
jogging, shopping and dining, as well as for sitting and quiet
contemplation.
(e) Public spaces shall be designed to fit the changeable nature of
the riverfront on a daily, seasonal and annual basis.
(f) Riverfront spaces shall be designed for public events and
celebrations.
(g) Public access shall be clearly defined by emphasizing the line
of the riverfront's edge with pathways, promenades and plazas
that give immediate and continuous public access along the
river while defining its physical boundary.
(h) Public access to the riverfront shall be highlighted with visual
links such as pedestrian-oriented streets and sidewalks, plazas
and view corridors, as well as appropriate site planning and
building design.
(i) The site's history shall be celebrated by incorporating that
history into street and building design. The site's history
should be told through informative signage and public spaces
for periodic events and historical celebrations.
(3) Development within the RDD should, to the extent possible:
(a) Provide employment opportunities at wage rates substantially
above established minimum standards for area residents,
particularly residents of Munhall.
(b) Contribute to the creation of a diversified job base within the
community, with an emphasis on health, education and other
service-oriented industries, advanced technology firms, the
recreation industry and other more traditional manufacturing
firms.
(c) Contribute to the long-term stability and growth of Munhall's
tax base.
C. Permitted uses. The following principal and accessory uses, permitted
and conditional uses, and uses by special exception shall be permitted
in the Riverfront Development District (RDD).
(1) Principal uses. The following principal uses shall be permitted in
the RDD:
(a) Art, music or photographic studios.
(b) Business services.
(c) Commercial or business schools.
§ 440-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-22
1:551
(d) Commercial recreation.
(e) Department stores.
(f) Eating and drinking establishments of any size, including the
sale of alcoholic beverages, also includes fast-food and drive-in
restaurants.
(g) Essential public services.
(h) Financial institutions, including satellite banking facilities and/
or ATMs.
(i) Hospitals.
(j) Hotels/motels, including customary ancillary retail and service
uses.
(k) Museums.
(l) Offices, business or professional.
(m) Office, flex.
(n) Off-track-betting establishments.
(o) Passive recreation.
(p) Personal services.
(q) Private clubs.
(r) Public parking garages.
(s) Public utility substations and structures.
(t) Research and development facilities.
(u) Residences, garden apartments and townhouses, as regulated
in the R-4 Residential District.
(v) Retail business.
(w) Safety services.
(x) Security facilities.
(y) Shopping centers.
(z) Banners and banner clusters not accessory to any other use.
(aa) Temporary uses, Article VIII, § 440-49A.
(bb) Theaters, including multiscreen theaters, but excluding adult
entertainment establishments.
§ 440-22 MUNHALL CODE § 440-22
1:552
(cc) Other similar principal uses and structures, subject to approval
by the Zoning Board.
(dd) Storage and warehousing facilities of 50,000 square feet or
greater.
(2) Accessory uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the RDD:
(a) Child's playhouse, garden house, gazebo, private residential
swimming pool, party house or room, tennis court or similar
private recreational facility and private greenhouse, ancillary
to multifamily dwelling.
(b) Employee restaurants and cafeterias which are not open to the
general public, when located in a permitted office or
commercial building.
(c) Fences and/or walls, in side or rear yards only.
(d) Off-street parking and loading facilities, including garages and/
or carports.
(e) Office(s), ancillary.
(f) Storage, only when clearly ancillary and only when contained
within an approved enclosed building.
(g) Storage of petroleum and/or petroleum by-products (other
than in an auto parts store or in conjunction with an
automotive sales and service facility):
[1] For on-premises use only.
[2] In an amount not to exceed a ninety-day supply.
[3] Contained wholly within an approved structure.
(h) Signage, including shared signage.
(i) Vehicle service and maintenance.
(j) Distribution facilities.
(k) Radio, television and/or satellite signal-receiving antenna.
(l) Security facilities.
(m) Other customary accessory uses and structures, subject to
approval by the Zoning Board.
(3) Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted as
conditional uses in the RDD, subject to the regulations and
procedures outlined under Article IX of this chapter: [Amended
9-27-2006 by Ord. No. 1509]
§ 440-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-22
1:553
(a) Adult entertainment facility.
(b) ARC house or halfway house.
(c) Casino.
(d) Distribution facilities (as a principal use).
(e) Light industry.
(f) Marinas, recreational boat docking and servicing facilities.
(g) Methadone treatment facility, provided all methadone
treatment facilities must be 500 feet from an existing school,
public playground, residential housing area, child-care facility,
church, meeting house or actual place of regularly stated
religious worship, and must be licensed by the proper agency
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania regulating this
conditional use. Any subsequent federal or commonwealth
statutes or regulations are incorporated herein without the
necessity of amending this subsection.168
(h) Recreational facilities.
(i) Residences; townhouses and/or garden apartments at densities
up to 50 units per acre.
(j) Telecommunications signal receiving, transmission or relay
tower.
(k) Storage and warehousing facilities.
(4) Uses by special exception. The following uses by special exception
shall be permitted in the RDD:
(a) Automotive, mobile home, boat, camper or trailer sales and
service.
(5) Prohibited uses. The following principal uses shall be specifically
prohibited in the RDD:
(a) Those used listed as prohibited uses in the Heavy Industrial
District, except for "residential uses" and "retail businesses."
(b) Heavy industrial uses and facilities.
(c) Pilot manufacturing facilities.
(d) Wholesale facilities.
(e) Any use not listed above which is identified as producing
hazardous wastes of any kind by regulations promulgated
under § 3301 of the Federal Resource Conservation and
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-22 MUNHALL CODE § 440-22
1:554
Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, or any subsequent federal
or commonwealth statute or regulation.
D. Bulk and area requirements. The following bulk and area requirements
are hereby established for all permitted principal and accessory
structures and uses in the RDD:
(1) Minimum lot dimensions, setbacks and densities. The minimum lot
frontage, depth, width and area (in square feet or acres)
dimensions and minimum front, rear and side yard setbacks shall
be as follows:
Lot Dimensions Required Setbacks
Principal
Uses
Frontage/
Depth
(feet)
Lot
Area
Principal
Buildings
Front/Rear/
Side
(feet)
Accessory
Buildings
Rear/Side
(feet)
Off-street
parking
NA/NA NA 30/5/5** NA
All others 200/200 1 acres 30/0/0** 10***
NOTES:
NA Not applicable.
* Includes both principal and accessory off-street parking areas
(lots).
** No side yard setback is required where any such off-street
parking area is adjacent to an existing building on a
neighboring lot which is both under separate ownership and
built on the lot line separating the two uses.
*** Except required setbacks for approved off-street parking
areas and driveways, as otherwise herein regulated.
(2) Maximum lot coverage:
(a) For all uses contained on a single lot, the maximum lot
coverage shall be 40%.
(b) For office, flex office and warehouse uses that are contained on
more than one lot but are owned and being developed by a
single owner for related purposes, the maximum lot coverage
for all lots involved shall be an average of 40%; provided,
however, that the maximum lot coverage permitted on each
such lot shall be 50%.
(3) Maximum height. The maximum height in the RDD shall be seven
stories and 84 feet.
(4) Special setback requirements.
§ 440-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-22
1:555
(a) Monongahela River. No structure in the RDD, except one which
is clearly related to a water-dependent use, may be located
within 25 feet of the top edge of the river's bank.
(b) Railroad. No structure in the RDD may be located within 30
feet of any railroad right-of-way.
E. Development plan requirements.
(1) Application and intent. No building, structure or land within the
RDD shall be erected, constructed, razed, altered, reconstructed,
converted, maintained or used except in accordance with an
approved land development plan. The intent of this requirement is
to maximize the flexibility available to the applicant in the selection
and arrangement of uses within the RDD while assuring that all
aspects of the proposed development will be properly coordinated,
negative impacts avoided, and the public health, safety and welfare
protected.
(2) Coordination of zoning and subdivision and land development
regulations.
(a) Zoning provisions. This chapter establishes the uses that are
allowed in the RDD, the size of structures and the intensity of
land use or development, requirements for off-street parking
and loading, open spaces, landscaping, performance standards
for operations, signs and other specific standards required of
permitted uses.
(b) Subdivision and land development provisions. The Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance, Chapter 389, establishes
standards for determining that the land is suitable for the
use(s) proposed; for the arrangement of uses, structures and
open spaces within the RDD; for the design and improvement
of public streets, private streets and other public facilities and
improvements; requirements for drainage, utilities, community
facilities and site improvements; and requirements for the
reservation and dedication of recreational and open space
areas.
(3) Procedures.
(a) Preliminary land development plan. A preliminary plan for land
development within the RDD shall include all contiguous real
property which is either currently under common ownership or
control or proposed to be under common ownership or control
and shall be submitted and processed in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 389, Subdivision and Land
Development.
[1] If a preliminary land development plan encompasses land
in two or more municipalities, approval by the Borough of
§ 440-22 MUNHALL CODE § 440-22
1:556
the plan for the use of the land within its corporate
boundaries shall be conditioned upon the applicant's
provision to the Borough of proof of approval by all of the
municipalities involved.
[2] After a preliminary land development plan has been
approved, the applicant shall be entitled to final land
development plan approval as well, provided that the final
land development plan is consistent with the approved
preliminary land development plan, including any
conditions attached to the preliminary land development
plan approval, and provided that the final land
development plan is submitted in accordance with all of
the requirements of the Borough's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, Chapter 389.
(b) Final land development plan. Applications for final approval
shall be submitted and processed in accordance with Chapter
389, Subdivision and Land Development.
[1] An application for final approval may include only those
portions of the total area encompassed by the land
development plan which are intended for initial
development or use, provided the proposed phasing of
development is in accordance with the approved
preliminary plan and the criteria listed in Chapter 389,
Subdivision and Land Development.
[2] If the land is to be subdivided for transfer of ownership or
if the land is to be developed by an entity other than the
applicant submitting the preliminary plan:
[a] Where the proposed subdivision or development
contains substantial variations, as herein defined,
from an already approved preliminary plan, a new
preliminary plan shall be required.
[b] Where the proposed subdivision or development does
not contain substantial variations, as herein defined,
from an already approved preliminary plan, the new
owner (applicant) may elect to submit an application
for final plan approval.
(4) Conditional uses. Applications for the approval of conditional uses
in the RDD may be submitted and considered by the Commission
and Council concurrent with an application for preliminary
approval of the land development plan. Any subsequent proposed
change in the list of already approved conditional uses shall require
the resubmission of both the preliminary land development plan
and the list of proposed conditional uses.
§ 440-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-22
1:557
(5) Permitted uses. Application for the approval of permitted uses in
the RDD shall be submitted and considered by the Zoning Officer
concurrent with an application for preliminary approval of the land
development plan. Any change in the proposed uses not included in
the approval of the preliminary land development plan shall require
resubmission of the preliminary land development plan as well as a
resubmission of the request for approval of the permitted uses.
(6) Required plan components.
(a) In order to establish and maintain the Monongahela River as a
scenic and recreational community resource, all structures
except for those related to approved water-dependent uses and
public or private roadways or driveways shall be set back a
distance of at least 25 feet from the edge of the top of the
river's bank.
[1] The riverfront yard area established by this setback shall
be landscaped in accordance with an approved landscape
plan and may be used as permanent open space or for
passive recreational purposes and shall be generally
accessible to the general public.
[2] Public or private roadways or driveways shall be set back a
distance of not less than 25 feet from any property line
separating the lot from the edge of the top of the
Monongahela River's bank.
[3] The Commission may or may not elect to establish setback
requirements, as deemed appropriate, for waterdependent
uses, based upon the specific proposal(s)
outlined in the plan by the applicant.
(b) The street pattern within the RDD shall be designed so as to
encourage access to the riverfront.
§ 440-22 MUNHALL CODE § 440-22
1:558
ARTICLE VII
Sign Regulations
§ 440-23. General performance standards. [Amended 12-29-1997 by
Ord. No. 1420; 6-19-1999 by Ord. No. 1446; 9-15-1999 by Ord. No.
1450]
Any and all signs are subject to the following performance standards:
A. Maintenance.
(1) Signs shall be properly maintained so as to present a legible
appearance. All signs shall be maintained in good repair. All
inoperative, broken, excessively weathered or faded signs shall be
repaired or removed.
(2) All temporary signs shall be removed at the expiration of the event
or sale for which they were erected.
(3) This section shall apply retroactively to all existing signs and any
new signs.
B. Prohibited signs.
(1) All districts.
(a) No flashing, animated or moving signs (other than electronic
time/temperature or message boards) shall be permitted in any
district.
(b) Off-site advertising signs. Billboards may be permitted in the
General Service District, as therein regulated. However,
billboards and all other types/forms of off-site advertising signs
shall be prohibited at any and all other locations throughout
the Borough.
(c) No sign or its lighting source shall be erected or maintained in
a manner which generates glare, is distractive or hazardous,
obstructs visibility or threatens the safety of motorists or
pedestrians proceeding along any public way or entering/
leaving a private residence, business or lot.
(d) No sign shall be erected or maintained on the roof or eaves of
any building.
(e) Banners in all districts but the RDD, streamers, pennants,
balloons, flags (other than national, state and/or municipal
flags), etc., are not permitted.
(2) B-1 and B-2 Districts. Pole signs are not permitted. Only ground
signs and/or monument signs which do not exceed seven feet in
total height above finished grade are permitted as freestanding
signs in these districts, and as may be otherwise regulated herein.
§ 440-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-23
1:559
§ 440-24. Residential districts. [Amended 12-29-1997 by Ord. No.
1420; 9-15-1999 by Ord. No. 1450]
Signs shall be permitted in any Residential District, subject to the following
conditions:
C. Vacation. In any district, all signs, other than permitted "for sale" or "for
rent" signs, shall be removed from the lot within 30 days of the closing
or vacation of a business. After 30 days from the closing, the Borough
may at any time require the owner or a successor in title to remove the
sign.
D. Exemptions. The following signs, except as noted, shall be exempt from
the requirements of this article:
(1) Properly authorized and/or approved street name signs, trafficcontrol-
related signage, etc., within any public or approved private
street right-of-way, including, but not limited to, "stop" signs,
"yield" signs, signs regulating on-street parking, etc.
(2) All signage for any approved recreational use which is open to the
general public without charge, subject to review and approval by
the Borough.
A. Nameplate sign. Not more than one such sign shall be permitted for
each single-family dwelling unit. Each sign shall not exceed two square
feet in total surface area. Any such sign shall be limited to address
number, street name, name of occupant and/or approved home
occupation. A permit shall not be required.
B. Identification sign. Not more than one such sign shall be permitted for
each multifamily dwelling structure containing more than five dwelling
units. Each sign shall not exceed eight square feet in total surface area
and shall not be closer than 10 feet to any property line or public rightof-
way. A permit shall not be required.
C. "For sale" or "for rent" sign. Only one such sign shall be permitted for
each front yard. Such sign shall not exceed 10 square feet in total
surface area, shall not exceed five feet in height and shall not be closer
than 10 feet to any property or public right-of-way line. A permit shall
not be required.
D. Development sign (temporary). Signs advertising lots or houses for sale
in real estate developments, where three or more contiguous lots in
common ownership are for sale simultaneously. Only one such sign shall
be permitted for any such development, except that a second sign shall
be permitted where any such development is comprised of 10 or more
contiguous lots in common ownership. Not more than two such signs
may be permitted for any such development. Each sign shall not exceed
25 square feet in total surface area and shall be located within the
boundaries of any such development, but not closer than 10 feet to any
private property line or public right-of-way.
§ 440-23 MUNHALL CODE § 440-24
1:560
(1) A building permit and a sign permit shall be required for each
temporary development sign.
(2) A performance bond equal to $100 per sign shall be required.
(3) Any such sign shall not be erected unless an application for a sign
permit is applied for and approved by the Zoning Officer. Any such
sign shall be removed within two years after receipt of a permit or
when all of the original lots have been sold, whichever is sooner; at
which time, the performance bond will be returned.
(4) Failure to remove the sign within the stated time period shall result
in the immediate forfeiture of the bond and the removal and
disposal of the sign by the Borough. Any such failure shall
constitute a violation of this article.
(5) Any such sign may not be illuminated.
E. Development sign (permanent).
(1) Not more than one approved development sign may be permitted at
each major entrance or point of vehicular ingress/egress to and/or
from a development.
(2) A building permit and a sign permit shall be required for each
permanent development sign.
(3) Letters not exceeding 18 inches in height may be affixed to or
engraved on an ornamental structure, giving the name of the real
estate development or subdivision and serving as a permanent
indication of the entrance(s) to such development.
(4) Any such sign shall not include identification of the owner,
developer, builder or realtor.
(5) Any such sign shall not exceed 25 square feet in total surface area
per each sign face.
(6) Any such sign shall have not more than two sign faces.
(7) Any such sign shall not exceed a cumulative (combined) gross
surface area of 50 square feet.
(8) Any such sign shall be no more than 10 feet in height above the
finished grade.
(9) Any such sign shall be situated not closer than 10 feet from any
public/private property or right-of-way line.
(10) Any such sign may be directly or indirectly illuminated by a small
white light which is not intermittent, does not flash and does not
generate glare, but instead shines directly within or onto the sign
with enough light to permit the sign to be read from the nearest
roadway at night.
§ 440-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-24
1:561
§ 440-25. Commercial, industrial and mixed-use districts.
[Amended 9-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1414; 12-29-1997 by Ord. No.
1420; 9-15-1999 by Ord. No. 1450; 9-19-2000 by Ord. No. 1469;
10-17-2001 by Ord. No. 1470; 2-20-2002 by Ord. No. 1474]
In any commercial or industrial district, signs are permitted, subject to the
following conditions:
F. Bulletin signs for houses of worship. Not more than one such sign shall
be permitted for each zoning lot. Each sign shall not exceed 15 square
feet in total surface area and shall not be located closer than 10 feet to
any private property line or public right-of-way.
A. Permits required.
(1) A building permit and a sign permit is required for each sign in a
commercial, industrial or mixed-use district.
(2) A single building permit and single sign permit shall be required for
each banner location not part of a banner cluster, although the
banner located there may be changed as permitted herein. A single
building banner permit and a single sign permit shall be required
for each banner cluster, although the banners which are part of the
banner cluster may be changed as permitted herein.
B. Number of business signs permitted.
(1) Each individual detached building in any commercial or general
service (industrial) district may be permitted one freestanding sign
and shall be permitted any number of flush-mounted signs, in
accordance with the requirements of Subsections C and D of this
section.
(2) In any shopping center in the RDD, individual businesses situated
within the principal structure shall only be permitted any
combination of flush-mounted exterior or interior (in a mall) signs.
(3) In any shopping center in the RDD, individual businesses situated
elsewhere upon the same lot within a separate principal structure
may be permitted one freestanding monument-type sign and any
number of flush-mounted signs.
(4) In any shopping center in the RDD that is comprised of 10 or more
business establishments (including businesses located in the
Boroughs of Homestead and West Homestead), the shopping
center, not each individual business, may be permitted one
additional freestanding sign at each approved principal entrance to
the shopping center site, identifying the group of businesses as a
single unit. Any such development sign shall be limited to either a
monument sign with an overall height not greater than 15 feet
above the finished grade or a pylon sign with an overall height not
greater than 60 feet above finished grade. In addition, any such
§ 440-24 MUNHALL CODE § 440-25
1:562
development sign shall have an area not greater than 250 square
feet of sign area per side and shall be situated on site. Any such
sign, shall be limited to the name and address of the development
and/or a complete or partial listing of its tenants.
(5) Banners may only be located on streetlights within or adjacent to a
public right-of-way within the RDD. No more than two banners may
be located on a single streetlight.
(6) Banner clusters may only be located along Waterfront Drive in the
RDD. No more than one banner cluster may be located along
Waterfront Drive at one time.
(7) In the RDD, one monument sign of no more than 50 square feet
shall be permitted for each building of less than 100,000 square
feet containing commercial, warehouse, office and/or flex office
use(s) and either two monument signs of no more 50 square feet or
one monument sign of no more than 100 square feet shall be
permitted for each building of 100,000 square feet or larger
containing commercial, warehouse, office and/or flex office use(s).
Multiple buildings whose combined GFA totals at least 100,000
square feet and which share a common curb cut are permitted to
use a single monument sign of no more than 100 square feet. Signs
mounted on a building shall be permitted as provided in Subsection
B(3) and (4) herein.
C. Size of signs permitted.
(1) Commercial district. The total gross surface area in square feet for
all permitted signage shall not exceed a ratio of one time the lineal
feet of the lot's frontage on a dedicated public or approved private
street right-of-way.*
(2) Industrial district. The total gross surface area in square feet for all
permitted signage shall not exceed a ratio of two times the lineal
feet of the lot's frontage on a dedicated public or approved private
street right-of-way.*
*Where a lot has frontage on more than one public or approved
private street, only the frontage on the one street upon which
the lot has the greater or greatest frontage shall be used in
determining the total gross surface area for all permitted signage.
(3) Riverfront Development District (RDD).
(a) Permitted sign area of each use in the RDD shall be 10% of the
total area of the front building facade of that use (building
height x building width x 0.10 = permitted sign area).
Permitted sign area shall be increased by 25% for uses having
frontage on more than one public right-of-way. No more than
75% of permitted signage may be used for signs mounted on
the wall of a building.
§ 440-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-25
1:563
(b) Shopping center. For any shopping center situated in the RDD
that is comprised of 10 or more business establishments, one
or more development signs shall be permitted at approved
locations which represent major points of vehicular ingress/
egress to/from the site. The cumulative gross surface areas in
square feet for all of the permitted development signs for a
particular development shall not exceed 2 1/2% of the
cumulative total of all of the front building facades in the
development.
(c) Large identification signs are permitted for any multifamily
dwelling units. Small identification signs are permitted for any
multifamily dwelling containing 50 units or less. No permit
shall be required for any identification signs.
(d) Banners may not exceed eight feet in height and three feet in
width, not including brackets by which the banners are affixed
to each streetlight.
D. Location of signs.
(1) All portions of business signs shall be a minimum of five feet from
any dedicated public right-of-way unless flush-mounted.
(2) All parts of any sign other than a development sign or a banner
shall be within 15 feet of the general ground level over which it is
located, unless flush-mounted.
(3) A sign shall be placed so as not to interfere with the safe, regular
and orderly flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(4) Flush-mounted signs shall be permitted on all sides of a building,
provided they are in conformance with the area requirements and
other provisions of this chapter.
(5) Freestanding signs shall be permitted in any yard area, provided
they are in conformance with the performance standards of this
article and other applicable provisions of this chapter.
(6) Identification signs in the RDD shall be no closer than 10 square
feet to any property line or public right-of-way.
E. Illumination.
(1) No sign may generate glare.
(2) Flashing and/or intermittent signs are prohibited.
(3) The lighting source for indirectly illuminated signs may not be
visible from any public right-of-way.
(4) Indirectly illuminated signs, neon signs and internally illuminated
signs are permitted.
§ 440-25 MUNHALL CODE § 440-25
1:564
(5) Electronic time/temperature and/or message board signs are
permitted, subject to the other regulations of this article.
F. Temporary signs. Temporary signs may be permitted for a period not to
exceed 14 consecutive calendar days and more not more than 28
calendar days in any one calendar year. There shall be no limit as to the
number or size of temporary signs, except that such signs must be
located on the lot of the business whose opening, sale or ownership is
being advertised, and that such signs shall not constitute a hazard or
impediment to vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
G. Directional signs. Two directional signs are permitted for each means of
ingress and egress, and each such sign may not exceed four square feet
in total surface area. Directional signs shall not be included when
determining permitted signage.
H. Menu boards. In addition to other permitted signs, a fast-food
restaurant may provide a menu board for drive-through customers. A
menu board shall not be located within the required front yard setback
area, shall not exceed 20 square feet in total surface area, and shall not
impede the safe flow of traffic.
I. Automobile service stations.
(1) Not more than two price signs may be attached to the permitted
freestanding sign. The area of these signs shall be included in the
total permitted signage surface area. The total surface area of all
freestanding signs shall not exceed 50 square feet.
(2) Additional signs are permitted on and above gasoline pump islands,
provided they do not extend beyond the edge of the island and are
within 15 feet of the ground. The total surface area of all permitted
freestanding and pump island signs shall not exceed 200 square
feet.
(3) State inspection shingles, where applicable, shall not exceed 24
inches by 26 inches in dimension and may be flush-mounted on the
structure.
J. Awning signs. Signs on awnings are exempt from the limitations
imposed by this article regarding the location of signs with respect to
the public right-of-way. An awning sign shall be affixed flat to the
surface of the awning; may be internally illuminated (backlighted),
provided that it generates no glare; may only list the business name
and/or address and shall otherwise conform to the regulations outlined
under this article.
K. Marquee signs.
(1) Number. Only one sign shall be permitted for each use.
(2) Size. The maximum depth of the sign shall be one foot, and the
maximum area of the sign shall be five square feet in surface area.
§ 440-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-25
1:565
L. "For sale" or "for rent" signs.
(1) Number. Only one such sign shall be permitted for each business
and may be located in a required front yard.
(2) Size. Any such sign shall not exceed 10 square feet in total surface
area and shall, unless affixed to the face of the building, not be
closer than five feet to any private property line or public right-ofway.
(3) Real estate "for sale" or "for rent" signs in any commercial, mixeduse
or general service (industrial) district shall not exceed five feet
in height unless approved by Council.
M. Banner signs. Banner signs may be bracketed to any streetlight along
Waterfront Drive; provided, however, that no more than two banners
may be located on a single streetlight. Banners shall be exempt from
the other limitations imposed by this article unless specifically made
applicable to banners.
§ 440-25 MUNHALL CODE § 440-25
1:566
ARTICLE VIII
Performance Standards
§ 440-26. Purpose.
The purpose of these performance standards is to establish specific
standards for various uses, classifications of uses or areas wherein
problems may occur in order to avoid or minimize the impact of such
problems and to promote the harmonious exercise of property rights
without conflict.
§ 440-27. Off-street parking regulations. [Amended 9-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 1414; 12-29-1997 by Ord. No. 1420; 8-19-1998 by Ord. No.
1431]
The number of off-street parking spaces (serving a building or use) existing
on the effective date of this chapter shall not be reduced below that
required for a similar new building or new use by this chapter or further
reduced if the number of spaces available is already less than required by
this chapter. Off-street parking spaces provided to comply with the terms
of this chapter shall not be subsequently reduced below the requirements
of this chapter. The granting and continued validity of a certificate of
occupancy (use, occupancy, and compliance), issued after the effective date
of this chapter, shall be conditional upon compliance with these parking
requirements. Where the owner or operator of a use of land must satisfy the
requirements for off-street parking by leasing spaces he/she shall provide
an executed copy of the lease agreement and shall provide a signed
statement that he/she understands that the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy is subject to the continuance of any such lease agreement or
to the required parking spaces being otherwise provided in an approved
manner.
A. General provisions.
(1) Computation. When calculation of the required amount of off-street
parking results in a requirement of a fractional space, that fraction
shall be counted as an entire parking space.
(2) Size.
(a) General. Any required off-street parking space shall be at least
nine feet wide by 19 feet in length, with an area of at least 171
square feet, not including access drives, aisles or ramps.
(b) Handicapped. Any required off-street parking space
designated as a handicapped space shall be required to include
an access aisle for access to the right-hand side of the vehicle
and shall minimally meet the following dimensional design
standards:
[1] Length: 19 feet.
§ 440-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-27
1:567
[2] Width: 11 feet.
[3] Access aisle width: five feet.
(3) Access. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly
upon an aisle or drive of such design as to provide safe and efficient
means of access to a street in a manner which will least interfere
with traffic flow.
(4) Surfacing. All driveways and open off-street parking spaces shall be
surfaced and maintained with a bituminous or concrete surface.
(5) Lighting. All off-street parking areas in multifamily residential,
commercial and industrial districts shall be suitably illuminated for
night use, with any such lighting being directed away from
adjacent residential districts or uses and streets.
(6) Drainage. All off-street parking and loading areas, including
driveways, aisles and other, shall be graded and adequately drained
so as to disperse surface water which might otherwise accumulate
upon any such area and to prevent excess runoff onto adjacent
properties or across public sidewalks by dispersing the surface
drainage to an adequate stormwater drainage system,
drainagecourse or other acceptable processing system.
B. Collective parking. Off-street parking for separate uses in the
commercial, industrial or mixed-use districts may be provided
collectively only if the total number of parking spaces in any such
collective off-street parking facility is equal to either:
(1) The total number of spaces required for the various uses if
computed separately.
(2) Only if it is demonstrated to Council's satisfaction that the
individual uses have parking needs at different times of the day
which can adequately be met by sharing the available off-street
parking spaces, an approved number of spaces which is less than
the total number of spaces required for the various uses if
computed separately.
(3) All of the other "general provisions" addressed under Subsection A
of this section shall be met.
C. Location and accessibility.
(1) Except as may be provided elsewhere herein, all required off-street
parking spaces for residential uses shall be located on the same
zoning lot as the dwelling(s) served.
(2) Off-street parking shall not be permitted in required transitional
buffer yards or required open space areas.
§ 440-27 MUNHALL CODE § 440-27
1:568
(3) In all districts, off-street parking shall be reasonably accessible to
the uses served. In business/commercial districts, all required
parking spaces shall be located within 250 feet (direct walking
distance) of a main entrance to the use served.
(4) Vehicle repair and/or service shall not be performed and is not
permitted within any off-street parking area or facility in any
district.
(5) The parking or storage of any vehicle, other than a recreation
vehicle, with a registered gross weight in excess of 11,000 pounds
shall not be permitted in any residential district.
(6) No commercial vehicle may be parked in an open yard in any
residential district, except for in-service vehicles which may be
parked temporarily (momentarily) for business or delivery
purposes and which are otherwise in full compliance with all other
applicable laws of the Borough and the commonwealth.
D. Required minimum number of off-street parking spaces. The minimum
number of required off-street parking spaces for each use, expressed in
units of total area, membership, employment or seating, is as follows:
(1) Residential uses.
(a) One- and two-family dwellings: two per dwelling unit.
(b) Multifamily dwellings.
[1] Efficiency or one-bedroom: one per unit.
[2] Two or more bedrooms: two per unit.
(c) Senior citizen housing: one per two dwelling units.
(2) Commercial uses.
(a) Animal (veterinary) clinic or hospital and kennels: one per 400
square feet gross floor area plus one per two employees.
(b) Automotive, mobile home, boat, camper or trailer sales: one
per 400 square feet gross floor area and one per employee.
(c) Automotive service stations: one per service bay plus one per
every two persons employed at any one time with no fewer
than two employee spaces.
(d) Barber and beauty shops: three per each barber/beautician.
(e) Business services: one per 300 square feet gross floor area.
(f) Car wash: one per employee.
(g) Child day-care center: four per classroom, plus one per
employee.
§ 440-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-27
1:569
(h) Conference or convention rooms, halls or centers: one per four
seats.
(i) Financial institution: one per 300 square feet gross floor area.
(j) Hotel/motel: one per room, plus one for every two employees
(based upon full employment), plus any and all separate
requirements for all ancillary uses.
(k) Laundromats: one per each two washing machines.
(l) Nightclubs, bars, taverns and cocktail lounges: one per three
seats.
(m) Offices, all types:
[1] Up to 99,999 square feet gross floor area: one per 300
square feet gross floor area.
[2] One hundred thousand or more square feet gross floor
area: three per each additional 1,000 square feet gross
floor area or fraction thereof over 99,999 square feet gross
floor area.
(n) Personal services (other than beauty salons/barbershops): one
per 300 square feet gross floor area.
(o) Restaurant.
[1] Fast-food drive-in: one per 30 square feet gross floor area.
[2] Carry-out: one per 200 square feet gross floor area plus
one per employee.
[3] All others: one per 100 square feet gross floor area.
(p) Retail store: one per 250 square feet gross floor area.
(q) Theater.
[1] In a shopping center: one per four seats.
[2] All others: one per three seats.
(r) All other commercial uses, including shopping centers:
[1] Up to 400,000 square feet: four per 1,000 square feet
gross floor area.
[2] Four hundred thousand to 599,999 square feet: 4 1/2 per
1,000 square feet gross leasable area.
[3] Six hundred thousand square feet or more: five per 1,000
square feet gross leasable area.
(3) Recreation and entertainment uses.
§ 440-27 MUNHALL CODE § 440-27
1:570
(a) Art or music studio: one per 300 square feet gross floor area.
(b) Auditoriums, sports arenas and stadiums: one per four seats.
(c) Bowling alley: four per bowling lane.
(d) Dance halls and skating rinks: one per 100 square feet of net
floor area used for the activity, plus one per three employees.
(e) Marinas: one per boat slip.
(f) Miniature golf: two per hole, plus one per employee.
(g) Private clubs and lodges: one per 10 members.
(h) Swimming pools: one per 10 persons of capacity.
(i) Tennis/racquet facilities: two per court, plus one per employee,
plus one per 100 square feet of other activity area.
(4) Institutional uses.
(a) Church: one per eight seats.
(b) Colleges and universities: one per three employees, plus one
per five students; based on maximum employment and student
enrollment.
(c) Hospitals and nursing or convalescent homes: one per two
employees, plus one per three beds.
(d) Library or museum: one per 300 square feet gross floor area.
(e) Medical or dental center or clinic: one per 250 square feet
gross floor area.
(f) Schools (by grades). Elementary (K to 5): two per classroom,
but not less than one per teacher and staff; intermediate (6 to
8): 1 1/2 per classroom, but not less than one per teacher and
staff; secondary (9 to 12): 2 1/2 per classroom, but not less
than one per teacher and staff.
(g) Business, technical and trade schools. The lesser of one per
two students, plus one per teacher and staff or one per 300
square feet gross floor area.
(5) Industrial and mixed uses.
(a) Research and development: one per 1,000 square feet gross
floor area.
(b) Shipping, receiving, distribution, storage or warehousing: one
per 5,000 square feet gross floor area.
(c) Ancillary office uses: one per 800 square feet gross floor area.
§ 440-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-27
1:571
(d) All other industrial uses not otherwise herein listed: one per
2,000 square feet gross floor area.
(6) Any unit or fraction of a unit above the unit(s) indicated shall count
as a full additional unit and shall require the expressed number of
additional space(s).
(7) Any reference to membership or employment shall be interpreted
as a reference to 100% of the membership or potential
employment.
(8) All off-street parking requirements outlined herein may be reduced
by up to 25%, provided that the site is situated within 650 feet
walking distance of a permanent mass transit system's pickup point
or stop.
(9) Any use which is a composite of several uses shall be broken down
into its composite parts and shall meet the off-street parking
requirement for the sum of all of its separate parts.
E. Required minimum number of off-street stacking spaces for drive-in
services. In addition to the off-street parking requirements outlined in
Subsection D, the minimum number of required off-street temporary
vehicle stacking spaces (nine feet by 19 feet) per unit for businesses
offering drive-in services or pickup windows shall be as follows:
(1) Automotive service stations. Two per each thirty-foot segment on
each side of each pump island or two per each side of each pump,
whichever is the greater number.
(2) Car wash. Self-service facilities: three per stall; and all others, six
per entrance.
(3) Financial institutions, Including stand-alone ATMs. Four per each
window and/or ATM.
(4) All other commercial uses. Five per window, and any such use
which also requires a separate stopping point from which orders
are placed shall also be required to provide not fewer than three
additional spaces for each such stopping point.
F. Parking area designs.
(1) Approved curbing shall be provided along the perimeter of all offstreet
parking areas to contain and control vehicular traffic, direct
surface drainage, and control erosion. Curbing may be eliminated
or interrupted in approved areas to facilitate stormwater
management design.
(2) Uniform painted line marking shall be provided and maintained to
separate parking stalls and where need to direct traffic flow.
§ 440-27 MUNHALL CODE § 440-27
1:572
§ 440-28. Off-street loading regulations.
Off-street loading spaces accessory to uses permitted in the various use
districts shall be designed in accordance with the following regulations and
other applicable provisions of this chapter.
(3) Parking lot gradients shall not exceed a five-percent cross slope
and a seven-percent longitudinal slope.
(4) The following curb-to-curb (a) parking area widths and aisle (b)
widths shall be the minimum requirements in any "double-wide"
(parking on both sides of an aisle) parking area:
(a) Ninety-degree parking: a = 60 feet and b = 22 feet.
(b) Sixty-degree parking: a = 54 feet and b = 20 feet.
(c) Forty-five degree parking: a = 49 feet and b = 17 feet, one-way
only.
(d) Thirty-degree parking: a = 46 feet and b = 16 feet, one-way
only.
(5) All off-street parking areas shall be paved and maintained with an
impervious bituminous or concrete surface; except, however, that
Council may, upon receipt of a written request from a prospective
developer, grant a temporary waiver of this requirement for a fixed
term, not to exceed 10 years, in conjunction with Council's review
and approval of a proposed phased development plan, only where
Council determines any such waiver to be consistent with this
chapter's statement of purpose and the promotion of the
community's best interest.
(6) Parking areas shall be designed in such a way as to avoid the
necessity of vehicles backing onto the street right-of-way in order
to exit.
G. Handicapped parking. Parking facilities serving buildings and/or
facilities which are required to be accessible to the physically
handicapped shall have conveniently located designated spaces as
follows:
(1) Up to 100 spaces: one space per 25 parking spaces or fraction
thereof.
(2) One hundred and one to 200 spaces: four spaces, plus one space
per 50 parking spaces or fraction thereof for spaces over 100.
(3) More than 200 spaces: six spaces, plus one space per each 100
parking spaces or fraction thereof for spaces over 200.
A. General provisions.
(1) Location.
§ 440-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-28
1:573
(a) All proposed loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as
the use served.
(b) No loading spaces for vehicles over two tons' capacity shall be
closer than 30 feet to a residential district or use unless
completely enclosed by building walls or by an approved and
uniformly painted wall and/or fence not less than six feet in
height.
(c) No loading space shall be located within 30 feet of the nearest
point of intersection of any two streets.
(d) No loading space shall be located in a required front yard, a
transitional (buffer) yard or required open space area.
(e) Any loading space located in a required rear yard or side yard
may be covered only by a well-maintained weatherproof
covering.
(2) Size. Unless otherwise specified, a loading space shall be at least
65 feet long and 12 feet wide and shall have an area of at least 780
square feet, not including access drives, aisles or required
maneuvering space.
(3) Access. Each off-street loading space shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street in a manner
which will least interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(4) Surfacing. All drives and loading spaces shall be paved and
maintained with an impervious bituminous or concrete surface.
(5) Repair and service. Vehicle repair and/or service work shall not be
performed and is not permitted in any required loading space in
any district.
B. Specific provisions.
(1) Space allocated to off-street loading or access to off-street loading
spaces shall not be used to satisfy the minimum requirements
under this chapter for off-street parking.
(2) All required off-street loading spaces shall have access and
maneuvering space adequate to ensure that any vehicle leaving the
loading area shall be traveling in a forward direction onto any
dedicated public street or across any public sidewalk.
(3) Business or industrial uses with a floor area of at least 5,000 square
feet gross floor area shall be required to have one off-street loading
space plus one additional space for each additional 40,000 square
feet of floor area over the first 40,000 square feet of floor area.
§ 440-28 MUNHALL CODE § 440-28
1:574
§ 440-29. Lot and yard regulations and exceptions. [Amended
8-19-1998 by Ord. No. 1431; 6-16-1999 by Ord. No. 1448;
10-15-1999 by Ord. No. 1452]
(4) Business or industrial uses having less than 5,000 square feet gross
floor area shall provide for adequate loading facilities by way of an
approved adjacent service drive, street or alley.
A. Maintenance of minimum standards.
(1) Any lot shall meet the minimum bulk, area and dimension
requirements established for the use to which it is to be put and the
zoning district in which it is situated.
(2) The maintenance of required minimum standards for yards, open
space and lot areas shall be a continuing obligation of the property
owner(s).
(3) No required minimum yard, open space or lot area may, for any
reason, be used to satisfy the yard, open space, or lot area
requirements for any other use or structure.
(4) Any lot or portion thereof once designated as all or any portion of a
required yard or as all or any portion of the required lot area in
compliance with the lot area, yard or dimension requirements of
this chapter shall not be sold at any time thereafter as a separate
lot.
(5) Any lot or portion thereof recorded or reserved as a right-of way or
thoroughfare shall not thereafter be used in satisfying any lot area,
yard or dimension requirement of this chapter.
(6) No required off-street parking area or other space may be reduced
in area or dimension if such reduction has the effect of reducing the
number or size of the area below the minimum standards required
by this chapter.
(7) Any existing lot, yard, parking area, or other space which is already
less than the required minimum established under this chapter
shall not be further reduced.
(8) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to limit the powers of
the Board in granting variances under the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Division of zoning lots. No lot may hereafter be subdivided into two or
more zoning lots and no portion of any zoning lot shall be sold unless all
zoning lots resulting from each subdivision or sale shall meet all of the
bulk and area regulations of the district in which the property is
situated, as well as the requirements of Chapter 389, Subdivision and
Land Development.
§ 440-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-29
1:575
C. Location of required open space. All required yards and other open
space shall be located on the same zoning lot as the structure or
structures that constitute the principal use upon which the requirement
is based.
D. Permitted obstructions in required yards. The following shall be
considered permitted obstructions when located in the specified
required yards.
(1) In required yards (all districts): recreation equipment, flagpoles,
window awnings, permitted open off-street parking space, outdoor
lampposts, one-story bay windows, cantilever floors, overhanging
eaves and gutters projecting 18 inches or less into the yard.
(2) In required front yards (all districts):
(a) Trees which are located at least five feet from any public rightof-
way line, and provided that any tree located within 20 feet of
any public right-of-way line shall have its lower branches
trimmed and maintained at a height of at least eight feet above
ground level.
(b) Shrubs or hedges located more than 10 feet from any side yard
line and more than 20 feet from any public street right-of-way
line to any height, provided they are properly trimmed and
maintained.
(c) Shrubs located within 20 feet of any public street right-of-way
shall be trimmed and maintained at a height not to exceed 2 1/
2 feet above the grade of the abutting sidewalk or street center
line.
(d) Open porches which are not more than one story or 14 feet,
whichever is the lower height, and which extend not more than
eight feet into the required front yard, provided that no such
porch shall be located closer to the side lot line than the
distance established for the principal structure as the required
side yard setback.
(e) Enclosed vestibules or porches not exceeding 25 square feet in
area and not projecting more than five feet into the required
front yard.
(f) Signs, as permitted and restricted elsewhere in this chapter.
(3) In any residential district only:
(a) In any front yard or side yard, hedges and shrubs located
within 10 feet of any lot line may not exceed four feet in height.
(b) In any front yard, hedges and shrubs located more than 10 feet
from any lot line and more than 20 feet from any public rightof-
way line shall have no height limitation.
§ 440-29 MUNHALL CODE § 440-29
1:576
(c) In any front yard, walls and fences may not exceed four feet in
height at any location and shall be at least 80% open to light
and air, except for retaining walls which have a side height
within six inches of the finished grade. All posts, braces and
supports for walls and fences must be placed on the interior
side of the wall or fence so that the finished side is facing the
exterior.
(d) In any side yard, hedges, shrubs and walls and fence may not
exceed four feet in height at any location.
(e) In any rear yard, hedges and shrubs located within 10 feet of
any side or rear property line and walls and fences at any
location may not exceed six feet in height.
(f) In any rear yard, hedges and shrubs located 10 feet or more
from any side or rear property line shall have no height
limitation, provided that they are trimmed and maintained.
(4) In any commercial district only:
(a) In any front yard, shrubs and hedges, walls and fences may not
exceed four feet in height at any location; except that, in the
B-2 District only, security fencing not exceeding 10 feet in
height may be permitted, subject to review and approval by the
Commission prior to construction.
(b) In any side or rear yard, shrubs and hedges located more than
10 feet from any side or rear lot line have no height limitation,
provided that they are trimmed and maintained.
(c) In any side or rear yard, security fencing may be permitted to a
height not exceeding 10 feet, subject to review and approval by
the Commission prior to construction.
(5) In any industrial or mixed-use district only:
(a) In any front or side yard, shrubs and hedges may not exceed six
feet in height at any location.
(b) In any front, side or rear yard, security fencing may be
permitted to a height not exceeding 10 feet, subject to review
and approval by the Commission prior to construction.
(6) Outdoor storage. In addition to regulations established elsewhere
in this chapter, permitted principal uses may utilize property for
ancillary outdoor storage in compliance with the following
performance standards:
(a) All proposed outdoor storage must be completely screened
from view from surrounding property. Screening must be in the
form of an opaque fence or solid wall (commercial, industrial
§ 440-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-29
1:577
and mixed-use districts only), which has been approved by the
Commission.
(b) Outdoor storage shall not be permitted in any required front
yard or in any required open space area in any yard in any
district.
(c) Fencing must meet all bulk and area regulations of this
chapter.
(d) The Commission may impose such other requirements as it
may deem necessary to protect adjacent properties and/or to
control aesthetics.
(e) These standards shall not apply to incidental sales (yard or
garage sales) in residential districts. Such incidental sales are
subject to the approval of the Zoning Officer, providing they do
not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or otherwise
present a detriment to adjacent property.
E. Prohibited obstructions. In all use districts, the accumulation or storage
of waste, garbage, rubbish, refuse, used or secondhand materials, scrap
materials, scrap metals, inoperable or dismantled vehicles, paper, rags,
tires and construction materials are prohibited; except that
construction materials may be permitted on a temporary basis only
where such materials are being immediately used in the construction of
an approved use or structure on the same zoning lot.
F. Height exceptions. Chimneys, flues, stacks, fire escapes, elevator
penthouses, ventilators, skylights, standpipes, conveyors, silos,
elevated water tanks, church spires, belfry towers, flagpoles, cupolas,
electronic emission or reception towers and/or antennas for radio,
telephone, cellular telephone or television transmissions and/or other
unique design or maintenance features which are not intended for
human habitation may exceed the height limitations of the district in
which they are situated, provided that the less restrictive of Subsection
F(1) or (2) below is met:
(1) The height limitations of the district in which the structure is
situated shall not be exceeded by more than 15 feet.
(2) The total height of the structure shall not exceed a dimension equal
to or less than the horizontal distance between the base of the
structure nearest the feature and the nearest lot line or street
right-of-way line.
G. Projections into required yards. All structures, whether open or
enclosed, including porches, canopies, balconies, platforms, garages,
carports, covered patios and similar architectural design features,
above the normal grade shall not project into any minimum required
front, side or rear yard; except that the following encroachments shall
be permitted:
§ 440-29 MUNHALL CODE § 440-29
1:578
(1) Bay windows, window sills, eaves, buttresses, chimneys, cornices,
piers, pilasters and other similar architectural features, provided
that any such feature shall not project more than two feet into any
required yard.
(2) Balconies, open aboveground patio decks or other platforms, open
fire escapes and/or access steps to a structure.
(3) An open or enclosed porch only may be extended from the principal
structure into a required side or rear yard only in any residential
district, provided that any such feature shall be:
(a) Not more than 10 feet in height.
(b) Not closer than three feet to any side lot line and not closer
than 10 feet to any rear lot line.
H. Fence and wall restrictions, front yards. In any required front yard:
(1) No fence or wall shall be permitted which materially impedes vision
across any such yard above the height of 2 1/2 feet.
(2) No hedge or other vegetation or planting(s) shall be permitted
which materially impedes vision across such yard between the
height of 2 1/2 feet and 10 feet.
I. Yard requirements, nonresidential uses abutting residential districts.
(1) In any district other than a residential district, nonresidential
buildings and uses shall not be located or conducted closer than 40
feet to any side or rear lot line of a lot situated within a residential
district.
(2) This minimum buffer yard distance requirement may be reduced to
20 feet, provided that the buffer yard is completely landscaped or
screened in accordance with an approved landscaping plan.
(3) Screening materials may include a masonry wall or solid fence
between four feet and six feet in height, which shall be maintained
throughout the entire term of the nonresidential use and shall be
kept free of all signs and graffiti.
(4) Landscaping may be provided in lieu of any such wall or fence,
provided that any such landscaping shall consist of dense
evergreen plantings which are not less than four feet in height at
the time of planting and which are trimmed and maintained
throughout the term of the nonresidential use.
(5) No wall, fence or landscaping shall in any way impede visibility for
vehicular traffic, as may be regulated elsewhere under this chapter.
§ 440-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-30
1:579
§ 440-30. Access.
All lots shall have direct frontage on either a dedicated public street or an
approved private street and shall have dimensions which meet or exceed
those established by this chapter.
§ 440-31. Construction in easements.
Easements for the installation, operation and/or maintenance of essential
services shall be reserved as indicated on each plat when recorded or
otherwise established. Within these easements, no structure shall be
located, placed or permitted which may damage or interfere with the
installation, operation and/or maintenance of any utility or which may
change the normal direction of flow of any drainagecourse, channel or
facility within said easement. The easement area of each lot and any
improvements situated within said easement shall be maintained
continuously by the owner of the lot, except for those secured structures or
improvements for which a public authority or utility is clearly responsible.
§ 440-32. Refuse collection areas. [Amended 12-29-1997 by Ord.
No. 1420; 11-18-1998 by Ord. No. 1434]
All storage area provided by commercial, industrial, mixed use and
multifamily residential developments for the temporary storage of trash,
garbage or other refuse shall be located in an alley or service road where
one exists, or at an approved location elsewhere upon the lot. All refuse
storage areas shall be enclosed by an approved solid wall or fence which is
at least four feet, but not more than six feet in height, unless said area is
contained entirely within an enclosed structure. In addition, any such area
shall be landscaped. The details for this landscaping shall be included in the
development's "landscaping plan." Provisions shall be made for adequate
vehicular access to any such storage area. The following requirements shall
also be met:
§ 440-33. Unlicensed or inoperable vehicles.
No unlicensed, unregistered, inoperative or partially dismantled vehicle,
trailer, accessory vehicle or vehicle part of any type shall be parked, stored
or otherwise maintained upon any public or private property for any period
of time in any district, except as follows:
A. The storage of hazardous or toxic materials or wastes shall not be
permitted without the documented approval of the DEP.
B. Materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or otherwise
constitute a fire hazard or which may attract vermin shall be stored only
in closed and tightly sealed containers constructed of impervious
materials.
C. Storage areas in any residential districts shall utilize such additional
screening as may be required under this chapter.
§ 440-30 MUNHALL CODE § 440-33
1:580
§ 440-34. Accessory structures.
No permanent accessory structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to
the construction of the principal structure to which it is accessory.
§ 440-35. Sidewalks.
A. Entirely within an enclosed and secured garage or other approved,
completely enclosed, and secured structure.
B. Temporarily at an approved location upon the premises of any
approved:
(1) Automotive, mobile home, boat, camper or trailer sales or repair
business or parts store (parts only).
(2) Automotive service station, garage or repair establishment.
(3) Fenced and secured automotive salvage, wrecking or junkyard.
(4) Vehicle impounding yard.
A. Public sidewalks.
(1) Public sidewalks are required and shall be installed by the
developer for all developments regardless of the district in which
the development is situated.
(2) Public sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of the street along
the entire perimeter of the development site which abuts dedicated
public street rights-of-way.
(3) The Commission may grant a temporary sidewalk waiver for any
development. The Commission may only grant any such waiver
until sidewalks are constructed on adjacent properties or adjacent
properties have been developed or redeveloped, and further
provided that the applicant has demonstrated just cause and
posted an appropriate performance bond.
(4) The Commission may grant a permanent sidewalk waiver for any
industrial development only. The Commission may grant such a
waiver for one or both sides of the street, depending upon the
Commission's evaluation of current and projected pedestrian
needs.
B. Private walkways. For all developments other than single- or two-family
developments, walkways shall be installed and maintained along at
least one side of all off-street parking areas, entrance driveways and
private roadways, providing for safe, pleasant and efficient pedestrian
passage and circulation between parking stalls and entrances to
structures.
§ 440-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-35
1:581
§ 440-36. Driveways and private roadways. [Amended 2-17-1999 by
Ord. No. 1442]
C. Handicapped access. At least one means of access to all public and
commercial buildings shall be provided to accommodate handicapped
individuals. Ramp gradient, railings and surface materials and
maintenance shall comply with applicable requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.
D. Public sidewalk standards. Public sidewalks and curbing in any public
right-of-way are to be constructed in accordance with standards
established in the Munhall Standards for Construction.
E. Private walkway standards. Private walkways shall be constructed of
concrete, precast blocks, terrazzo (textured surface only), brick,
flagstone, rubblestone, blackstone or other Borough-approved
material(s).
A. Location and design. The location and design of private entrance,
service and delivery driveways and/or roadways shall be in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation guidelines for
design of local roads and streets, the Munhall Standards for
Construction and other applicable standards as may be established by
the Borough.
B. Curbing. Public curbing shall be constructed of concrete and shall be
installed in accordance with the Munhall Standards for Construction in
the public right-of-way along the sides of public roads as required to
contain vehicular traffic, protect pedestrians and reduce maintenance
of adjacent seeded or planted areas. Curbing may be eliminated or
interrupted in approved areas to facilitate stormwater management
design.
C. Roadway markings. Center-line markings and lane-divider markings on
all public and/or private roads, driveways and roadways shall be
installed to guide and control vehicular traffic flow.
D. Parking markings. Line markings shall be installed to define and control
parallel and angle parking on all public or private roads, roadways,
parking lots and driveways.
E. Paving surfaces. All public and private roads, roadways, parking lots
and driveway surfaces shall be paved with concrete or approved
bituminous material.
F. Number of permitted driveways.
(1) Any lot or building site which has frontage on a dedicated public
street(s) or an approved and improved private street(s) shall be:
(a) Permitted to have one curb cut for a driveway or private
roadway which provides access to the lot or site.
§ 440-35 MUNHALL CODE § 440-36
1:582
(b) Permitted to have one additional curb cut for each additional
150 feet of frontage or fraction thereof in excess of the first
150 feet of frontage.
(2) Where any such lot or building site has frontage on more than one
street, this standard shall be applied on a cumulative basis, rather
than for each street separately on an individual or stand-alone
basis.
G. Distance from intersections. The distance separating any driveway or
private roadway on a dedicated public street or an approved and
improved private street from the nearest intersection of a second
dedicated public or approved private street shall be not less than 40
feet; except that, for driveways or private roadways leading to approved
off-street loading or docking area or facility, this distance shall be not
less than 50 feet. Any such setback distance shall be measured
between:
(1) The point where the radius for the intersecting street begins on the
curb for the street upon which the lot has frontage.
(2) The point on the same curb where the nearest edge of the proposed
curb cut is to begin.
H. Minimum distance between driveways. The minimum distance
separating two driveways and/or private roadways situated on the same
side of the same street shall be 30 feet, except that, where either or
both of these driveways/roadways lead to an off-street loading or
docking area, this minimum distance shall be 70 feet. In any R-1 or R-2
District, this distance shall be measured between the two points where
the right-of-way line intersects each driveway's center line. In all other
districts, this distance shall be measured between the points where the
right-of-way line intersects the nearest finished edge of each driveway.
I. Maximum grade. The maximum grade within any public street right-ofway
for any driveway or private roadway shall be 8%.
J. Curb cut dimensions. The following standards shall apply:
Districts Type
Minimum
(feet)
Maximum
(feet)
R-1 and R-2 All 9 24
All other
districts*
One-way 12 30
Two-way 24 30
Divided** 30 36
§ 440-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-36
1:583
§ 440-37. Excavating, grading and site preparations.
NOTES:
* These requirements may be modified or waived by Council for any
industrial or mixed-use development in conjunction with Council's
review and approval of a proposed land development plan or
subdivision, where Council considers said waiver or modification
to be consistent with the intent, purposes and objectives, outlined
under Article I, §§ 440-1, 440-2, 440-3 and 440-4 of this chapter.
** Divided driveways shall not be permitted on lots with less than
150 feet of frontage and shall be required to include a landscaped
median strip which is at least six feet in width.
K. Minimum distance from side lot line(s). A curb cut may be situated no
closer than:
(1) Three feet from any side or rear lot line which separates two
residential uses in any district.
(2) Five feet from any side or rear lot line which separates a residential
use in any district from a nonresidential use in any district.
(3) Five feet from any side or rear lot which separates two or more
nonresidential uses in any district.
L. Flare. Between its point of intersection with the cartway (curb) and its
point of intersection with the right-of-way line, the finished edge of any
driveway shall either follow along a radius of five or more feet or
otherwise gradually flared. In any residential or commercial district,
the width of the driveway at the curbline shall not exceed a ratio of 1 1/
2 times its width measured at the right-of-way line. In any industrial or
mixed-use district, the width of the driveway at the curbline may vary
but shall generally not exceed a ratio of two times its width measured at
the right-of-way line.
A. Grading statutes. All grading shall conform to all applicable federal,
state and local statutes.
B. Grading plan. No changes shall be made in the contour of the land, no
grading, excavation, removal or destruction of the topsoil, trees or
other vegetative coverage of the land shall be commenced until such
time as a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been filed
with, reviewed by, and approved by the Borough or the Borough has
determined that such plans are not necessary. Measures used to control
erosion and reduce sedimentation shall, as a minimum, meet the
standards and specifications of the Allegheny County Conservation
District and the Borough Engineer and shall ensure compliance with
the appropriate specifications, copies of which are available from the
Conservation District. The following shall be considered in the
development and review of the plan referenced above:
§ 440-36 MUNHALL CODE § 440-37
1:584
(1) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be
done in such a way so as to minimize erosion.
(2) Development plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep
cut/fill operations to a minimum, and ensure conformity with
topography so as to create the least erosion potential and
adequately handle the volume and velocity of surface water runoff.
(3) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected
and supplemented.
(4) The disturbed area and the duration of soil exposure shall be kept
to a practical minimum.
(5) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
(6) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
(7) The permanent final vegetation and structural erosion control and
drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practical in the
development.
(8) Provisions shall be made to effectively control runoff caused by
changed soil and surface conditions before, during and after
construction. Where necessary, the rate of surface water runoff
shall be structurally retarded.
C. Sedimentation. Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping
vegetation, regrading or other development, it shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to remove it from all adjoining
surfaces, drainage systems and watercourses and to repair any damage
at his/her expense as quickly as possible.
D. Maintenance. Maintenance of all public roads, streets, parking areas,
drainage facilities and watercourses within any land development shall
be the responsibility of the property owner until these improvements
have been formally accepted by the Borough.
E. Watercourse maintenance. It is the responsibility of any person,
corporation or other entity performing any act on or across a communal
stream, watercourse or swale, or upon the floodplain or right-of-way
thereof, to maintain as nearly as possible in its present state the stream,
watercourse, swale, floodplain or right-of-way during the pendency of
the activity, and to return it to its original or equal condition after such
activity is completed.
F. Maintenance of drainagecourses. Maintenance of drainage facilities or
watercourses originating and completely on private property is the
responsibility of the owner to the point of open discharge at the
property line or at a communal watercourse within the property.
§ 440-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-37
1:585
§ 440-38. Vegetation preservation.
§ 440-39. Landscaping requirements. [Amended 9-17-1997 by Ord.
No. 1414; 12-29-1997 by Ord. No. 1420]
G. Communal stream blockages. No person, corporation or other entity
shall block, impede the flow of, alter, construct any structure, or deposit
any material or thing, or commit any act which will affect normal or
flood flow in any communal stream or watercourse without having
obtained prior approval from the Borough or Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection.
A. Vegetation preservation regulations. No removal of trees, shrubbery,
foliage, grass or other natural growth shall be permitted, except in
compliance with the provisions of this article.
B. Clear-cutting prohibited.
(1) The cutting of trees and clearing of vegetation for the sole purpose
of clearing land, not incidental to imminent development, is
prohibited.
(2) In any district or use, no person shall cut, destroy, cause to be
destroyed, move or remove six or more trees with a trunk diameter
of six inches or more measured three feet from the ground without
first obtaining written permission from the Zoning Officer.
(3) The following requirements shall be met before permission is
granted:
(a) The applicant shall be the owner of the property or an
authorized agent of the owner.
(b) The applicant shall show that the proposed removal of natural
growth is necessary for imminent development of the property,
for agricultural purposes or to improve the utility, appearance
or safety of the property.
(c) Adequate provision for the disposition of increased surface
water drainage shall be shown to be provided. Such additional
surface water drainage shall be controlled so as to prevent any
increased and undue burden on adjacent streets, public or
private property.
(d) As a condition for approval of the removal of vegetation, the
Zoning Officer may require that suitable replacement trees be
planted elsewhere on the site.
C. Land development. No alteration of vegetation incidental to
development shall be undertaken except in compliance with this
chapter.
A. General. All districts:
§ 440-37 MUNHALL CODE § 440-39
1:586
(1) Plantings shall complement and accentuate the best feature(s) of
the building(s) and site.
(2) Plantings shall provide essential shade, effective cooling, sound
and light control by screening and traffic control when required.
(3) Planting shall be organized to minimize maintenance by:
(a) Selecting hedge and screen plants which tolerate trimming
and shaping.
(b) Installing fences and screens located at the edge of paving,
placed at least six inches inside outer edge of paving.
(c) Treating major slope areas with an attractive, perennial, lowmaintenance
ground cover.
(d) Complying with Chapter 243, Grading and Excavating.
(4) All front and side yard areas shall be seeded or sodded.
(5) Ground cover shall normally consist of the following materials:
seed, sod, derivative organic material, or an approved perennial
alternative. Small rocks or gravel ground cover shall not be
permitted. Large rocks, subject to approval, may be used to
accentuate a landscape feature or as a part of an oriental garden.
(6) All required deciduous trees shall be a minimum of two inches in
caliper measured at a point one foot above the ground, and all
required evergreen trees shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in
caliper measured at a point one foot above the ground. All trees
shall be at least 4 1/2 feet in height and shall be supported by
anchored guy wires.
(7) All required evergreen trees shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in
caliper measured at a point one foot above the ground, at least 6 1/
2 feet in height, and supported by anchored guy wires.
(8) The Commission may impose landscaping requirements in addition
to those outlined herein to provide for additional erosion control,
buffer areas or screening.
(9) It shall be the responsibility of the owner/applicant to assure the
continued growth and maintenance of all required landscaping
and/or, in the event of frost, vandalism or other reasons for
discounted growth, to replace the same, consistent with the
Borough-approved landscaping plan.
(10) All proposed multifamily residential, commercial, mixed-use and
industrial developments or uses shall require a submission by the
prospective developer and review and approval by the Commission
of a landscaping plan for the development which has been drafted
by a certified or licensed landscape architect or recognized
§ 440-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-39
1:587
commercial horticultural landscaper and which shall be drawn
to scale, indicating the type or variety and size of the proposed
plantings and ground cover.
B. Residential districts. In addition to the general landscaping
requirements:
(1) In all residential developments, at least one deciduous tree per
dwelling unit shall be required, planted and maintained.
(2) In all multifamily developments, one evergreen tree per each 10
lineal feet or fraction thereof of side and/or rear yard abutting any
one- or two-family residential district or use shall be required.
(3) In all multifamily developments, at least 25% of the total gross
square footage of the site shall be retained as landscaped and
improved open space, details of which shall be included in the
proposed landscaping plan for the development.
(4) In addition, all off-street parking areas for proposed multifamily
developments shall be separated from any street right-of-way by a
five-foot-wide landscaped buffer strip, which shall be situated not
closer than three feet to any street right-of-way line, retained as
additional open space, details of which shall also be included in the
proposed landscaping plan for the development.
(5) Up to 20% of the basic landscaping requirement under Subsection
B(3) may be used to subdivide parking areas with landscaped
islands.
C. Commercial and industrial. In addition to the general landscaping
requirements:
(1) At least one deciduous tree for each 5,000 square feet gross floor
area for commercial developments and 10,000 square feet gross
floor area for industrial developments shall be required.
(2) All transitional side and/or rear yards which separate commercial,
mixed or industrial uses from residential uses or districts shall
require the installation of a densely planted landscaped buffer strip
(at least five feet in width) and a hedge, decorative masonry wall,
landscaped mound or other durable landscape barrier which is at
least four feet in height and shall consist of at least one deciduous
tree for each 2,000 square feet of paved area and one evergreen
tree for each five-foot length of side and/or rear yard separating the
uses or districts.
(a) The required hedge, wall, mound or barrier shall be installed in
such a manner so as to effectively screen the commercial,
mixed and/or industrial use(s) from the adjacent residential
uses or district(s).
§ 440-39 MUNHALL CODE § 440-39
1:588
(b) For each 10 linear feet of any such buffer strip, the equivalent
of two shrubs and one deciduous or evergreen tree shall be
planted and maintained.
(c) The remainder of any such buffer shall be improved with grass,
ground cover, shrubs or other approved landscaping materials.
(d) The maximum height for any such barrier in a required front
yard shall be four feet.
(e) The minimum height for any such barrier in a required side or
rear yard shall be 5 1/2 feet.
(f) Any such buffer strip and/or barrier shall be permanently
maintained in good condition, trimmed and kept free of
advertising, signs (except approved directional signs) and
graffiti.
(3) In any commercial or mixed-use development which is less than an
acre in size, at least 10% of the site's total gross square footage
shall be retained as landscaped and improved open space, details
of which shall be included in the development's proposed
landscaping plan.
(4) In any commercial or mixed-use development which is one or more
acres in size, at least 15% of the site's total gross square footage
shall be retained as landscaped and improved open space, details
of which shall be included in the development's proposed
landscaping plan.
(5) In all industrial developments of less than one acre in size, at least
5% of the site's total gross square footage shall be retained as
landscaped and improved open space, details of which shall be
included in the development's landscaping plan.
(6) In addition, all off-street parking areas for commercial, mixed-use
and/or industrial developments shall be separated from any public
street right-of-way or from any approved private street right-of-way
by an approved landscaped buffer strip which is at least eight feet
in width and from any side or rear lot line by an approved
landscaped buffer strip which is at least five feet in width. Any such
landscaped buffer shall be maintained in perpetuity as addition
open space; the design detail of which shall also be included in the
development's landscaping plan.
(7) In addition, any commercial, mixed-use and/or industrial off-street
parking area which contains 30 or more parking spaces shall be
divided with landscaped planting strips which are at least three
feet in width and have an area of at least 57 square feet, with at
least one such strip for every 30 parking spaces or any fraction
thereof, unless alternative plans have been approved by the
§ 440-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-39
1:589
§ 440-40. Special recreation and open space requirements.
Commission. Each strip shall include at least one deciduous or
evergreen tree and complementary ground cover.
(8) In addition, any proposed commercial, mixed-use and/or industrial
development which is five or more acres in area shall include the
following:
(a) At least one deciduous or evergreen tree for every five parking
spaces or fraction thereof, with at least 50% of the required
tree plantings integrated within driveway, parking and/or
service areas.
(b) In the case of parking areas which abut a thoroughfare rightof-
way, at least one deciduous or evergreen tree for each 30
lineal feet or fraction thereof of perimeter abutting the right-ofway.
D. Conditional uses and uses by special exception. Additional landscaping
requirements may be imposed for conditional uses or uses by special
exception in accordance with the specific conditions outlined for the
use elsewhere under this chapter.
A. Special. Certain types of development shall require special open space
and recreational amenities above and beyond the front, side, rear and
bulk area requirements otherwise specified by this chapter. Developers
of the following uses shall provide additional amenities to address these
special needs:
(1) All multifamily residential developments in excess of 20 dwelling
units.
(2) All senior citizen housing.
(3) All public and institutional development.
(4) Commercial development in excess of 125,000 square feet of floor
area.
B. Recreation and open space development schedule. The uses listed
under Subsection A of this section shall minimally provide for and
include an additional 5% of the gross site area which shall be developed
as recreational space and/or improved/landscaped open space.
C. Location. Recreational facilities required under this section shall be
located so as not to be detrimental to adjacent property owners by
virtue of noise, light, glare or any other objectionable features
emanating therefrom.
D. Designation. All private recreational areas should be accompanied by a
brief narrative which outlines the proposed financing plan for
development, ongoing maintenance, and upkeep.
§ 440-39 MUNHALL CODE § 440-41
1:590
§ 440-41. Lighting regulations. [Amended 12-29-1997 by Ord. No.
1420]
§ 440-42. Utility regulations.
All utility (electric, telephone, cable TV, etc.) service for new structures and
new subdivisions shall be underground. In any industrial district or in any
new commercial or multifamily development only, the Planning Commission
may waive this requirement for electrical service only.
§ 440-43. Noise regulations.
Every use shall be operated so that noise shall be so muffled or otherwise
controlled as not to become objectionable as a result of intermittence,
beat frequency, impulse character (hammering, etc.), periodic character
(humming, screeching, etc.), or shrillness.
§ 440-44. Vibration regulations.
Every use shall be operated so that the ground vibration inherently and
recurrently generated is not perceptible without instruments at property
boundaries.
§ 440-45. Air pollution regulations.
No emission which violates the air pollution control regulations established
under Article XX of the Allegheny County Health Department's Rules and
Regulations shall be permitted.
A. Sidewalks and walkways. All public and private sidewalks, pedestrian
walkways, steps and grade changes shall be suitably lighted at all
times. Detail of proposed lighting fixtures and supports, and the
location thereof, shall be submitted as part of the building permit
application.
B. Off-street parking areas. All off-street parking areas shall be lighted,
with said lighting arranged so as to reflect the light away from all
abutting properties. Floodlights projected from buildings shall not be
approved unless design specifications are submitted demonstrating
that glare will not present a traffic problem or a nuisance to adjacent
properties.
C. Underground wiring. All lighting fixtures are to be installed with
underground wiring.
D. Maximum height. The maximum height of all outdoor lighting fixtures
for any residential, commercial, mixed or industrial use in any district
shall be 28 feet.
E. Fixture design. In the RDD only, all outdoor lighting fixtures for any
commercial or mixed use shall be similar in design and subject to
approval in advance by the Commission.
§ 440-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-46
1:591
§ 440-46. Heat, glare, radiation and fumes regulations.
Every use shall be so operated that it does not emit an obnoxious or
dangerous degree of heat, glare, radiation or fumes beyond the property
boundaries.
§ 440-47. Odor regulations.
No use shall emit an offensive odor as to be detectable from beyond
property boundaries.
§ 440-48. Government regulations.
All land uses shall be governed by applicable local, state, and federal
regulations regarding the above activities as as other activities (e.g., waste
treatment and disposal, fire regulations, etc.).
§ 440-49. Temporary uses.
A. Permitted uses and performance standards. The following temporary
uses may be permitted, subject to the specific regulations and time
limits as indicated:
(1) Temporary real estate sales offices. Any such use shall contain no
living accommodations, shall require the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy (use), and may be permitted for any new subdivision
which is 10 acres or more in area for a period not to exceed 12
consecutive calendar months; except that, in addition, not more
than two extensions for periods of up to six months each in length
may be granted if, in the judgment of the Zoning Officer, conditions
warrant the extension.
(2) Temporary buildings, offices, equipment and storage facilities. Any
such use which may be required in conjunction with an approved
construction activity or project shall require the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy (use) and may be permitted for a period
not to exceed 12 consecutive calendar months; except that an
unlimited number of six-month extensions may be granted where,
in the judgment of the Zoning Officer, construction is substantially
underway and progress is being made.
(3) Temporary sales and services. Any such use shall be limited to the
sale of flowers, plants, arts and crafts, farm produce, or similar
perishable items, shall require the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy (use), and may be permitted for any private for-profit or
nonprofit individual or organization. Any application for such a
certificate shall be accompanied by a valid vendor's license if the
proposed use is for-profit and a written statement from the
property owner granting permission for the proposed use. Any such
certificate:
§ 440-46 MUNHALL CODE § 440-49
1:592
(a) Shall be valid for a period not to exceed four consecutive
calendar days.
(b) May only be issued up to three separate times within any
twelve-consecutive-calendar-month period to:
[1] Any individual or organization for use anywhere in the
Borough.
[2] For any particular zoning lot, regardless of whether or not
the lot would be used for the same proposed temporary
use.
[3] May only be issued where the proposed use encroaches
upon not more than 25% of any required off-street parking
area.
(4) Garage sales, yard sales and similar activities. May be permitted in
any district in which dwellings are a permitted use.
(a) Any individual or family may:
[1] Conduct not more than two such sales within any twelveconsecutive-
calendar-month period.
[2] Conduct any such sale only upon the property upon which
he resides.
[3] Conduct any such sale for a period not to exceed three
consecutive days, and then only between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(b) As long as the provisions of this chapter pertaining to such a
sale, signage and off-street parking are met, a certificate of
occupancy (use) shall not be required.
(c) Where more than one residence participates in any such sale at
one location, the activity shall be considered a group sale and,
as such, shall require the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
(use).
B. Procedures and conditions for approval of a temporary use. The
temporary uses outlined herein may be approved by the Zoning Officer
through the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy (use),
provided the following conditions are met:
(1) Application form. The property owner must complete a written
application form provided by the Borough, together with a
nonrefundable application fee in an amount equal to that required
normally for a certificate of occupancy (use), at least seven
calendar days prior to the proposed use. Said application shall
contain a complete description of the proposed use, location, offstreet
parking and available sanitary facilities. Upon issuance, the
§ 440-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-49
1:593
§ 440-50. Dangerous uses, practices or conditions.
certificate shall be displayed prominently on site at all times
throughout the term of the temporary use.
(2) Definition. The proposed use must be temporary in nature, rather
than permanent or protracted. Temporary use permits may be
renewed, provided a new application is made consistent with the
other requirements of this section.
(3) Renewals or extensions. The temporary certificate of occupancy
(use) may be renewed or extended in the following manner:
(a) An application and an additional nonrefundable fee are refiled
by the applicant.
(b) The Zoning Officer shall submit a recommendation to each
member of the Board.
(c) If any member of the Board wishes to object to the renewal or
extension, he/she must do so in writing within seven days of
the date of issuance of the notice. If a proper challenge is
made, the matter shall come before the full Board for approval.
If no challenge is made by a member of the Board, the renewal
or extension may be approved by the Zoning Officer.
(d) In no event may a temporary use be extended for a period in
excess of twice the original term of the previously approved
temporary use.
C. Criteria. The applicant shall provide evidence to the Borough that the
proposed use will not create a public nuisance, that sufficient off-street
parking and loading spaces are available, and that safe and efficient
traffic movement is not impaired.
D. Maintenance of the site. Applicants are responsible for keeping the
property free of rubbish and debris at all times, as well as for the
collection of all rubbish and debris on adjacent properties and rights-ofway
generated by the temporary use.
E. Additional conditions.
(1) Additional conditions which are deemed necessary to protect
adjacent properties from adverse effects or to prevent the creation
of a public nuisance may be imposed.
(2) Any such temporary use shall be completely terminated
immediately upon either the completion of the activity or expiration
of the term authorized in the permit, whichever occurs first.
F. Revocation. The Zoning Officer may revoke a temporary use permit at
any time if it is determined that the use is not consistent with the
requirements of this section.
§ 440-49 MUNHALL CODE § 440-50
1:594
A. Regulations. No land or building in any district shall be occupied or
used in any manner which creates or contributes to the existence of
conditions which are dangerous, injurious, harmful, noxious or
objectionable or which may otherwise adversely affect surrounding
areas or adjoining premises; except that any use permitted under this
chapter may be undertaken or maintained if acceptable measures and
safeguards to reduce any dangerous or objectionable conditions to
acceptable limits, as established in this section, are properly exercised.
Specifically, the occupation or use of any land or building in any district
shall be in violation of this chapter if one or more of the following
conditions is found to exist at any time:
(1) The use or storage of flammable or explosive materials which are
not adequately protected by fire-fighting/fire-protection equipment
or by safety devices normally required for such use.
(2) The use or storage of flammable and/or explosive materials which
are not set back from adjacent facilities or activities a safe distance
compatible with the potential danger involved.
(3) Radioactivity or air pollution is present in violation of regulations
established by the DEP or the EPA.
(4) Hazardous wastes are present in violation of regulations
established by the DEP or the EPA.
(5) Objectionable noise due to volume, frequency or beat is present.
(6) Direct or reflected glare is present which is visible from any street
or from any adjoining property which is not located in an industrial
district.
(7) Erosion caused by wind or water is carrying objectionable
materials or substances onto any adjacent property.
(8) Water pollution or contamination is present in violation of
regulations established by the DEP or the EPA.
B. Assurance requirements and plans. Prior to the issuance of a zoning
permit or a certificate of occupancy, the applicant may be required to
submit written assurances and plans indicating the manner in which
dangerous and objectionable aspects of processes or operations
entailed in certain uses are to be eliminated or reduced to acceptable
limits and tolerances.
C. Enforcement provisions. Any occupancy, use, conditions or
circumstances existing in violation of this section of this article shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and be subject to the enforcement
procedures contained elsewhere herein.
§ 440-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-51
1:595
§ 440-51. Conversions of dwellings.
No residence in any district may be converted to accommodate an increased
number of dwelling units unless all of the following conditions are first met:
§ 440-52. Infill development of vacant buildable lot(s) and additions
to existing structures. [Amended 8-18-1999 by Ord. No. 1449]
In any residential district only, where 51% or more of the block face has
already been developed and where the principal buildings within that block
face have existing front, side or rear setbacks which are either greater
or less than the setbacks established under this chapter, the lot shall be
developed with front, side or rear setbacks consistent with the already
established existing setbacks within the same block face; provided,
however, that the setbacks for a principal building on any such lot shall be
the same as those for:
§ 440-53. Parking and storage of vehicles and trailers.
In any residential district, commercial vehicles, tractors, trucks, buses,
trailers, semitrailers, or similar vehicles or accessory vehicles may only be
parked or stored upon a lot when completely contained within an enclosed
building, except:
A. The conversion is in full compliance with all applicable commonwealth
or federal regulations.
B. The district within which the residence is located is so regulated so as
to allow such an increase in the number of dwelling units.
C. The yard dimensions meet or exceed that required for new structures in
the same district.
D. The lot area per dwelling unit meets or exceeds that required for new
structures in the same district.
E. The floor area per dwelling unit meets or exceeds that required for new
structures in the district.
F. The conversion is otherwise in full compliance with all other relevant
codes and ordinances of the Borough.
A. The existing principal building(s) on the adjoining, contiguous,
developed lot(s).
B. The average of all principal buildings along the same block face within
the same block.
C. In no case less than 10 feet for any front or rear yard and three feet for
any side yard.
A. Those commercial vehicles conveying the necessary tools, materials
and/or equipment to a premises where labor using such tools, materials
§ 440-51 MUNHALL CODE § 440-53
1:596
§ 440-54. Junk.
The accumulation of junk, junked or abandoned vehicles; disabled or
inoperative machinery, equipment, vehicle or machinery parts; rags;
building materials; or any other discarded object(s), trash or debris shall
be prohibited in any district, outside of an approved salvage or vehicle
impounding yard, in order to protect residents from conditions which may
threaten their health, safety and/or welfare.
§ 440-55. Visibility at intersections.
In order to ensure reasonably safe visibility for motorists at any
intersection:
§ 440-56. Stormwater management.
All uses and lots in all zoning districts shall comply with the applicable
requirements and standards for managing stormwater runoff in accordance
with Chapter 389, the Munhall Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
and equipment is to be performed may be temporarily parked on a lot
within a residential district only for that period of time during which
the work is actually being performed.
B. Not more than one currently licensed, registered and operative trailermounted
and secured boat and/or not more than one unoccupied,
currently licensed, registered and operative recreational vehicle or
trailer per resident family, owned by an immediate member of the
resident family, may be parked or stored within the allowable building
area in the rear yard only or at an approved alternate location
elsewhere upon the property, only where it is not physically possible to
park or store the item within the rear yard.
A. On any corner lot at the intersection of two streets in any district,
nothing shall be installed, erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow
in such a manner as to impede vision materially between the height of
2 1/2 feet and 10 feet above the center-line grades of the intersecting
streets, in the area bounded by the right-of-way lines bordering such a
corner lot and a line joining a point along each right-of-way line which is
50 feet from their point of intersection.
B. On a corner lot at the intersection of a street and an alley or on a corner
lot at the intersection of two alleys, in any district, nothing shall be
installed, erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner
as to impede vision materially between the height of 2 1/2 feet and 10
feet above the center-line grades of the two intersecting thoroughfares,
in the area bounded by the right-of-way lines bordering such a corner
lot and a line joining a point along each right-of-way line which is 25
feet from their point of intersection.
§ 440-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-57
1:597
§ 440-57. Swimming pools. [Amended 9-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1414]
Any above-the-ground or in-the-ground private or public swimming pool
with a depth at any point of 24 inches or more shall be secured with a
fence or wall which is at least five feet in height, and provided that any
such combination of wall(s) or fence(s) shall provide three-hundred-sixtydegree
security around said swimming pool. Each and every exterior door
and entrance gate along (within) any such wall or fence shall be equipped
with an approved childproof lock. Any door connecting a swimming pool or
patio area around a swimming pool to a principal or accessory structure
need not be equipped with a childproof lock, provided only that all other
exterior doors providing access to the same structure shall be equipped
with a fully functional lock which limits access to the key or combination
holder.
§ 440-58. Auto sales. [Amended 12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 1439]
The sale or lease or offering for sale or lease of any motor vehicle, mobile
home, boat, camper or trailer in any residential, commercial, industrial or
mixed-use district shall be prohibited, except as follows:
A. In conjunction with an approved use by special exception which meets
all of the conditions for automotive, mobile home, boat, camper or
trailer sales in any General Business (B-2) or General Service (GS)
District.
B. As a temporary use in any residential district, only where all of the
following conditions have been met:
(1) Any such motor vehicle, mobile home, boat, camper or trailer must
be owned by a current resident, whether or not the owner, of the
real property upon which the sale or lease is offered.
(2) If any such motor vehicle, mobile home, boat, camper or trailer is
owned by a current resident who is not the owner of the real
property upon which the sale or lease is offered, the proposed
offering for sale or lease shall be authorized, in writing, by the
owner of the real property.
(3) Any such offering(s) for sale or lease shall be limited to a
cumulative total of not more than 90 days in any one calendar year.
(4) Any such motor vehicle, mobile home, boat camper or trailer must
be roadworthy, undamaged and fully operational.
(5) Any such motor vehicle, mobile home, boat, camper or trailer shall
have a valid license(s) and current inspection stickers.
(6) In any residential district only, any such motor vehicle, mobile
home, boat, camper or trailer may not be parked at any time and at
any location in a required front yard, except upon a hard-surfaced
§ 440-57 MUNHALL CODE § 440-58
1:598
§ 440-59. Other performance standards. [Amended 9-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 1414; 12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 1439]
Any site development plan should also address the following items:
(concrete or asphalt) driveway or, in the case of a multifamily
dwelling, within an approved off-street parking lot.
(7) No motor vehicle may be parked and offered for sale or lease from
any location within a public right-of-way, except for the overnight
parking of any such motor vehicle for a period of not more than 12
consecutive hours.
(8) Not more than two motor vehicles, mobile homes, boats, campers
or trailers, in any combination, may be offered for sale or lease
from any location upon any lot within a residential district during
any one calendar year.
A. Signs.
B. Refuse storage and pickup.
C. Service, delivery and loading areas.
D. Traffic control devices.
E. Street furniture or recreational equipment in active or passive
recreational areas or open space areas, including playground
equipment, swimming pools, benches, waste cans, planters, tree pots,
shelters, lighting fixtures, other landscape features, statues, etc.
§ 440-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-59
1:599

ARTICLE IX
Conditional Uses
§ 440-60. General conditions.
All conditional uses shall be subject to the specific applicable conditions and
procedures outlined under this article, including the following:
§ 440-61. Procedures.
The procedure for requesting approval of a conditional use is as follows:
A. Submission and approval of a preliminary and final site plan, if
requested.
B. Compliance with any other conditions imposed by provisions of this
chapter regarding the specific or particular conditional use.
C. Any other applicable regulations, whether in this or any other Borough
ordinance, or any county, state or federal regulations.
D. Any other general or specific conditions imposed by the Council which
are deemed necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety
and/or welfare, particularly those relating to the specific site upon
which the use is proposed.
E. The Council may increase or decrease bulk and area regulations,
performance standards and parking requirements that might otherwise
be applicable for permitted uses.
A. A written application and a preliminary site plan shall be filed with the
Zoning Officer. The application shall be of a form approved by the
Borough. The preliminary plan shall address itself to all applicable
conditions for the particular conditional use.
B. The site plan and application shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer,
and a public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be set by the
Commission within 45 days of the filing of the preliminary plan and
application.
C. Notice of the Commission hearing shall be advertised in accordance
with the provisions of the MPC.
D. The Commission shall, at the hearing, examine the preliminary plan and
listen to relevant testimony from the owner of the property or his agent,
the Zoning Officer and any interested citizen. The Commission shall
have the right to pose necessary questions to any of the above parties.
E. The Commission shall, within 14 days of its hearing, forward a written
recommendation to the Council along with the preliminary plan and
application. This recommendation shall either recommend the approval
of the conditional use request, disapproval or approval conditioned
upon specified changes or conditions.
§ 440-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-61
1:601
F. The Council shall hold a public hearing on the conditional use request
in accordance with the provisions of the MPC. The hearing shall be
conducted by Council or Council may appoint any member or an
independent attorney as a hearing officer. The decision or, where no
decision is called for, the findings shall be made by Council. However,
the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the
Borough, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or
findings by Council and accept the decision or findings of the hearing
officer as final. In granting a conditional use, Council may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in
this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of
this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.169
G. The Council shall, at the hearing, examine the preliminary plan and the
recommendation by the Commission. The Council shall also hear
relevant testimony from the owner of the property or his agent, or the
Zoning Officer, if desired, and any interested citizens, and shall have
the right to pose necessary questions to any of the above parties. The
Council may request the submission of a final plan, if deemed
necessary.
H. Council shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called
for, make written findings on the conditional use application within 45
days after the last hearing before Council. Where the application is
contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of
fact or conclusions based thereon, together with any reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions of the chapter, the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, rule or regulation shall
contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the
conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found. Council
shall have the right to adopt, modify or reject the specific changes or
conditions recommended by the Commission.170
I. A conditional use shall not be approved unless Council determines:
(1) That the proposed conditional use will not substantially injure or
detract from the use of neighboring property, or from the character
of the neighborhood.
(2) That approval of the proposed conditional use will serve the best
interests of the Borough, the convenience of the community, and
the public health, safety and welfare.
(3) That the approval of the proposed conditional use is consistent with
the logical, efficient, and economic extension of public services and
facilities, such as public water, sewers, police and fire protection,
and public schools.
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-61 MUNHALL CODE § 440-61
1:602
§ 440-62. General provisions.
J. A majority vote of the Borough Council is required for approval.
K. Where Council fails to render the decision within the period required by
the subsection or fails to commence, conduct or complete the required
hearing as provided in § 440-86C(1) of this chapter [§ 908(1.2) of the
Municipalities Planning Code171], the decision shall be deemed to have
been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed
in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has
been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of Council
to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, Council shall
give public notice of the decision within 10 days from the last day it
could have met to render a decision in the same manner as required by
the public notice requirements of this chapter and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. If Council shall fail to
provide such notice, the applicant may do so. The property owner or his
agent, the Commission, and the Zoning Officer shall receive written
notification of Council's decision. Any other interested party may, at the
hearing, also request receipt of the written notification. In any case, the
written notification shall be sent promptly following Council's
decision.172
L. Appeals from the decision of the Council are governed by the applicable
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
A. When a request for the approval of a conditional use has been denied by
the Council, no subsequent request for that same use may be refiled
with the Zoning Officer for a period of at least one year from the date of
denial. The only exception to this provision shall be if the landowner or
his agent can show to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer a
substantive change in circumstances regarding the property which
would warrant reexamination of the request within the one-year
limitation. A written explanation of the change in circumstances shall
be submitted, along with a conditional use application, to the Zoning
Officer.
B. An approved conditional use shall be completed within two years
following the date of approval. However, the Zoning Officer may grant
an extension of time if the landowner or his agent requests such an
extension and if good cause for the extension is shown to the Zoning
Officer's satisfaction. There are no other exceptions to this rule. If, at
the end of the two-year period, the conditional use is not completed,
and if no extension has been granted, the approval of the conditional
use shall be null and void unless renewed by Council.
171. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908(1.2).
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-62
1:603
§ 440-63. Specific conditions. [Amended 3-19-1997 by Ord. No.
1409]
In order for a particular conditional use to be eligible for approval by
Council under this article, the following specific conditions shall be met:
C. Minor changes in design or specifications of an approved conditional
use which do not constitute an expansion of the conditional use may be
approved administratively.
D. Any major change in an approved, but not completed, conditional use
and any change in a completed conditional use which constitutes an
expansion of such use shall be subject to review and approval by
Council under the provisions of § 440-61 of this article. An improper
expansion is a violation of this chapter and is subject to the penalties of
this chapter, including, but not limited to, a fine and corrective legal
action by the Borough to remove the improper expansion.
A. Residential zoning districts.
(1) Quasi-public uses (R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4).
(a) Minimum lot size: two acres.
(b) Minimum frontage (lot width): 300 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 250 feet.
(d) Maximum lot coverage. The total area of the lot covered by
buildings, parking lots and vehicular accessways shall not
exceed 50% of the total lot area.
(e) Landscaping and green areas. At least 40% of the total lot area
shall be designated as a green area, landscaped and otherwise
maintained throughout the term of the use as open space.
(2) Public library (R-3 and R-4).
(a) Minimum lot size: one acre.
(b) Minimum frontage (lot width): 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 210 feet.
(d) Maximum lot coverage. The total area of the lot covered by
buildings, parking lots and vehicular accessways shall not
exceed 60% of the total lot area.
(e) Landscaping and green areas. At least 30% of the total lot area
shall be designated as a green area, landscaped and otherwise
maintained throughout the term of the use as open space.
(3) Cemetery (R-4).
(a) Minimum lot size: 10 acres.
§ 440-62 MUNHALL CODE § 440-63
1:604
(b) Minimum frontage (lot width): 400 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
(d) Shall have frontage upon and direct vehicular access to one or
more arterial streets.
(e) Minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks (buffer areas): 15
feet.
(f) No mausoleum shall be constructed which:
[1] Exceeds 35 feet in height.
[2] Is located closer than 50 feet to any street right-of-way
line.
[3] Is located closer than 100 feet to any other property line
which is not also a street right-of-way line.
(4) Telecommunications signal receiving, transmission or relay tower
(all residential districts).
(a) Minimum lot size. The same as that required of other principal
uses in the same district or subdistrict.
(b) Maximum tower height above the finished grade, including any
and all projecting antennas supported by the tower, shall not
exceed the documented, reviewed and approved minimum
height required in order to provide proposed service.
(c) The minimum setback distance from all property lines shall be
a distance which is equal to or greater than the total height of
the tower, including any and all projecting antennas supported
by the tower.
(d) Any such use may be approved and permitted as either a
principal or accessory use.
(e) The person proposing the use shall supply the Borough with
written documentation that the tower meets all applicable
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements and regulations.
(f) The lighting of any such tower where not required by the FCC
or the FAA shall be prohibited.
(g) Any such tower shall be painted either dark brown or dark
green, and the painted surface shall be inspected and
maintained on a regular basis.
(h) In order to discourage the unnecessary, unsightly and
potentially dangerous proliferation of towers, whenever and
§ 440-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-63
1:605
wherever practical, antennas should be co-located on already
existing towers.
(i) The applicant shall be required to notify the Borough if the use
of the tower is for any reason discontinued in the future. Any
such tower shall be removed and the property completely
restored if any such use is for any reason discontinued for a
period of 90 days or more.
(j) The structural integrity of any such tower shall be assured
through the regular periodic inspection and comprehensive
maintenance of the tower by the applicant for approval of this
use in accordance with the applicable local, state and federal
requirements.
(k) No such tower may be situated closer than 1/2 mile from any
previously approved or existing tower which could also
accommodate the proposed use and meet the
telecommunications needs of the applicant. No consideration
for a waiver of this requirement shall be given by the Borough
to an applicant based upon any alleged financial hardship
which may arise relating to negotiations between persons in an
attempt to secure the rights to co-locate antennas on a
common tower.
(l) Any person proposing to erect any such tower shall be required
to submit a location survey prepared by a registered surveyor
which shall minimally include the location of the tower,
supporting guy wires and wire tie-downs, all existing
structures on the same lot, and all lot lines and the distances
from the tower to all existing structures on the same lot.
(m) The Borough reserves the right to impose such other
requirements as it may deem appropriate, provided that these
requirements do not conflict with the Telecommunications Act
of 1996, as may be amended in the future.
B. Business/commercial zoning districts.
(1) Hospital (B-1 and B-2).
(a) Minimum lot size: five acres.
(b) Minimum frontage (lot width): 300 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 300 feet.
(d) Maximum lot coverage. The total area of the lot covered by
buildings, parking lots and vehicular accessways shall not
exceed 75% of the total lot area.
§ 440-63 MUNHALL CODE § 440-63
1:606
(e) Landscaping and green areas. At least 20% of the total lot area
shall be designated as a green area, landscaped and otherwise
maintained throughout the term of the use as open space.
(f) Shall have frontage and direct vehicular access to one or more
arterial streets.
(g) Shall be set back at least 100 feet from any adjacent residential
district or use.
(h) Shall be set back at least 50 feet from any nonresidential
district or use.
(i) The minimum building setback shall be 50 feet from all
property lines.173
(2) Telecommunications signal receiving, transmission or relay tower.
The same conditions listed for telecommunications signal
receiving, transmission or relay tower under Subsection A of this
section shall apply, except that the color of the tower shall not be
regulated.
C. Industrial and mixed-use zoning districts.
(1) Mobile home park (GS).
(a) Minimum lot size: five acres.
(b) Minimum frontage (lot width): 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 300 feet.
(d) Maximum lot coverage. The total area of the lot covered by
buildings, parking lots and vehicular accessways shall not
exceed 60% of the total lot area.
(e) Landscaping and green areas. At least 30% of the total lot area
shall be designated as a green area and shall be landscaped
and maintained throughout the term of the use of the property
as a mobile home park.
(f) All vehicular accessways and streets shall be either approved
and dedicated public streets or approved, improved and
maintained private streets.
(g) All property within the park shall be held under common
ownership.
(h) If the park is to be owned by an association of mobile home
owners, the CUP request shall be accompanied by copies of all
173. Editor's Note: Original Part 9, § 4B(2), Adult entertainment establishment (B-2), which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 9-27-2006 by Ord. No. 1509.
§ 440-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-63
1:607
proposed covenants, deed restrictions and maintenance
agreements for the park.
(i) The CUP request shall be accompanied by a plot plan
specifying all proposed fire hydrant locations.
(j) Minimum number of pads or mobile homes per park: 24 pads
or dwelling units.
(k) Maximum density: 10 dwelling units per acre.
(l) All proposed common structures or grounds shall be
delineated on a plot plan and submitted as a part of the CUP
request.
(2) Auto wrecking or salvage (GS).
(a) Minimum lot size: three acres.
(b) Minimum frontage (lot width): 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(d) All vehicles or other salvage materials shall be stored enclosed
entirely within an approved solid fence which is at least six feet
in height.
(e) Said fence shall be secured at all times when the use is not in
operation.
(f) No vehicle or other salvage material may be temporarily or
permanently stored outside the approved enclosed area of the
lot.
(g) The vehicles or other salvage materials stored on the lot shall
not be visible from any public thoroughfare.
(h) Any such use shall have frontage upon and may only be
situated upon an arterial street, as herein defined.
(i) No such use may be situated upon any lot which directly abuts
a residential district or use.
(j) No wrecking or salvage operation may take place except when
conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday.
(3) Junk buildings, shops or yards (GS).
(a) Buildings and shops only.
[1] Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot frontage (width): 50 feet.
[3] Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
§ 440-63 MUNHALL CODE § 440-63
1:608
[4] All junk and other salvage materials shall be stored
entirely within an enclosed, secured, approved structure
and may not be stored within an open yard anywhere upon
the lot.
[5] No such use may be situated upon any lot which directly
abuts a residential district or use.
[6] The hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m.
through 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday only.
(b) Junkyards, either alone or in conjunction with a junk building
or shop. The same conditions outlined herein for auto wrecking
or salvage shall apply.
(4) Kennel (GS).
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) Minimum lot frontage (width): 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(d) Any such use may not be situated upon any lot which directly
abuts any residential district or use.
(e) All animals must be boarded inside an approved, enclosed and
sound-insulated structure.
(f) All outdoor runways and exercise areas shall be cleaned on a
daily basis and kept free of excrement.
(g) No animal may be kept overnight in an open yard.
(h) All outdoor runways and exercise areas shall be completely
enclosed by a secured fence which is not less than six feet in
height.
(i) It shall only be situated upon an arterial street, as herein
defined.
(5) Drive-in theater (GS).
(a) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(b) Shall only be situated upon an arterial street, as herein
defined.
(c) Any such use shall be expressly prohibited from displaying
sexually explicit films which are either X-rated under the U.S.
motion picture industry's rating standards or which have been
ruled as pornographic in any court of law.
(d) The screen shall be situated so as not to be visible from any
dedicated public street.
§ 440-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-63
1:609
(e) The sound system shall be such that the soundtrack cannot be
heard off site.
(6) Adult entertainment establishment (GS and RDD Districts).
[Amended 9-27-2006 by Ord. No. 1509]
(a) Minimum lot size: 4,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum frontage (lot width): 40 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(d) Maximum lot coverage. The total area of the lot covered by
buildings, parking lots and vehicular accessways shall not
exceed 80% of the total lot area.
(e) Any such proposed use shall be situated not less than:
[1] Five hundred feet from any church.
[2] One thousand feet from any public or private school.
[3] Five hundred feet from any other such use or activity.
[4] Two hundred feet from any public transit stop, with any
such distance being measured from the closest point on
one lot to the closest point on the other.
(f) No such establishment shall be open and/or accessible to any
person under the age of 21, whether or not the establishment
is licensed to serve alcoholic beverages.
(g) Any such establishment shall include a double-doored
entrance. The inner door shall be posted with a notice
cautioning those that choose to enter that there are potentially
offensive sexually explicit materials inside.
(h) Hours of operation shall be restricted to the following:
[1] Monday through Saturday, 9:00 a.m. through 12:00
midnight.
[2] Sundays and all federal holidays, 12:00 noon through
12:00 midnight.
(i) Nothing inside the establishment shall be visible from outside
the establishment.
(j) Signage shall be limited to the name of the establishment and
the words "adult books," "adult films" or "adult books and
films." Signage shall otherwise conform with all other
requirements of this chapter.
§ 440-63 MUNHALL CODE § 440-63
1:610
(k) Shall not be situated adjacent to any residential zone or
residential use, except where separated from said zone or use
by a dedicated public right-of-way.
(l) Shall be situated only on an interior lot which has frontage on
an arterial street.
(7) Distribution facilities (HI and RDD Districts).
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(b) Minimum lot frontage (width): 300 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 300 feet.
(d) Any use of this nature shall only be permitted where the
applicant is able to address, in writing, to Council's
satisfaction, the following issues as they relate to the specific
use proposed:
[1] Anticipated employment level.
[2] Proposed rates of pay and total estimated payroll.
[3] Tax-yielding improvements to real property.
[4] The application, wherever practical, of related state-of-theart
technologies.
(e) An approved state-of-the-art self-contained and/or on-site firesuppression
system is required.
(f) If any such use has a loading dock or platform which would
otherwise be visible from any public street right-of-way north
of SR 837 (Eighth Avenue), it shall be screened from view by an
approved, landscaped, earthen mound which is at least six feet
in height.
(g) All loading docks and/or service areas shall be limited or
confined to the rear of any such building.
(h) The majority of the accessory off-street parking spaces for any
such building shall be located in the building's required front
yard.
(i) Storage in an open yard, as either a principal or an accessory
use, shall not be permitted.
(j) The front building facade for any such building shall be
designed and constructed as if the building were to be used
solely for office space.
(k) All off-street parking areas, off-street loading areas, areas for
the temporary storage of vehicles and/or trailers, or vehicle-
§ 440-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-63
1:611
maneuvering areas shall be hard-surfaced and maintained with
an approved impervious concrete or asphalt surface.
(l) Any such parking, loading, storage or maneuvering area shall
have an approved stormwater management plan which
includes protection against the potential negative
environmental effects created by gasoline, oil, deicing agent,
antifreeze and/or other petroleum-based substances.
(8) Storage and warehousing facilities (HI and RDD Districts). The
same conditions as those listed for distribution facilities situated in
the HI and RDD Districts under this article shall apply.
(9) Wholesale facilities (HI). The same conditions as those listed for
distribution facilities in this district under this article shall apply.
(10) Recreational facilities (HI and RDD).
(a) Any such facility shall be situated at least 150 feet away from
any adjacent industrial district or use.
(b) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(c) Minimum lot frontage (width): 200 feet.
(11) Marinas or recreational boat docking and servicing facilities (HI
and RDD):
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(b) Minimum lot frontage (width): 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(d) Minimum river frontage: 200 feet.
(e) Minimum side yard setback from adjacent riverfront industrial
uses: 100 feet.
(f) Ownership of the facility and/or its operation may be either forprofit
or nonprofit.
(g) A minimum of one hard-surfaced parking space shall be
provided for every two boat slips.
(h) Barges shall not be permitted unless they have been
completely converted for recreational use.
(12) Residences, multifamily dwellings (RDD), (high density).
(a) Limited to garden apartments and/or townhouses.
(b) The maximum percentage of land usage within the RDD in
Munhall which may be used for this use, if any land is to be put
to this use, is 30% of the total area of the RDD on the river side
§ 440-63 MUNHALL CODE § 440-63
1:612
of the mainline railroad tracks paralleling Eighth Avenue or 25
acres, whichever is the lesser total.
(c) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(d) Minimum lot frontage (width): 300 feet.
(e) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(f) Minimum setbacks from adjoining industrial or business uses:
100 feet.
(g) Landscaping and green areas. At least 30% of the total lot area
shall be designated as a "green area" and shall be landscaped
and maintained throughout the term of the property's use for
residential purposes.
(h) Maximum density: 50 dwelling units per acre.
(i) Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
(j) Shall only be permitted as a part of an approved overall
development plan for the entire RDD.
(13) Light industry (RDD). The same conditions as those listed for
distribution facilities in the RDD District under this article shall
apply.
(14) Telecommunications signal receiving, transmission or relay tower
(all industrial and mixed-use districts). The same conditions listed
for this use under Subsection A of this section shall apply, except
that the color of the tower shall not be regulated.
(15)ARC house or halfway house (RDD). [Added 9-27-2006 by Ord.
No. 1509]
(a) All governmental or court-ordered regulations shall be met.
(b) All required licenses shall be obtained.
(16) Casino (RDD). [Added 9-27-2006 by Ord. No. 1509]
(a) The casino shall be licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(b) The casino shall comply with all governmental regulations of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(17) Methadone treatment facility (RDD). [Added 9-27-2006 by Ord.
No. 1509]
(a) A methadone treatment facility shall be located no closer than
500 feet from an existing school, public playground, public
park, residential housing area, child-care facility, church,
meeting house or other actual place of regularly stated
§ 440-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-63
1:613
religious worship established prior to the proposed methadone
treatment facility.
(b) A methadone treatment facility shall be licensed by the proper
agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 440-63 MUNHALL CODE § 440-63
1:614
ARTICLE X
Special Exceptions
§ 440-64. Conditions.
All special exceptions shall be subject to the specific applicable conditions
and procedures outlined under this article, including the following:
§ 440-65. Procedure.
The procedure for requesting a special exception is as follows:
A. Submission and approval of a preliminary and final site plan, if
requested.
B. Compliance with any other conditions imposed by provisions of this
chapter regarding the particular special exception.
C. Any other applicable regulations, whether in this or any other Munhall
ordinance or any county, state or federal regulations.
D. Any other conditions imposed by the Zoning Hearing Board which are
deemed necessary for protection of the public health, safety and
welfare.
E. Only those specific special exceptions listed elsewhere in this chapter
as a special exception in a particular district may be permitted under
this article.
A. A written application and a preliminary plan shall be filed with the
Zoning Officer. The application shall be a form approved by the
Borough. The preliminary plan shall address itself to all applicable
conditions for the particular special exception.
B. The preliminary plan and application for each special exception shall be
reviewed by the Zoning Officer, and a public hearing by the Board shall
be set within 45 days of the filing of the preliminary plan and
application.
C. Notice of the Board hearing shall be advertised in accordance with the
standards established by the MPC.
D. The Board shall, at the hearing, examine the preliminary plan and listen
to relevant testimony from the owner of the property or his agent, the
Zoning Officer, and any interested citizen. The Board may direct any
necessary questions to any of the above parties.
E. The Board shall, within 14 days after the hearing, approve or
disapprove the request for the special exception. If the Board
disapproves the request, the reasons for disapproval shall be stated.
F. A special exception shall not be granted unless the Board shall
determine:
§ 440-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-65
1:615
§ 440-66. General provisions.
(1) That the proposed special exception will not substantially injure or
detract from the use of neighboring property or from the character
of the neighborhood, and that the use of property adjacent to the
area included in the proposed change or plan is adequately
safeguarded.
(2) That the proposed special exception will serve to protect the best
interests of the Borough of Munhall, the convenience of the
community, and the public health, safety and welfare.
(3) That the effect of the special exception will facilitate the logical,
efficient and economical extension of public services and facilities,
such as public water, sewers, police and fire protection and public
schools.
G. A majority vote of the Board is required for approval.
H. The property owner or his agent and the Zoning Officer shall receive
written notification of the Board's decision. Any other interested party
may, at the hearing, request to receive such written notification. In any
case, the written notification shall be sent within 14 days of the Board's
decision.
I. Appeals from the decisions of the Board are governed by the applicable
provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code.
A. When a special exception has been denied by the Board, no request for
the same special exception at the same location may be refiled with the
Zoning Officer for at least one year from the date of that denial. The
only exception to this provision shall be if the landowner or his agent
can show to the satisfaction of the Board a substantial change in
circumstances regarding the property which would warrant
reexamination of the special exception request within the year's
limitation. Any such request shall be submitted in writing, along with a
special exception application and the appropriate nonrefundable fee, to
the Zoning Officer.
B. An approved special exception shall be completed within two years
following the date of approval. However, the Board may grant an
extension if the landowner or his agent requests such an extension and
if good cause for the delay is shown. There are no other exceptions to
this rule. If at the end of the two-year period the special exception is not
completed, and if no extension has been granted, the approval of the
special exception shall be null and void.
C. Minor changes in design or specifications of an approved special
exception which in no way constitute any expansion of the special
exception may be approved administratively upon written request.
§ 440-65 MUNHALL CODE § 440-66
1:616
§ 440-67. Specific conditions.
In order for a particular use by special exception to be eligible for approval
by the Board, the following specific conditions shall be met.
D. Any change in an approved but not completed special exception and any
change in a completed special exception which constitutes an
expansion of such use shall be governed by the applicable provisions of
this chapter. An improper expansion is a violation of this chapter and is
subject to the penalties of this chapter, including, but not limited to, a
fine and an action to remove the improper expansion.174
A. Residential zoning districts.
(1) Adult or child day-care center (R-1 and R-2).
(a) Any such facility may be permitted only when ancillary to an
existing church or school which is licensed by the
commonwealth.
(b) Any such facility serving adults may only be permitted in a
situation where those being served do not require nursing
care.
(c) Any such facility may only provide care for a period of less than
24 hours.
(d) Any such facility may only be situated within an existing
structure which has a principal use which is directly related to
the church or school.
(e) Any such use shall be licensed by the commonwealth where
licensing is required.
(f) Any such use may be permitted only where the church or
school is situated upon and has direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street.
(g) Any such facility shall provide at least one off-street parking
space for each employee plus one space for every 10 adults or
children being served (a minimum of two such parking spaces).
(2) Public utility structure (R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4).
(a) Any such use may be permitted only where the structure is:
[1] Secured with chain-link fencing.
[2] Screened from view with adequate landscaping which is
maintained throughout the term of the use.
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-67
1:617
(b) Wherever practical, any such structure shall be situated with
frontage upon an alley rather than a street right-of-way.
(c) The utility owning or utilizing the structure shall be solely
responsible for the security and maintenance of any such
structure.
(3) Adult or child day-care center (R-3 and R-4). The same as those
listed for this use under Subsection A(1) of this section and the
following:
(a) Any such use shall be situated only upon either an arterial or
collector street which provides direct vehicular access.
(b) May only be permitted where the use is situated:
[1] As an accessory use in conjunction with a school or
church.
[2] As a principal use within an approved structure which is
residential by design.
(c) Where a day-care center is a principal use, the following
standards shall apply.
[1] Minimum lot frontage: 60 feet.
[2] Minimum lot area: 6,600 square feet.
[3] Minimum required setbacks for the principal structure
shall be:
[a] Front yard: 20 feet.
[b] Side yards: six feet.
[c] Rear yard: 30 feet.
[d] Minimum rear and side yard setbacks for all accessory
structures shall be three feet.
[4] Where child day care is an accessory use within a single
dwelling, not more than 12 children at any one time may
be served.
(4) Community garage (R-2).
(a) Shall be permitted only within an accessory structure situated
upon the same lot as a dwelling.
(b) May provide off-street parking space for no more than six
motor vehicles or trailers, which shall be entirely contained
and secured within said structure.
§ 440-67 MUNHALL CODE § 440-67
1:618
(c) Vehicle repairs and retail or wholesale business of any kind
may not be conducted within any such structure.
(d) May only provide off-street parking situated entirely within an
approved and enclosed structure for residences situated within
a radius of 1/8 mile of the community garage.
(5) Community garage (R-3 and R-4). The same as those listed for this
use under Subsection A(4) of this section and the following:
(a) May be permitted as either an accessory or a principal use.
(b) Shall be situated only within the required rear yard.
(c) May provide off-street parking space for no more than eight
motor vehicles or trailers, which shall be entirely contained
and secured within said structure.
(6) Group residence (R-2, R-3 and R-4) and personal care
boardinghome, group care facility, boardinghouse or nursing home
(R-3 and R-4).
(a) Minimum lot size: 6,600 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 60 feet.
(c) Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
(d) Minimum parking: one space per each employee, plus one
space for each three beds or fraction thereof.
(e) Shall have frontage upon and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street.
(f) Required minimum setbacks for the principal structure shall
be as follows.
[1] Front: 20 feet.
[2] Side: six feet.
[3] Rear: 30 feet.
(g) Required minimum side and rear yard setbacks for accessory
structures: three feet.
(h) Shall also have at least 600 square feet of lot area per bed.
(7) Mid-rise apartments (R-3).
(a) Minimum lot size: one acre.
(b) Maximum density: 20 dwelling units per acre.
(c) Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
§ 440-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-67
1:619
(d) Maximum height: 55 feet and five stories.
(e) Minimum frontage (lot width): 100 feet.
(f) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(g) Required minimum setbacks for principal buildings.
[1] Front: 20 feet.
[2] Side: 10 feet.
[3] Rear: 30 feet.
(h) Required minimum side and rear yard setbacks for accessory
structures: five feet.
(8) High-rise apartments (R-4).
(a) Minimum lot size: net two acres.
(b) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(c) Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
(d) Minimum parking. See Article VIII, § 440-27.175
(e) Shall have frontage upon and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street.
(f) Required minimum setbacks for the principal structure shall
be as follows.
[1] Front: 50 feet.
[2] Side: 30 feet.
[3] Rear: 30 feet.
(g) Required minimum side and rear yard setbacks for accessory
structures: five feet.
(h) Maximum density: 36 dwelling units per acre.
(i) Any such use may include housing for the elderly.
(9) Transitional dwelling (R-4).
(a) Any such use shall serve not more than six persons.
(b) Minimum parking. One space per each employee, plus one
space for each three beds or fraction thereof.
(c) Shall also have at least 600 square feet of lot area per bed.
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-67 MUNHALL CODE § 440-67
1:620
(d) Minimum lot dimensions shall be not less than those required
for a single-family residence in the same district.
(10) Limited retail sales (R-5).
(a) All sales on the premises shall be limited to gift shops for the
sale of small gifts, limited to one or more of the following
items: greeting cards, flowers (real and artificial), arts and
crafts, antiques, candy and over-the-counter and prescription
drugs.
(b) Any such use shall be limited in scope with a strong emphasis
on maintaining the residential character of the neighborhood.
B. Business zoning districts.
(1) Pet grooming (excluding kennels) (B-1).
(a) Any such use shall not include the keeping, breeding, training,
boarding, offering for sale, or the provision of medical
treatment of any kind to any dog, cat or other domestic animal.
(b) The hours of operation for any such use shall be limited to the
hours between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. daily, Monday through
Saturday only.
(c) Any such facility shall be fully sound-insulated so as to
preclude the transmission of noise emanating from the
premises to any off-premises location.
(2) Eating and drinking establishments, including restaurants, taverns,
bars and cocktail lounges (B-1).
(a) The hours of operation for any eating establishment shall be
limited to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight
daily.
(b) The hours of operation for any tavern, bar, cocktail lounge or
other establishment serving any alcoholic beverage(s) shall be
limited to those established by the commonwealth.
(c) Any such facility shall be fully sound-insulated so as to
preclude the transmission of noise emanating from the
premises to any off-premises location.
(d) Fast-food restaurants and drive-in restaurants shall be
specifically prohibited in this district.
(e) Adult entertainment of any kind shall be prohibited in this
district, whether or not in conjunction with or ancillary to an
otherwise legal use.
(f) The owner of any carry-out food or drink establishment shall be
responsible for the daily thorough policing of the subject
§ 440-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-67
1:621
premises and all surrounding public and private properties of
all trash and/or garbage which may have been generated by
the subject establishment or its customers.
(3) Car wash (B-1).
(a) Any such use shall be limited to hours of operation between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. daily.
(b) All water generated by any such use shall be contained entirely
upon the subject premises and shall not be permitted to drain
onto any adjoining property or public right-of-way.
(c) Any such use shall be responsible for the daily thorough
policing of the subject premises and all surrounding public and
private properties of all trash and/or garbage which may have
been generated by the subject establishment or its customers.
(d) Any such facility shall include provisions for the installation
and maintenance of a filtering device or trap which shall
prevent petroleum products and solids from being deposited
into the Borough's sanitary and/or storm sewer systems.
(e) Any such facility shall only be situated upon a lot which has
frontage upon and direct vehicular access to and from an
arterial street.
(4) Automotive service station (B-1).
(a) Any such use shall be limited to hours of operation between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, daily.
(c) Any such facility shall only be situated upon a corner lot which
has frontage upon and direct vehicular access to and from an
arterial street.
(d) Any such use shall meet or exceed the following bulk and area
requirements.
(b) Any vehicle maintenance (repair) work shall only be performed
when contained entirely within an approved enclosed
structure.
[3] Minimum lot area for service station: 22,500 square feet.
[1] Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet.
[2] Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
[4] Yard setbacks.
[a] Principal structure.
[i] Front: 60 feet.
§ 440-67 MUNHALL CODE § 440-67
1:622
[ii] Rear: 0 feet.
[iii] Side: 20 feet.
[b] Accessory structure or use.
[i] Rear: 0 feet.
[ii] Side: 10 feet.
(e) The owner of any such use shall be responsible for the daily
thorough policing of the premises and all surrounding public
and private properties of all trash, litter and/or garbage which
may have been generated by the subject establishment or its
customers.
(f) Any such use shall include provisions for the installation and
maintenance of a filtering device or trap which shall prevent
petroleum products and solids from being deposited into the
Borough's sanitary and/or storm sewer systems.
(5) Any business of any kind which includes an outdoor ATM or drivethrough
window as a principal or accessory use (B-1).
(a) Any outdoor ATM facility shall be well-lit at all hours and shall
be easily visible from the public street right-of-way upon which
the lot has frontage.
(b) Off-street parking areas for the principal use shall include at
least two additional parking spaces for each outdoor ATM.
(c) Off-street parking areas for any establishment which has an
outdoor drive-through ATM or drive-through window shall
provide on-site stacking space for at least four vehicles for
each drive-through ATM or window; and, in any event,
satisfactory efforts shall be made to accommodate all vehicles
which may be waiting to use the facility on site, rather than
creating a situation where all or any part of a waiting line may
be forced into a public street right-of-way.
(d) A trash receptacle(s) shall be installed and maintained for each
approved ATM or drive-through window.
(e) The owner of any such use shall be responsible for the daily
thorough policing of the subject premises and all surrounding
public and private properties of all trash and/or garbage which
may have been generated by the subject establishment or its
customers.
(6) Automotive repair establishment (B-2).
(a) All repairs shall be conducted entirely within an approved
enclosed structure. No repair work shall be permitted in an
§ 440-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-67
1:623
open yard regardless of whether or not said yard is enclosed
by a fence, wall or other enclosure.
(b) Any such facility shall be sound-insulated so as to limit the
transmission of noise emanating from the premises to any offpremises
location.
(c) Any such use shall be limited to hours of operation between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. daily.
(d) The owner of any such use shall be responsible for the daily
thorough policing of the subject premises and all surrounding
public and private properties of all trash and/or garbage which
may have been generated by the subject establishment or its
customers.
(e) Any damaged vehicle or vehicle part shall only be stored
entirely within an approved enclosed solid fence or wall. No
such vehicle or vehicle part may be stored in an open yard.
(f) No vehicle may be stored at any location on the premises for
any period of time in excess of 30 days.
(g) No motor vehicle, boat, camper, trailer or motor vehicle part
may be sold or leased or offered for sale or lease at any time
from any location on the premises.
(7) Automotive, mobile home, boat, camper or trailer sales (B-2).
(a) All repairs shall be conducted entirely within an approved
enclosed structure. No repair work shall be permitted in an
open yard regardless of whether or not said yard is enclosed by
a fence, wall or other enclosure.
(b) All vehicle maintenance facilities shall be sound-insulated so as
to limit the transmission of noise emanating from the premises
to any off-premises location.
(c) Any such use shall be limited to hours of operation between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., daily.
(d) The owner of any such use shall be responsible for the daily
thorough policing of the subject premises and all surrounding
public and private properties of all litter, trash and garbage
which may have been generated by the subject establishment
or its customers.
(e) Any damaged vehicle or vehicle part shall only be stored
entirely within an approved enclosed solid fence or wall. No
such vehicle or vehicle part may be stored in an open yard.
§ 440-67 MUNHALL CODE § 440-67
1:624
(f) Temporary or permanent banners, streamers, flags (other than
one U.S. flag and one State of Pennsylvania flag), and pennants
shall be prohibited at any location on the premises.
(g) Temporary or permanent signs, other than those permitted and
approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
shall be prohibited at any location on the premises.
(8) Any wholesale business (B-2).
(a) All business-related activities shall be conducted and
contained wholly within an approved enclosed structure
(which may include an approved loading dock which is under
roof but otherwise open to light and air).
(b) All parking and loading facilities shall be entirely
accommodated on site.
(c) Storage in an open yard shall not be permitted in conjunction
with any such use.
(d) Any such use shall be limited to hours of operation between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight daily, Monday through
Saturday.
(9) Freight terminal (B-2).
(a) All business-related activities, including the transfer of freight,
shall be conducted and contained wholly within an approved
enclosed structure (which may include an approved loading
dock which is under roof but otherwise open to light and air).
(b) All parking and loading facilities shall be entirely
accommodated on site.
(c) Storage in an open yard shall not be permitted in conjunction
with any such use.
(d) Any such use shall be limited to hours of operation between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through
Saturday.
(10) Lumber or supply yard (B-2).
(a) All business-related activities, including the transfer of
building materials, shall be conducted and contained wholly
within an approved enclosed structure (which may include an
approved storage structure which is under roof but otherwise
open to light and air).
(b) All parking and loading facilities shall be entirely
accommodated on site.
§ 440-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-67
1:625
(c) Storage in an open yard shall not be permitted in conjunction
with any such use.
(d) Any such use shall be limited to hours of operation between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
(11) Maintenance and storage facility (B-2).
(a) All business-related activities, including the transfer of stored
materials, shall be conducted and contained wholly within an
approved enclosed structure (which may include an approved
storage structure which is under roof but otherwise open to
light and air).
(b) All parking and loading facilities shall be entirely
accommodated on site.
(c) Storage in an open yard shall not be permitted in conjunction
with any such use.
(d) Any such use shall be limited to hours of operation between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
(12) Horticultural nursery (B-2).
(a) All sales-related activities shall be conducted and contained
wholly within an approved enclosed structure.
(b) All parking and loading facilities shall be entirely
accommodated on site.
(c) Storage in an approved and fenced open yard of living plants
only shall be permitted in conjunction with any such use.
(d) Any such use shall be limited to hours of operation between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., daily.
(e) A detailed site development plan shall be submitted and shall
be subject to review and approval by the Board prior to the
approval of any such proposed use.
(13) Research and development facility (B-2).
(a) A detailed site development plan shall be subject to review and
approval by the Board prior to the approval of any such
proposed use.
(b) Any such use shall be conducted and contained entirely within
an approved enclosed structure.
(c) Any such use shall be limited to hours of operation between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, daily.
§ 440-67 MUNHALL CODE § 440-67
1:626
(d) Any such use shall be limited to those operations and activities
which pose no real or potential threat to the public health,
safety and welfare of area residents.
(14) Roadside stand (B-2).
(a) Any such use shall be responsible for the daily thorough
policing of the subject premises and all surrounding public and
private properties of all litter, trash and garbage which may
have been generated by the subject establishment or its
customers.
(b) Any such use shall be limited to hours of operation between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday,
and 12:00 noon and 6:00 p.m., Sundays.
(c) A detailed site development plan shall be subject to review and
approval by the Board prior to the approval of any such
proposed use.
(d) Careful consideration shall be given to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic flow on site.
(e) Any temporary structure designed or used for the display or
sale of seasonal products, including agricultural products from
a roadside location, shall be included in the definition under
this section of this article.
(f) All parking surfaces shall be hard-surfaced with proper
provisions for the collection and disposal of surface drainage
for the parking area.
(15) Amusement arcade (B-2).
(a) The owner of any such use shall be responsible for the daily
thorough policing of the subject premises and all surrounding
public and private properties of all litter, trash and garbage
which may have been generated by the subject establishment
or its customers.
(b) In any situation where an amusement arcade is to be the
principal use, the hours of operation shall be limited to the
hours between 3:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m., on all schooldays;
8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Saturdays; and 12:00 noon and
8:00 p.m., Sundays.
(c) Where any amusement arcade is to be ancillary to some other
principal use, the hours of operation for the arcade shall be at
least as restrictive as the hours of operation for the principal
use.
§ 440-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-67
1:627
(d) Any establishment which includes an amusement arcade and in
which alcoholic beverages are also served shall not be open
and accessible to any person under the age of 21.
(e) In any situation where an amusement arcade is to be the
principal use, the establishment shall provide public rest
rooms for its customers.
(16) Satellite-signal-receiving antennas (B-1 and B-2).
(a) May only be permitted in the rear yard or upon a roof.
(b) May only be permitted where no portion of the antenna is
visible from a point six feet above grade at a point measured
along a line drawn perpendicular to the front property line
from the center point of said property line a distance of 60 feet.
And in the case of a corner lot, any such structure shall met the
front yard setback requirement for all yards fronting on a
public right-of-way.
(c) Shall minimally meet the side yard setback requirements
established for the principal structure with said measurement
being taken from the point of the antenna nearest the property
line rather than the base of the structure.
(d) Shall have a painted or anodized finish which is either forest
green, dark brown or black in color.
C. Industrial and mixed-use zoning districts.
(1) Automotive, mobile home, boat, camper or trailer sales (GS) and
(RDD). The same conditions as those listed for automotive, mobile
home, boat, camper or trailer sales in the B-2 Business District
under Subsection B(7) of this section.
(2) Billboard (GS).
(a) Any billboard site location shall be located not less than 500
feet from the nearest already existing billboard site location.
(b) No billboard may be attached to the surface of any building or
structure other than the structure designed to support the
billboard itself.
(c) Not more than two single-sided or double-sided signs shall
constitute each billboard site or location.
(d) Billboards may only be situated upon property which has
frontage on an arterial street.
(e) Billboards may be permitted as either an accessory or principal
use.
§ 440-67 MUNHALL CODE § 440-67
1:628
(f) No structure supporting a billboard may exceed 40 feet in
vertical height above finished grade.
(g) No billboard sign face may exceed 12 feet in vertical height, 36
feet in horizontal width or 432 square feet in area.
(3) Recycling collection facility (GS).
(a) The owner of any such use shall be responsible for the daily
thorough policing of the subject premises and all surrounding
public and private properties of all litter, trash and garbage
which may have been generated by the subject establishment
or its customers.
(b) The outside storage of materials in an open yard shall be
permitted only where the storage area is completely surround
by security fencing and screened from the public eye.
(c) Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between 6:00
a.m. and 12:00 midnight, daily.
(d) Minimum lot size: one acre.
(4) Satellite-signal-receiving or -sending antennas (GS).
(a) May only be permitted in the rear yard or upon a roof.
(b) May only be permitted where no portion of the antenna is
visible from a point six feet above grade at a point measured
along a line drawn perpendicular to the front property line
from the center point of said property line a distance of 60 feet.
And in the case of a corner lot, any such structure shall met the
front yard setback requirement for all yards fronting on a
public right-of-way.
(c) Shall minimally meet the side yard setback requirements
established for the principal structure, with said measurement
being taken from the point of the antenna nearest the property
line rather than the base of the structure.
(d) Shall have a painted or anodized finish which is either forest
green, dark brown or black in color.
(5) Roadside stand (GS).
(a) Any temporary structure designed or used for the display or
sale of seasonal products, including agricultural products,
from a roadside location shall be included in the definition
under this section.
(b) Any such use shall be responsible for the daily thorough
policing of the subject premises and all surrounding public and
private properties of all litter, trash and garbage which may
§ 440-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-67
1:629
have been generated by the subject establishment or its
customers.
(c) Any such use shall be limited to hours of operation between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday,
and 12:00 noon and 6:00 p.m., Sundays.
(d) Careful consideration shall be given to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic flow on site.
(e) A detailed site development plan shall be subject to review and
approval by the Board prior to the approval of any such
proposed use.
(f) All parking surfaces shall be hard-surfaced with proper
provisions for the collection and disposal of surface drainage
for the parking area. [Amended 9-17-1997 by Ord. No.
1414; 3-15-2000 by Ord. No. 1461]
§ 440-67 MUNHALL CODE § 440-67
1:630
ARTICLE XI
Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses
§ 440-68. Regulation of nonconforming lots, structures and uses.
Lots, structures and uses of land which were both lawful and existing prior
to the adoption of this chapter, but which are restricted or prohibited by this
chapter, its successors or any amendments, are permitted to remain and
continue, subject to the following regulations:
§ 440-69. Nonconforming lots of record.
§ 440-70. Nonconforming uses of land.
A. The owner of any legal nonconforming lot, structure or use made
nonconforming by the enactment of this chapter or any preceding
zoning ordinance shall register such legal nonconforming lot, structure
or use with the Zoning Officer. In addition, the owner of record of any
nonconformance shall provide, upon request, information required by
the Zoning Officer which is deemed necessary by the Borough to
ascertain the extent of the nonconformity and/or its legality.
B. Upon the change of a legal nonconformance to a conforming lot,
structure or use or in the event of a lapse or destruction of a legal
nonconformance, the owner may request that the lot, structure or use
be deleted from the list of legal nonconformances.
A. Residential lots. In any use district in which residences are listed as a
permitted use, a single-family dwelling and its normally permitted
accessory buildings may be erected on any nonconforming single lot of
record where no conforming, permitted principal structure can
otherwise be erected.
B. Separate ownership.
(1) Any such nonconforming lot of record must, however, be under
separate ownership from adjoining lots and must not have
continuous frontage with other lots under the same ownership.
(2) Any such nonconforming lot which is owned by the same owner or a
predecessor in title as an adjoining lot] shall not be considered a
separate buildable zoning lot under this section.
C. Conformance. Except for the lot size (area) requirement, any singlefamily
dwelling on a nonconforming lot of record under this section
shall otherwise conform to all applicable bulk, area and use regulations,
unless a variance is requested and granted in accordance with this
chapter.
A. Expansion. No nonconforming use of land shall be enlarged, increased,
expanded or changed in any manner unless first approved by the Board.
§ 440-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-70
1:631
§ 440-71. Nonconforming structures.
Any such approved enlargement, expansion, increase or change in use
shall be subject to the following specific criteria:
(1) The nonconforming use may only be changed to a use of equal or
more-restrictive use.
(2) When a nonconforming use is changed to a more-restrictive use,
any such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less-restrictive
use.
(3) The use may be continued only as long as the structure remains in
use.
(4) All technical advances which are known to be available pertaining
to the particular nonconforming use shall be required so as to
minimize the detrimental effect of such use on adjacent structures
and uses.
(5) In no case shall any approved expansion exceed 25% of the existing
gross floor area of the structure which is currently used for the
nonconforming use.
(6) The entire structure, after renovation, shall comply with all
building, housing and health ordinances and any other relevant
local, state or federal regulations.
B. Continuation. Any legal nonconforming use of land shall be permitted to
continue, including subsequent sales of the property for the identical
existing legally nonconforming use.
C. Discontinuance. If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of
12 consecutive months or more, the legally nonconforming status shall
have automatically been extinguished. Subsequent uses of the property
shall be in full compliance with this chapter.
A. Expansion. No nonconforming structure shall be enlarged, increased,
expanded or changed in any manner unless approval is requested and
granted by the Board in accordance with this chapter.
B. Continuation. Any legal nonconforming structure shall be permitted to
continue, including subsequent sales of the property.
C. Moving. No nonconforming structure shall be moved, in whole or in
part, to another location on the lot or anywhere else in the Borough
unless every portion of said structure shall be brought into full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. Damage or destruction. Should any such nonconforming structure be
destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50% of its fair market
value (at the time of destruction), it shall not be reconstructed except in
full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 440-70 MUNHALL CODE § 440-71
1:632
E. Repairs or maintenance. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
prevent the strengthening or restoration for health or safety reasons of
any structure or part thereof declared to be unhealthy or unsafe by any
official charged with protecting the public health or safety upon the
order of such official.
§ 440-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-71
1:633

ARTICLE XII
General Administrative Provisions
§ 440-72. General rules.
§ 440-73. Zoning Officer.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted and applied so as to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety,
welfare and morals of the citizens of the Borough of Munhall.
B. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter upon
uses of land or structures are either more restrictive or less restrictive
than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this
chapter or of another applicable law, municipal ordinance, rule or
regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive shall
govern.
C. This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or
other private agreement, provided that, where the regulations of this
chapter are more restrictive than such easements, covenants or other
private agreements, the requirements of this chapter shall govern.
D. No structure shall be erected, converted or altered, nor shall any
structure or land be used, except for a purpose permitted in the use
district in which the structure or land is located, except as hereinafter
provided. No structure shall be erected, enlarged or altered except in
conformity with the area regulations, minimum yard requirements,
performance standards and minimum off-street parking space
requirements of this chapter for the district in which such structure is
located.
E. Any person, partnership, or corporation found to have violated any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be notified of said violation in
accordance with the standards and procedures outlined under the MPC.
F. All applications for a variance, special exception, amendment,
conditional use permit or any other permit, application or certificate
within the scope of this chapter shall be made on printed forms
provided by the Borough of Munhall. Any such application shall contain
accurate information as to size and location of structures on the lot, the
dimensions of all yards and open spaces, the sections of this chapter
applicable to the request, and such other information as may be
necessary to provide for the enforcement of this chapter. A file of all
such applications shall be kept in the Borough Manager's office.
G. General administration. The duty of administering the provisions of this
chapter is conferred upon the Zoning Officer, the Planning Commission,
the Borough Council and the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. Powers and duties. The Zoning Officer shall:
§ 440-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-73
1:635
§ 440-74. Planning Commission powers and duties.
The Planning Commission is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction
and authority:
(1) Administer and enforce this chapter.
(2) Issue or authorize the issuance of all building permits, certificates
of occupancy (use, occupancy and compliance), and zoning
permits, and make and maintain records thereof.
(3) Conduct or authorize inspections of buildings, structures and uses
of land to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
and make and maintain records thereof.
(4) Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including,
but not limited to, all maps, amendments, special exceptions,
variances, nonconforming uses, conditional uses, appeals and
applications for and records of hearings thereon.
(5) Provide and maintain public information relative to all matters
arising out of this chapter.
(6) Receive, file and forward all applications or appeals requiring
action by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(7) Prepare and maintain a list and description of all legally
nonconforming lots, uses, signs and structures.
(8) Provide written notifications of violations of this chapter, as
prescribed in this article.
(9) Receive complaints from residents regarding alleged violations of
this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall, whenever practical, act on a
complaint within three business days and shall keep records of
complaints as well as action taken on them.
(10) Be responsible for the day-to-day administration of matters relating
to this chapter.
B. Appeals (of an administrative decision or interpretation). Any appeal of
an administrative action of the Zoning Officer shall be made to the
Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of such action. The Zoning Officer
shall immediately transmit to the Zoning Hearing Board all of the
papers constituting the record upon which the appeal is based.
A. To receive copies of all applications for amendments and conditional
uses, to make findings and recommendations thereon, and to forward
such findings and recommendations to the Council.
B. To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, a study of the
provisions of this chapter, and to make reports of its findings and
recommendations to the Council no less frequently than annually.
§ 440-73 MUNHALL CODE § 440-74
1:636
§ 440-75. Certificate of occupancy. [Amended 12-18-2002 by Ord.
No. 1480]
C. To supply information to the Zoning Officer as required in this chapter.
D. To study, after examination and with the aid of expert assistance where
required, determine and define all arterial highways within the
Borough, and to make a report of its findings to the Zoning Hearing
Board and to the Council.
E. To receive applications for the review and approval of additional uses
and rezoning request submissions under the applicable provisions of
this chapter and the MPC.
A. Requirements.
(1) It shall be unlawful to use, occupy or permit the use or occupancy
of any building, land or premises, or part thereof, thereafter
created, erected, altered in its structure, enlarged in its use or
changed in its use, tenants, ownership or occupants until a
certificate of occupancy (use occupancy and compliance) has been
issued therefor, stating that the proposed use of land, building or
premises conforms to the requirements of the grading and zoning
ordinances and the building and fire codes and is, therefore,
suitable and eligible for legal occupancy.
(2) It shall be unlawful to change the use, tenants, ownership or
occupants of any building, land or premises unless a certificate of
occupancy has first been issued by the Zoning Officer stating that
the building, land or premises conforms to the requirements or the
grading and zoning ordinances and the building and fire codes and
is, therefore, suitable and eligible for legal occupancy.
B. Application.
(1) Any application for a building permit shall also constitute (serve as)
an application for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy upon
completion of the work, excluding building permit applications for
swimming pools, window replacement, residential storage sheds,
gutters and downspouts, siding and/or other minor repairs to
existing structures.
(2) The applicant, in all cases, shall be the owner or a duly authorized
representative of the owner. In the case of a change in ownership of
the property, the applicant may be the current owner or the
proposed new owner.
(3) A separate application for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
shall be required anytime that a use is enlarged or changed or
anytime that there is a change in ownership of the land, business or
use.
§ 440-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-75
1:637
§ 440-76. Amendments.
C. Inspections.
(1) The applicant for a separately issued certificate shall notify the
Zoning Officer of the proposed date of expansion (enlargement) of
the use, change in use, or transfer of ownership.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall then inspect or authorize the inspection of
the use or structure within 10 days of the receipt of said notice.
(3) An inspection for the purpose of determining whether a certificate
should be issued shall only extend to the area upon which or within
which the use is to be conducted and to such appurtenant areas as
it may be necessary to inspect in determining compliance with
grading, zoning, building and fire codes and/or ordinances.
D. Issuance of a certificate.
(1) A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Zoning
Officer while alterations are being made or for the partial
occupancy of a building pending its completion and may require
such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the
occupants and the public.
(2) Upon inspection of land, building or premises to determine
whether or not a certificate of occupancy shall be issued, if the
Zoning Officer finds that such construction, alteration or erection is
in accordance with this chapter, a certificate of occupancy shall be
issued. Written notice shall be given to the applicant stating why a
certificate cannot be issued when the Zoning Officer finds that such
construction, alteration or erection is not in accordance with this
chapter.
(3) Upon inspection of land, building or premises to determine
whether or not a certificate of occupancy shall be issued, if the
Zoning Officer finds that this chapter has been complied with, a
certificate of occupancy shall be issued. Written notice shall be
given to the applicant stating why a certificate cannot be issued
when the Zoning Officer finds that the land, building or premises is
not in compliance with this chapter.
E. Revocation or suspension of a certificate. A certificate of occupancy
may be revoked or suspended by the Zoning Officer if the holder of the
certificate has failed to comply with conditions attached to the issuance
of the certificate or if the Zoning Officer finds that the land, building or
premises is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
F. Fee. The Borough may establish a fee for the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
§ 440-75 MUNHALL CODE § 440-76
1:638
§ 440-77. Violations and penalties. [Added 9-17-1997 by Ord. No.
1414]
A. General. Council may, on its own initiative or upon receipt of a
recommendation initiated by the Planning Commission, amend,
supplement, change, modify or repeal this chapter, provided that
Council considers said amendment, supplement, change, modification
or repeal to be necessary in serving the best interests, convenience, or
general welfare of the public, and provided that the procedures
followed shall be consistent with those established by the MPC.
B. Landowner curative amendments.
(1) Any landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds
this chapter or the Zoning Map or any provision thereof which
prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he
has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the Council
with a written request that his challenge and proposed amendment
be heard and decided.
(2) The procedures for processing landowner curative amendments
which is outlined in the MPC shall be followed.
C. Municipal curative amendments. If Council should determine that this
chapter or any portion thereof is substantially invalid, it shall follow the
procedures outlined in the MPC for municipal curative amendments.
A. Any person who has violated the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment penalty of not more than
$500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred
by the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by
the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant
to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the Magisterial District Judge determining that there has been a
violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for the
person violating this chapter to have believed that there was no such
violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one
such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination
of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge, and thereafter each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
C. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorneys' fees collected as a
penalty(ies) for the violation of this chapter shall be payable to the
Borough of Munhall.
§ 440-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-77
1:639

ARTICLE XIII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 440-78. Creation.
The Zoning Hearing Board which is presently in existence shall continue to
constitute the Zoning Hearing Board of the Borough of Munhall under this
chapter. Matters pending before the Zoning Hearing Board at the time this
chapter becomes effective shall continue and be completed under the law(s)
in effect at the time the particular petition(s) regarding the issue was filed.
§ 440-79. Continuity of office.
Those members of the Board existing under the prior zoning ordinance are
hereby reappointed and shall serve out their unexpired terms as members
of the present Board, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 440-80. Membership, term of office.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of three residents of the Borough
of Munhall appointed by Council. The members of the existing Board shall
continue to serve in office in accordance with § 440-79. The term of office
shall be three years and shall be so fixed so that the term of office of one
member of the Board shall expire each year. Members of the Board shall
hold no other office in the Borough of Munhall.
§ 440-81. Vacancies.
The Board shall promptly notify the Council of any vacancies which occur.
Appointments by the Council to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired
portion of the term.
§ 440-82. Removal of members.
A member of the Board may be removed for malfeasance of nonfeasance
in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of Council. The Board
member must receive a majority vote of Council. The Board member must
receive 15 days' advance written notice of the intent of Council to vote
on the member's removal. The written notice shall be accompanied by a
clear, written statement of the specific charges. A hearing shall be held in
connection with the vote if the Board member shall so request in writing.
§ 440-83. Organization of the Board.
The Board shall elect its officers from its own membership. The officers
shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of
any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than
a majority of all the members of the Board, but the Board may appoint a
hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any hearings on its
behalf, and the parties may waive further action by the Board, as provided
by the MPC.
§ 440-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-84
1:641
§ 440-84. Rules and regulations.
The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and regulations and forms for
its procedures, such as are consistent with the ordinances of the Borough
of Munhall and the laws of Pennsylvania. The Board shall keep full public
records of its business and shall submit a report of its activities to the
Council annually. All records and rules of the Board shall be on file for public
inspection in the office of the Borough Manager.
§ 440-85. Expenditures.
Within the limit of funds appropriated by Council, the Board may employ
or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other
technical and clerical services. Members of the Board may receive
compensation for the performance of their duties as may be fixed by
Council, but in no case shall such compensation exceed the rate of
compensation authorized to be paid to Council members.
§ 440-86. Meetings and public hearings.
A. Meetings of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be held:
(1) At the call of the Chairman.
(2) Within 60 days from the date of any application to the Board.176
(3) At such other times as the Board may determine.
B. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall
keep minutes of its proceedings, showing whether a member was
present or absent and the vote of each member upon each question, and
shall keep stenographic records of its hearings and other official
actions. All Board records shall be filed with the Zoning Officer and
shall be available for public inspection. Upon the filing of an application
or appeal, the Board shall fix a time and place for a public hearing and
shall, in the manner prescribed by this chapter and Council, give public
notice thereof. The Board shall conduct the hearings and render
decisions in the manner prescribed by Council as now established or as
hereafter amended.
C. The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance
with the following requirements:177
(1) The first hearing before the Board or hearing officer shall be
commenced within 60 days from the date of receipt of the
applicant's application, unless the applicant has agreed in writing
to an extension of time. Each subsequent hearing before the Board
or hearing officer shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing,
unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
177. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-84 MUNHALL CODE § 440-86
1:642
record. The applicant shall complete the presentation of his casein-
chief within 100 days of the first hearing. Upon the request
of the applicant, the Board or hearing officer shall assure that
the applicant receives at least seven hours of hearings within the
100 days, including the first hearing. Persons opposed to the
application shall complete the presentation of their opposition to
the application within 100 days of the first hearing held after the
completion of the applicant's case-in-chief. An applicant may, upon
request, be granted additional hearings to complete his case-inchief,
provided the persons opposed to the application are granted
an equal number of additional hearings. Persons opposed to the
application may, upon the written consent or consent on the record
by the applicant and the Borough, be granted additional hearings
to complete their opposition to the application, provided the
applicant is granted an equal number of additional hearings for
rebuttal.
(2) The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may
appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing
officer. The decision or, where no decision is called for, the findings
shall be made by the Board; however, the appellant or the
applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the Borough, may,
prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by
the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer
as final.
(3) The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the Board, and any other person, including civic or
community organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The
Board shall have power to require that all persons who wish to be
considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms provided
by the Board for that purpose.
(4) The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing
officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses
and documents requested by the parties.
(5) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(6) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(7) The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the
§ 440-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-86
1:643
Board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board
if the transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall
be paid by the person appealing from the decision of the Board
if such appeal is made, and in either event the cost of additional
copies shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies.
In other cases, the party requesting the original transcript shall
bear the cost thereof.
(8) The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with
any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all
parties to participate; shall not take notice of any communication,
reports, staff memoranda or other materials, except advice from its
Solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest
the material so noticed; and shall not inspect the site or its
surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party
or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to
be present.
(9) The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing
before the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is
contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by
findings of fact and conclusions based thereon together with the
reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of this
chapter or of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a
reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the
conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found. If
the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, and there has been no
stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Board shall
make his report and recommendations available to the parties
within 45 days, and the parties shall be entitled to make written
representations thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry
of findings, and the Board's decision shall be entered no later than
30 days after the report of the hearing officer. Except for
challenges filed under § 916.1 of the Municipalities Planning
Code,178 as amended, where the Board fails to render the decision
within the period required by this subsection, or fails to commence,
conduct or complete the required hearing as provided in
Subsection C(1) of this section, the decision shall be deemed to
have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant
has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.
When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant
because of the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as
hereinabove provided, the Board shall give public notice of the said
decision within 10 days from the last day it could have met to
render a decision in the same manner as provided in Subsection
178. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1.
§ 440-86 MUNHALL CODE § 440-86
1:644
§ 440-87. Public notice.179
Public notice of any public hearing shall be in accordance with the
standards and procedures established in the MPC. Public notice shall be
given and written notice shall be given to the applicant, the Zoning Officer
and to any person who has made timely request for the same. Written
notices shall be given at such time and in such manner as shall be
prescribed by rules of the Board. In addition to the written notice provided
herein, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the
affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.
§ 440-88. Powers and duties. [Amended 6-16-1998 by Ord. No.
1426]
The Board shall, in accordance with the provisions of the MPC, have the
power and duty to perform the following functions:
C(1) of this section. If the Board shall fail to provide such notice,
the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice
the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the
decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(10) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to
him not later than the day following its date. To all other persons
who have filed their name and address with the Board not later
than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or
otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement
of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.
(11) Council shall establish, by resolution, fees with respect to hearings
before the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. To hear and decide appeals from any administrative order,
determination or requirement made by the Zoning Officer in the
administration and enforcement of this chapter where it is alleged that
the Zoning Officer has failed to follow prescribed procedures or has
misinterpreted or misapplied any provision of a valid ordinance, map or
rule or regulation governing the action of the Zoning Officer.
B. To hear substantive challenges to the validity of this chapter or the
Zoning Map, as prescribed by the MPC, except those brought before
Council pursuant to §§ 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the MPC.180
C. To hear and decide requests for a variance from the requirements of
this chapter where it is alleged that the strict application of the
provisions of this chapter would result in an unnecessary hardship that
would deprive the owner of the reasonable use of the land. The Board
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-88
1:645
shall also have the power to attach such conditions to the variance as
it deems necessary to implement the general purpose and intent of this
chapter. No variance shall be granted unless the Board determines,
and fully describes in its findings, that all of the following tests can be
answered in the affirmative:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of the chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
(2) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there
is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant (applicant) or a predecessor in title.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
D. To hear and decide requests for special exceptions which are expressly
permitted by the provisions of this chapter and subject to the standards
and criteria set forth in Article X of this chapter.
E. To hear, where the Board has jurisdiction over zoning matters in this
article, all other appeals which the applicant may elect to bring before
it with respect to any Borough ordinance or requirement pertaining to
the same development plan or development. The Board shall take
evidence and make findings on all relevant issues of fact. However, the
Board shall have no power to act upon issues which do not relate
directly to this chapter. Nor shall the Board assume any authority to
grant relief not specifically authorized by this chapter.
F. Whenever any person or entity files an appeal to the Munhall Zoning
Board pursuant to Subsection A hereof and pays a fee in connection
with that appeal, the Board in its discretion may order the return of all
or a portion of the fee paid by the appealing, successful party, provided
that there is no appeal to the Court of Common Pleas within the
applicable time. If there is an appeal from the decision of the Board,
§ 440-88 MUNHALL CODE § 440-88
1:646
§ 440-89. Variance time limit.
§ 440-90. Automatic revocation of variance.
Any previously approved variance shall be automatically revoked under any
one of the following three circumstances:
§ 440-91. Right of appeal.
Any party aggrieved by any decision of the Board may appeal therefrom
within 30 days to the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
such refund will not be payable until final resolution in favor of the
appellant by the exhaustion of all further appeals.
A. Upon the granting of a variance by the Board, the petitioner of record
shall be required to:
(1) Secure the necessary building permit within not more than 180
calendar days of the date of variance approval by the Board.
(2) Complete all work as approved by the Board within not more than
24 calendar months from the date of variance approval by the
Board.
B. Failure to comply with both of the time deadlines outlined in Subsection
A of this section shall automatically result in the immediate revocation
of the variance.
A. Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, provided that a building
permit authorizing the work approved by the Board has not been issued
within the past 24 calendar months and any portion of the work has not
been completed in full accordance with the approved plans and/or
conditions.
B. Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, provided that a building
permit authorizing the work approved by the Board has been issued
within the past 24 calendar months, but substantial progress has not
made toward completion of the project in full accordance with the
approved plans and/or conditions within the one-hundred-eightycalendar-
day period immediately preceding adoption of this chapter.
C. At any point in time in the future, provided that a building permit
authorizing the work approved by the Board has been issued within the
past 24 calendar months and substantial progress has been made
toward completion of the project within the one-hundred-eightycalendar-
day period immediately preceding adoption of this chapter,
but not all of the work is completed in full accordance with approved
plans and/or conditions within a period of 24 calendar months of the
original date of approval.
§ 440-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-91
1:647

ARTICLE XIV
Historic Overlay District
[Added 3-15-2000 by Ord. No. 1460]
§ 440-92. Designation of districts.
§ 440-93. Historical Architectural Review Board.
A historical architectural review board (HARB) is hereby created, subject to
the following requirements:
A. Purpose. Structures or districts with special historic, cultural,
architectural or educational significance enhance the quality of life for
all residents of the Borough of Munhall, Allegheny County, and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Accordingly, the purpose of the
Historic Overlay District(s) are:
(1) To protect that portion(s) of the Borough reflecting the cultural,
economic, social, political and architectural history of the Borough
of Munhall, Allegheny County, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
and the nation.
(2) To preserve property values, attract future residents and
strengthen the local economy.
(3) To foster public education, awareness of local history and civic
pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past.
(4) To establish special development requirements and procedures to
assure that new construction, reconstruction, alteration,
rehabilitation, restoration or demolition of buildings within the
district(s) enhances the character of the district(s).
B. Map. The map entitled "Borough of Munhall Zoning Map" is the Official
Zoning Map for the Borough and illustrates the historic district(s) as
overlays to the underlying districts.
C. Boundaries.
(1) The boundaries of the local historic district are as shown on the
attached map entitled the "Borough of Munhall Historic Overlay
Zoning Map."181
(2) The boundaries of the National Historic District are as listed on the
National Register of Historic Places.
A. Membership.
(1) The Historical Architectural Review Board shall be a joint
municipal board of the Boroughs of Homestead, West Homestead
181. Editor's Note: The Borough of Munhall Historic Overlay Zoning Map is on file and may be
seen at the Borough office.
§ 440-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-93
1:649
and Munhall. Members shall be appointed by the borough councils.
It shall be composed of not less than eight members. One member
shall be a registered architect appointed at large by the three
borough councils, one member shall be a licensed real estate
broker appointed at large by the three borough councils, one shall
be a building inspector of each of the three boroughs and the
remaining three members shall be one person from each of the
three boroughs who is a resident of that borough and who has
knowledge of and interest in the preservation of historic districts.
(2) Each Board member shall serve a term of three years and may be
reappointed for an unlimited number of terms by the borough
councils. Board members shall serve without compensation but
shall be reimbursed for any personal expenditures in the conduct of
HARB business.
(3) Board members are required to disqualify themselves from voting
on any project in which their own financial interests are directly or
indirectly involved.
B. Meetings.
(1) The Historical Architectural Review Board shall meet monthly at a
regularly prescribed date and meeting place and at other times as
its Chairperson may deem necessary. All meetings of the HARB
shall be open to the public. A simple majority of the HARB shall
constitute a quorum, and action taken at any meeting shall require
the affirmative vote of a majority of the Board members present.
(2) The HARB shall adopt such rules and regulations as it considers
necessary in the administration of its duties. It shall keep minutes
of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. It shall
keep records of its hearings and other official actions, which shall
be immediately filed with the Borough Secretary and shall be a
public record.
(3) The HARB shall prepare an annual report of its activities and
present it to the borough councils by February 1 of each year.
C. Powers and duties. The HARB shall have the power and duty to:
(1) Coordinate local historic preservation efforts with those of the
Pennsylvania History and Museum Commission and the National
Trust for Historic Preservation.
(2) Sponsor public information activities, when deemed appropriate,
publicizing historic preservation efforts, including speaking
engagements, press releases, the preparation and publication of
maps, brochures and descriptive materials in the Boroughs, etc.
§ 440-93 MUNHALL CODE § 440-93
1:650
§ 440-94. Classification of historic resources.
Historic resources included in an overlay district may include districts,
individual structures or groups of structures, land or land and structures
in combination, provided that the resource has architectural or historical
significance to the community.
(3) Conduct an inventory and classify historic resources according to
the criteria of this article.
(4) Recommend areas and buildings to the borough councils for
designation as historic overlay districts.
(5) Review and make recommendations to the borough councils on
applications for certificates of appropriateness pursuant to the
requirements of this article.
(6) Develop and recommend to the borough councils specific
guidelines for each historic district prior to the establishment of
such district, delineating specific criteria for the approval of
certificates of appropriateness, in addition to the criteria listed in
this article.
(7) Recommend the establishment of an appropriate system of markers
for selected historic and/or architectural sites, buildings and
structures, including proposals for the installation and care of such
historic markers.
(8) Advise owners of historic buildings on problems and issues of
preservation, renovation, restoration and maintenance.
A. Classification of historic districts.
(1) National Register historic district. An area listed as a historic
district in the National Register of Historic Places.
(2) Certified historic district. An area designated as a historic district
by local ordinance, which has been certified as significant by the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission according to the
provisions of the Historic District Act (Act 167 of 1961).182
(3) Local historic district. An area designated as a historic district by
the Borough Council, which has local historical or architectural
significance but lacks federal or state recognition.
B. Classification of structures within historic districts. Within any historic
overlay district, all principal structures shall be classified based on
their contribution to the overall character and integrity of the district in
the following categories:
182. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 8001 et seq.
§ 440-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-94
1:651
(1) Significant. Structures that are outstanding examples of the
architecture of the district or of major importance in the history of
the district.
(2) Contributing. Structures that may lack individual significance, but
which contribute to the overall historic or architectural character
of the district.
(3) Noncontributing or intrusion. Structures that do not contribute to
the overall historic or architectural character of the district.
C. Classification of historic resources not in historic districts. Individual
structures, groups of structures, land, or land and structures in
combination may be designated by the borough councils by ordinance
as historic resources in the overlay district and shall be subject to the
provisions of this article. In designating properties not listed in historic
districts for inclusion in a historic overlay district, the following kinds of
properties shall be eligible:
(1) Properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
evaluated by the National Park Service or the Pennsylvania History
and Museum Commission as eligible for listing on the National
Register.
(2) Properties identified as having outstanding historic or architectural
significance in a state historic resource survey or other competent
inventory and with the recommendation of the HARB.
D. Procedure for designation.
(1) The Historical Architectural Review Board shall have the
responsibility of recommending to the Borough Council the
adoption of ordinances designating sites or areas as historic
overlay districts.
(2) Prior to the designation of any historic overlay district, the
Historical Architectural Review Board shall submit to the Borough
Council a report and recommendation on the historical and
architectural significance of the site or area to be designated. Such
report shall also attempt to provide an indication of the economic
status of the property or properties under consideration for
designation, including assessed value, recent real estate
transactions or other appropriate data. The report shall also
recommend the boundaries of any proposed historic district and
recommend standards and guidelines for the approval of
certificates of appropriateness in the proposed district.
(3) The recommendation of the Historical Architectural Review Board
shall not become final until it is approved and adopted by the
Borough Council in accordance with the requirements for zoning
amendments under Article XII of this chapter.
§ 440-94 MUNHALL CODE § 440-95
1:652
§ 440-95. Allowable uses.
§ 440-96. Certificate of appropriateness.
For all land and buildings located within a historic overlay district, a
certificate of appropriateness must be approved by the Borough Council
prior to the issuance of any building and/or demolition permit.
A. Permitted uses. All uses allowed as permitted uses in an underlying
zoning district shall be allowed in the Historic Overlay District, subject
to the certificate of appropriateness requirements of § 440-96 and the
requirements of the underlying zoning district.
B. Conditional uses. Any uses allowed as conditional uses in the
underlying zoning districts shall be allowed as conditional uses in the
Historic Overlay District, subject to the requirements of this subsection
and the certificate of appropriateness requirements of § 1440-96 below.
A. Activities requiring a certificate. With the exception of the uses and
activities described in Subsection B, Exempt activities, a certificate of
appropriateness will be required for the following:
(1) The erection of any building or structure, including signs, within a
historic overlay district.
(2) The reconstruction, alteration or restoration of the exterior of any
building or structure within a historic overlay district.
(3) The razing, demolition or movement of any building or structure
within a historic overlay district.
B. Exempt activities. A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required
for alterations to building exteriors or for normal repairs and
maintenance to building exteriors, such as repainting, provided such
repair and maintenance activity does not include any change in color or
any structural alterations.
C. Application requirements. Applications for certificates of
appropriateness required by this section shall be made to the Zoning
Officer on forms provided, together with architectural sketches,
elevations and other information described on the application form.
D. Notice of public meetings. Prior to considering any application for a
certificate of appropriateness required by this section, the Historical
Architectural Review Board shall provide public notice of the date, time
and location of the public meeting at which the Board shall consider the
application for any such certificate. Such notice shall appear at least
one time in a newspaper having general circulation in the Borough and
shall appear no less than seven days prior to the date of such public
meeting.
E. Recommendation by the Historical Architectural Review Board. Within
15 days after the public meeting to consider the application for a
§ 440-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-96
1:653
§ 440-97. Criteria for review.
The recommendation and decision on an application for a certificate of
appropriateness shall be based on the following standards, as is applicable
to the particular activity and/or use of the property and the buildings
thereon:
certificate of appropriateness, the Historical Architectural Review
Board shall submit its written recommendation to the Borough Council.
F. Action by the Borough Council. Within 45 days after receipt of the
recommendation from the Historical Architectural Review Board, or if
no recommendation is received, then 60 days after the public meeting,
the Council shall either:
(1) Issue the certificate of appropriateness.
(2) Issue the certificate of appropriateness subject to reasonable
conditions.
(3) Deny the certificate of appropriateness.
G. Notice of decision. The Borough Council shall notify the applicant of its
decision in writing and, in the case of a denial, specify the reasons
therefor.
A. Standards for new construction. New construction in a historic overlay
district will be certified as appropriate if it is compatible with the scale
and basic design elements of adjacent and neighboring buildings which
are classified as significant and contributing and with distinguishing
site design elements of the district. The intent is not to require or
encourage new buildings to look like old buildings but to assure
pleasing and harmonious relationship between old and new that will
maintain and strengthen the architectural character of the historic
district. The following design elements shall be considered in the
evaluation of the appropriateness of new construction:
(1) Building height. New buildings should be constructed to a
maximum height that is within 10% of the average height of
neighboring buildings.
(2) Elevation proportion. The relationship between the height and
width of the front elevation of a new building should be within 10%
of the average proportions of adjacent buildings.
(3) Proportion of openings. The relationship of height to width of
windows and doors of a building should be within 10% of the
proportions of windows and doors of adjacent buildings.
(4) Spacing of windows and doors. The spacing of windows and doors
in the front facade of a building should be similar to adjacent
buildings.
§ 440-96 MUNHALL CODE § 440-97
1:654
(5) Horizontal lines. Header and sill lines of a building should be
located at similar heights or elevations as the horizontal lines of
adjacent buildings.
(6) Spacing of buildings on street. Setbacks and side yards of new
buildings should be similar to those on adjacent parcels. Placement
of sidewalks and projections of porches should be similar to
adjacent buildings.
(7) Roofs. The shape, style and material of the roof of a new building
should be similar to the roofs of adjacent and surrounding
buildings.
(8) Building materials. Building materials should be compatible with
materials commonly used within the historic district.
(9) Color. The predominant color of a building and the color of its trim
should be compatible with the colors of surrounding buildings.
(10) Architectural details. The use of specific architectural elements
and details such as porches, dormers, cornices, brackets, quoins,
balustrades and the like may be used to strengthen the relationship
of new construction to the existing architecture of the district;
however, such detailing is not sufficient to assure appropriateness
if the structure is not related to its surroundings in terms of
massing, rhythm and proportions.
(11) Landscaping. The use of plant materials that are traditional in the
district should be encouraged. Similarly encouraged is the use of
paving and fence materials that are traditional in the district.
B. Standards for rehabilitation. The following "Standards for
Rehabilitation" shall be used by the Historical Architectural Review
Board when determining if a rehabilitation project is appropriate.
These standards are a section of the Secretary of the Interior's
"Standards for Historic Preservation Projects" and appear in Title 36 of
the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 1208 (formerly 36 CFR Part
67).183
(1) Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use
for a property which requires minimal alteration of the building,
structure or site and its environment, or to use a property for its
originally intended purpose.
(2) The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building,
structure or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The
removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive
architectural features should be avoided when possible.
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-97
1:655
(3) All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as products
of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and
which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.
(4) Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure or
site and its environment. These changes may have acquired
significance in their own right, and this significance shall be
recognized and respected.
(5) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
which characterize a building, structure or site shall be treated
with sensitivity.
(6) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary,
the new material should match the material being replaced in
composition, design, color, texture and district, unless excepted
under the provisions of this subsection hereunder and with the
additional special standards for signs contained elsewhere in this
chapter.
(a) A sign which meets the requirements of the underlying district
must still be certified as appropriate in relation to the specific
building on which it is to be located and in terms of
compatibility with signs in the surrounding area; compliance
with the underlying zoning district requirements does not
guarantee approval of a certificate of appropriateness.
C. Standards for demolition or relocation of structures.
(1) In the case of a building to be razed, demolished or moved, the
Historical Architectural Review Board and the Borough Council
shall consider the extent to which the loss of the building will
detract from the Historic Overlay District and the purposes of this
section and the public benefit to be gained by preserving the
building or district in comparison to any loss or hardship to be
suffered by the property owner.
(2) If the initial recommendation of the Review Board is against the
proposed demolition, a period of 90 days shall be provided during
which the Review Board shall attempt to negotiate with the
applicant in order to achieve an acceptable alternative to the
proposed demolition. If agreement is not reached by end of the
ninety-day period, the Review Board shall transmit its negative
recommendation to the Borough Council, which shall issue or deny
a certificate of appropriateness based on its consideration of all of
the information presented. If the Borough Council authorizes
issuance of a permit for demolition after a negative
recommendation from the Review Board, a permit shall not be
issued for 10 days, during which time the Historical Architectural
Review Board may request and the Borough Council may order that
§ 440-97 MUNHALL CODE § 440-97
1:656
§ 440-98. Demolition by neglect.
§ 440-99. Enforcement.
issuance of a permit be delayed for an additional 90 days in order
to allow documentation of the resource prior to its destruction.
A. Condition. No person owning any building or structure within the
Historic Overlay District shall permit or cause such building or
structure to suffer demolition by neglect.
B. Definition. "Demolition by neglect" exists where there is:
(1) Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports, roofs or
other horizontal members and external chimneys such that the
structural integrity of the building may be threatened or
compromised.
(2) Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs and foundations
causing or contributing to the deterioration specified in Subsection
B(1) above.
(3) Creation of any hazardous or unsafe condition or conditions.
A. Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have
such power to institute a proceeding at law or in equity to enforce the
provisions of this article as is provided elsewhere in the Code of the
Borough.
B. Fines.
(1) Any person demolishing or razing or causing the demolition or
razing of all or part of any building or structure without first
obtaining a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with this
article shall be fined $500.
(2) Any person permitting or causing demolition by neglect shall be
subject to a fine of $100 per day for every day that said condition
remains unabated or uncorrected after having received written
notice of such condition from the Borough.
§ 440-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-99
1:657

ARTICLE XV
Local Historic District
[Added 3-21-2001 by Ord. No. 1467]
§ 440-100. Designation of districts.
A. Purpose. Structures or districts with special historic, cultural,
architectural or educational significance enhance the quality of life for
all residents of the Borough of Munhall, Allegheny County and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Accordingly, the purpose of the
Historic Overlay District(s) are:
(1) To protect that portion(s) of the Borough reflecting the cultural,
economic, social, political and architectural history of the Borough
of Munhall, Allegheny County, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
and the nation.
(2) To preserve property values, attract future residents and
strengthen the local economy.
(3) To foster public education, awareness of local history and civic
pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past.
(4) To establish special development requirements and procedures to
assure that new construction, reconstruction, alteration,
rehabilitation, restoration or demolition of buildings within the
district(s) enhances the character of the district(s).
B. Boundaries. The boundaries of the Local Historic District are the same
as the boundaries of the National Historic District as listed on the
National Register of Historic Places. These boundaries are as follows:
(1) Beginning at the point of intersection of the southerly right-of-way
line of Boon Way and the westerly right-of-way line of Andrew
Street; thence southwardly along the said westerly right-of-way
line of Andrew Street to its point of intersection with the northerly
right-of-way line of Brush Way; thence westwardly along said
southerly right-of-way line of Brush Way to its point of intersection
with the extended easterly property line of 601 East Tenth Avenue;
thence southwardly along the said easterly property line of 601
East Tenth Avenue to its point of intersection with the northerly
right-of-way line of East Tenth Avenue to its point of intersection
with the extended westerly right-of-way line of Louise Street;
thence southwardly along the westerly right-of-way line of Louise
Street to its point of intersection with the northerly right-of-way
line of East Twelfth Avenue; thence generally westwardly along the
northerly right-of-way line of East Twelfth Avenue to its point of
intersection with the easterly right-of-way line of Stark Way to its
point of intersection with the southerly property line of 410 East
Eleventh Avenue; thence southwardly along the said property line
to its point of intersection with the property line separating 410
§ 440-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-100
1:659
East Eleventh Avenue and 1110 McClure Street; then
northwestwardly along said property line to its point of intersection
with the southerly property line of 1110 McClure Street; thence
southwestwardly along said property line extended to the center
line of McClure Street, which is also the municipal boundary line
separating the Borough of Homestead and the Borough of Munhall;
thence northwestwardly along the said center line/Borough line to
its point of intersection with the center line of East Eighth Avenue,
which is also the municipal boundary line separating the Borough
of Homestead and the Borough of Munhall; thence eastwardly
along the said center line/Borough line to its point of intersection
with the extended easterly right-of-way line of Library Place;
thence southwardly along the said easterly right-of-way line of
Library Place to its point of intersection with the southerly right-ofway
line of Boon Way; thence eastwardly along the said southerly
right-of-way line of Boon Way to its point of intersection with the
westerly right-of-way line of Andrew Street, the point of beginning.
(2) Beginning at the existing boundary of the Munhall Local Historic
District at the intersection of Andrew Street and Brush Way; thence
southward along the center line of Andrew Street to the
intersection of Andrew Street and Park Way; thence along the
center line of Martha Street to the intersection of Bluff Way; thence
westward along the center line of Park Way eastward to the
intersection of Park Way and Martha Street; thence along the
center line of Martha Street southward to the intersection of
Martha Street and East Twelfth Avenue; thence along the center
line of East Twelfth Avenue westward to the existing boundary of
the Munhall Historic District at the intersection of East Twelfth
Avenue and Louise Street. [Added 1-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1517]
(3) Beginning at the existing boundary of the Munhall Local Historic
District at the intersection of Margaret Street and Twelfth Avenue;
thence eastward along the center line of Twelfth Avenue to the
intersection of Twelfth Avenue and Martha Street; thence
southward along the center line of Martha Street to the
intersection of Bluff Way; thence westward along the center line of
Bluff Way to the intersection of Bluff Way and Louise Street; thence
along westward crossing over Louise Street and proceeding along
the southerly property line of 514, 512, 510 and 508 East Twelfth
Avenue to the intersection of Blake Way; thence westward crossing
over Blake Way and proceeding along the southerly property lines
of 506, 504 and 500 East Twelfth Avenue to the intersection of
Margaret Street; thence northward along the center line of
Margaret Street back to the existing boundary of the Munhall
Historic District at the intersection of Margaret Street and Twelfth
Avenue. Also, beginning at the existing boundary of the Munhall
Historic District at the intersection of Twelfth Avenue and Stark
Way; thence westward along the center line of Twelfth Avenue to
the intersection of Twelfth Avenue and McClure Street; thence
§ 440-100 MUNHALL CODE § 440-100
1:660
§ 440-101. Historical Architectural Review Board.
A historical architectural review board (HARB) is hereby created, subject to
the following requirements:
northward along the center line of McClure Street to the existing
boundary of the Munhall Historic District to the point of
intersection of McClure Street and property line of 1101 McClure
Street. [Added 2-21-2007 by Ord. No. 1518]
A. Membership.
(1) The Historical Architectural Review Board shall be a joint
municipal board of the Boroughs of Homestead, West Homestead
and Munhall. Members shall be appointed by the borough councils.
It shall be composed of not less than 11 members. One member
shall be a registered architect appointed at large by the three
borough councils, one member shall be a licensed real estate
broker appointed at large by the three borough councils, one shall
be a building inspector or borough engineer of each of the three
boroughs, and the remaining six members shall be two persons
from each of the three boroughs who are residents of the borough
and who have knowledge of and interest in the preservation of
historic districts.
(2) Each Board member shall serve a term of three years and may be
reappointed for an unlimited number of terms by the borough
councils. Board members shall serve without compensation, but
shall be reimbursed for any personal expenditures in the conduct of
HARB business.
(3) Board members are required to disqualify themselves from voting
on any project in which their own financial interests are directly or
indirectly involved.
B. Meetings.
(1) The Historical Architectural Review Board shall meet monthly at a
regularly prescribed date and meeting place and at other times as
its Chairperson may deem necessary. All meetings of the HARB
shall be open to the public. A simple majority of the HARB shall
constitute a quorum, and action taken at any meeting shall require
the affirmative vote of a majority of the Board members present.
(2) The HARB shall adopt such rules and regulations as it considers
necessary in the administration of its duties. It shall keep minutes
of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or if absent to vote, indicating such fact. It shall keep
records of its hearings and other official actions, all of which shall
be immediately filed with the Borough Secretary and shall be a
public record.
§ 440-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-101
1:661
§ 440-102. Classification of historic resources.
Historic resources included in a historic district may include individual
structures or groups of structures, land or land and structures in
combination, provided that the resource has architectural or historical
significance to the community.
(3) The HARB shall prepare an annual report of its activities and
present it to the borough councils by February 1 of each year.
C. Powers and duties. The HARB shall have the power and duty to:
(1) Coordinate local historic preservation efforts with those of the
Pennsylvania History and Museum Commission and the National
Trust for Historic Preservation.
(2) Sponsor public information activities, when deemed appropriate,
publicizing historic preservation efforts, including speaking
engagements, press releases, the preparation and publication of
maps, brochures and descriptive materials in the Boroughs, etc.
(3) Conduct an inventory and classify historic resources according to
the criteria in this article.
(4) Recommend areas and buildings to the borough council(s) for
designation as local historic districts.
(5) Review and make recommendations to the borough council(s) on
applications for certificates of appropriateness pursuant to the
requirements of this article.
(6) Develop and recommend to the borough council(s) specific
guidelines for each historic district prior to the establishment of
such district, delineating specific criteria for the approval of
certificates of appropriateness, in addition to the criteria listed in
this article.
(7) To recommend the establishment of an appropriate system of
markers for selected historic and/or architectural sites, buildings
and structures, including proposals for the installation and care of
such historic markers.
(8) To advise owners of historic buildings on problems and issues of
preservation, renovation, restoration and maintenance.
A. Classification of historic districts. The following kinds of districts may
be included in a historic district established by the Borough Council:
(1) National Register historic district. An area listed as a historic
district on the National Register of Historic Places.
(2) Local historic district. An area designated as a historic district by
local ordinance which has been certified as significant by the
§ 440-101 MUNHALL CODE § 440-102
1:662
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission according to the
provisions of the Historic District Act (Act 167 of 1961).184
B. Classification of structures within historic districts. Within any historic
district, all principal structures shall be classified based on their
contribution to the overall character and integrity of the district in the
following categories:
(1) Significant. Structures that are outstanding examples of the
architecture of the district or of major importance in the history of
the district.
(2) Contributing. Structures that may lack individual significance, but
which contribute to the overall historic or architectural character
of the district.
(3) Noncontributing or intrusion. Structures that do not contribute to
the overall historic or architectural character of the district.
C. Classification of historic resources not in historic districts. Individual
structures, groups of structures, land or land and structures in
combination may be designated by the borough council(s) by ordinance
as historic resources in the historic district and shall be subject to the
provisions of this article. In designating properties not listed in historic
districts for inclusion in a local historic district, the following kinds of
properties shall be eligible:
(1) Properties on the National Register of Historic Places or evaluated
by the National Park Service or the Pennsylvania History and
Museum Commission as eligible for listing on the National
Register.
(2) Properties identified as having outstanding historic or architectural
significance in a state historic resource survey or other competent
inventory and with the recommendation of the HARB.
D. Procedure for designation.
(1) The Historical Architectural Review Board shall have the
responsibility of recommending to the Borough Council the
adoption of ordinances designating sites or areas as historic
overlay districts.
(2) Prior to the designation of any local historic district, the Historical
Architectural Review Board shall submit to the Borough Council a
report and recommendation on the historical and architectural
significance of the site or area to be designated. Such report shall
also attempt to provide an indication of the economic status of the
property or properties under consideration for designation,
including assessed value, recent real estate transactions or other
184. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 8001 et seq.
§ 440-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-102
1:663
§ 440-103. Allowable uses.
§ 440-104. Certificate of appropriateness.
For all land and buildings located within a local historic district, a certificate
of appropriateness must be approved by the Borough Council prior to the
issuance of a building and/or demolition permit:
appropriate data. The report shall also recommend the boundaries
of any proposed historic district and recommend standards and
guidelines for the approval of certificates of appropriateness in the
proposed district.
(3) The recommendation of the Historical Architectural Review Board
shall not become final until it is approved and adopted by the
Borough Council.
A. Permitted uses. All uses as permitted uses in the appropriate zoning
district shall be allowed in the Local Historic District, subject to the
certificate of appropriateness requirements of § 440-104 and the
requirements of that zoning district.
B. Conditional uses. Any uses allowed as conditional uses in the
appropriate zoning districts shall be allowed as conditional uses in the
Local Historic District, subject to the requirements of this subsection
and the certificate of appropriateness requirements of § 440-104 below.
A. Activities requiring a certificate. With the exception of the uses and
activities described in Subsection B, Exempt activities, a certificate of
appropriateness will be required for the following:
(1) The erection of any building or structure, including signs, within
the Local Historic District.
(2) The reconstruction, alteration or restoration of the exterior of any
building or structure within the Local Historic District.
(3) The razing, demolition or movement of any building or structure
within the Local Historic District.
B. Exempt activities. A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required
for alterations to building interiors or for normal repairs and
maintenance to building exteriors, such as repainting, provided such
repair and maintenance activity does not include any change in color or
any structural alterations.
C. Application requirements. Applications for certificates of
appropriateness required by this section shall be made to the Zoning
Officer on forms provided, together with architectural sketches,
elevations and other information described on the application form.
D. Notice of public meetings. Prior to considering any application for a
certificate of appropriateness required by this section, the Historical
§ 440-102 MUNHALL CODE § 440-104
1:664
§ 440-105. Criteria for review.
The recommendation and decision on an application for a certificate of
appropriateness shall be based on the following standards as is applicable
to the particular activity and/or use of the property and the buildings
thereon.
Architectural Review Board shall provide public notice of the date, time
and location of the public meeting at which the Board shall consider the
application for any such certificate. Such notice shall appear at least
one time in a newspaper having general circulation in the Borough and
shall appear no less than seven days prior to the date of such public
meeting.
E. Recommendation by the Historical Architectural Review Board. Within
30 days after the public meeting to consider the application for a
certificate of appropriateness, the Historical Architectural Review
Board shall submit its written recommendation to the Borough Council.
F. Action by the Borough Council. After receipt of the recommendation
from the Historical Architectural Review Board, or if no
recommendation is received, then 60 days after the public meeting, the
Borough Council shall at its next regularly scheduled Council meeting
either:
(1) Issue the certificate of appropriateness.
(2) Issue the certificate of appropriateness subject to reasonable
conditions.
(3) Deny the certificate of appropriateness.
G. Notice of decision. The Borough Council shall notify the applicant of its
decision in writing and, in the case of a denial, specify the reasons
therefor, in writing, and will send a copy to the Pennsylvania Historical
and Museum Commission. In the letter of disapproval, it shall indicate
what changes in plans and specifications are necessary to meet the
conditions for protecting:
(1) The distinctive historical character of the district.
(2) The architectural integrity of the building or structure.
A. Standards for new construction. New construction in the Local Historic
District will be certified as appropriate if it is compatible with the scale
and basic design elements of adjacent and neighboring buildings which
are classified as significant and contributing and with distinguishing
site design elements of the district. The intent is not to require or
encourage new buildings to look like old buildings, but to assure
pleasing and harmonious relationship between old and new that will
maintain and strengthen the architectural character of the Historic
§ 440-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-105
1:665
District. The following design elements shall be considered in the
evaluation of the appropriateness of new construction:
(1) Building height. New buildings should be constructed to a
maximum height that is within 10% of the average height of
neighboring buildings.
(2) Elevation proportion. The relationship between the height and
width of the front elevation of a new building should be within 10%
of the average proportions of adjacent buildings.
(3) Proportion of openings. The relationship of height to width of
windows and doors of a building should be within 10% of the
proportions of windows and doors of adjacent buildings.
(4) Spacing of windows and doors. The spacing of windows and doors
in the front facade of a building should be similar to adjacent
buildings.
(5) Horizontal lines. Header and sill lines of a building should be
located at similar heights or elevations as the horizontal lines of
adjacent buildings.
(6) Spacing of buildings on street. Setbacks and side yards of new
buildings should be similar to those on adjacent parcels. Placement
of sidewalks and projection of porches should be similar to adjacent
buildings.
(7) Roofs. The shape, style and material of the roof of a new building
should be similar to the roofs of adjacent and surrounding
buildings.
(8) Building materials. Building materials should be compatible with
materials commonly used within the Historic District.
(9) Color. The predominant color of a building and the color of its trim
should be compatible with the colors of surrounding buildings.
(10) Architectural details. The use of specific architectural elements
and details such as porches, dormers, cornices, brackets, quoins,
balustrades and the like may be used to strengthen the relationship
of new construction to the existing architecture of the district.
However, such detailing is not sufficient to assure appropriateness
if the structure is not related to its surroundings in terms of
massing, rhythm and proportions.
(11) Landscaping. The use of plant materials that are traditional in the
district should be encouraged. Similarly encouraged is the use of
paving and fence materials that are traditional in the district.
B. Standards for rehabilitation. Except as provided in Subsection C below,
the following "Standards for Rehabilitation" shall be used by the
Historical Architectural Review Board when determining if a
§ 440-105 MUNHALL CODE § 440-105
1:666
rehabilitation project is appropriate. These standards are a section of
the Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for Historic Preservation
Projects," and appear in Title 36 of the Code of Federal Regulations,
Part 1208 (formerly 36 CFR, Part 67):
(1) Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use
for a property which requires minimal alteration of the building,
structure or site and its environment or to use a property for its
originally intended purpose.
(2) The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building,
structure or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The
removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive
architectural features should be avoided when possible.
(3) All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as products
of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and
which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.
(4) Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure or
site and its environment. These changes may have acquired
significance in their own right, and this significance shall be
recognized and respected.
(5) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
which characterize a building, structure or site shall be treated
with sensitivity.
(6) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary,
the new material should match the material being replaced in
composition, design, color, texture and other visual qualities.
Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be
based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by
historic, physical or pictorial evidence, rather than on conjectural
designs or the availability of different architectural elements from
other buildings and structures.
(7) The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods
that will damage the historic building materials shall not be
undertaken.
(8) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archaeological resources affected by or adjacent to any project.
(9) Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing
properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and
additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or
cultural material and such design is compatible with the size, scale,
§ 440-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-105
1:667
color, material and character of the property, neighborhood or
environment.
(10) Whenever possible, new additions or alterations to structures shall
be done in such a manner that, if such additions or alterations were
to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the
structure would be unimpaired.
C. Standards for additions to noncontributing structures. The
appropriateness of additions to noncontributing structures in local
historic districts shall be judged primarily in terms of their visual
impact on nearby properties. Additions should generally be certified as
appropriate if their size is minor in relation to the total structure and if
they do not significantly increase the visual appearance of
incompatibility between the noncontributing structure and neighboring
structures which are contributing or significant.
D. Standards for signs. All signs within the Local Historic District shall
comply with the sign regulations which are applicable in the underlying
zoning districts, unless excepted under the provisions of this subsection
hereunder and with the additional special standards for signs contained
elsewhere in this chapter.
(1) A sign which meets the requirements of the applicable district must
still be certified as appropriate in relation to the specific building
on which it is to be located and in terms of compatibility with signs
in the surrounding area; compliance with the applicable zoning
district requirements does not guarantee approval of certificate of
appropriateness.
(2) The Historical Architectural Review Board may recommend and the
Borough Council may issue a certificate of appropriateness for a
sign which is not permitted by the regulations of the applicable
zoning district if the proposed sign is shown to be historically
accurate by documentation acceptable to the HARB.
E. Standards for demolition or relocation of structures.
(1) In the case of a building to be razed, demolished or moved, the
Historical Architectural Review Board and the Borough Council
shall consider the extent to which the loss of the building will
detract from the Local Historic District and the purposes of this
section and the public benefit to be gained by preserving the
building or district in comparison to any loss or hardship to be
suffered by the property owner.
(2) If the initial recommendation of the Review Board is against the
proposed demolition, a period of 90 days shall be provided during
which the Review Board shall attempt to negotiate with the
applicant in order to achieve an acceptable alternative to the
proposed demolition. If agreement is not reached by end of the
ninety-day period, the Review Board shall transmit its negative
§ 440-105 MUNHALL CODE § 440-105
1:668
§ 440-106. Demolition by neglect.
§ 440-107. Enforcement.
recommendation to the Borough Council, which shall issue or deny
a certificate of appropriateness based on its consideration of all
of the information presented. If the Borough Council authorizes
issuance of a permit for demolition after a negative
recommendation from the Review Board, a permit shall not be
issued for 10 days, during which time the Historical Architectural
Review Board may request and the Borough Council may order that
issuance of a permit be delayed for an additional 90 days in order
to allow documentation of the resource prior to its destruction.
A. Condition. No person owning any building or structure within the Local
Historic District shall permit or cause such building or structure to
suffer demolition by neglect.
B. Definition. "demolition by neglect" exists where there is:
(1) Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports, roofs or
other horizontal members and external chimneys such that the
structural integrity of the building may be threatened or
compromised.
(2) Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs and foundations
causing or contributing to the deterioration specified in Subsection
B(1) above.
(3) Significant rotting and other forms of decay.
(4) Creation of any hazardous or unsafe condition or conditions.
A. Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have
such power to institute a proceeding at law or in equity to enforce the
provisions of this article as is provided elsewhere in the Code of the
Borough.
B. Fines. The Borough Council shall establish and update by resolution a
schedule of fees and a collection procedure relating to this article.
(1) Any person demolishing or razing or causing the demolition or
razing of all or part of any building or structure without first
obtaining a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with this
article shall be fined.
(2) Any person permitting or causing demolition by neglect shall be
subject to a fine per day for every day that said condition remains
unabated or uncorrected after having received written notice of
such condition from the Borough.
§ 440-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-107
1:669
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1559 1-16-2013 Tax rate 2013 NCM
1560 1-16-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 440
1561 11-20-2013 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 440, table only
1562 1-28-2014 Tax rate 2014 NCM
1563 Not adopted
1564 9-17-2014 Pension Plan NCM
1565 9-17-2014 Floodplain management Ch. 227
1566 9-17-2014 Authorization to enforce
storm drain regulations
NCM
1567 Not adopted
1568 10-15-2014 Pension Plan NCM
1569 12-30-2014 Tax rate 2014 NCM
1570 1-21-2015 Notification of lost or
stolen firearms repealer
Ch. 203, Art. I,
reference only
1571 3-18-2015 Parks and Recreation
Board
Ch. 46
1572 6-17-2016 Parks and Recreation
Board amendment
Ch. 46
1573 9-16-2015 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
1574 11-18-2015 Animal nuisances Ch. 123, Art. III
1575 11-4-2015 Repeal of Ord. No. 1313 NCM
1576 12-16-2015 Tax rate 2016 NCM
1577 7-8-2016 Use fee structure for West
Field
NCM
1578 3-16-2016 Tax certification
amendment
Ch. 394, Art. II
1579 9-21-2016 Sanitary sewer certificate
amendment
Ch. 350, Art. VII
§ 440-107 MUNHALL CODE § DL-1
1:670
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1580 9-21-2016 Stormwater discharge into
sanitary sewer
amendment
Ch. 350, Art. VIII
1581 7-20-2016 Solid waste: recycling
amendment
Ch. 373, Art. III
1582 8-17-2016 Pension Plan NCM
1583 10-19-2016 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 440, table only
1584 10-19-2016 Taking of land for public
purpose
NCM
1585 2-15-2017 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
1586 3-15-2017 Salaries and
compensation: Tax
Collector's commission
amendment
Ch. 75, Art. I
1587 6-21-2017 Pension Plan NCM
1588 12-20-2017 Tax Rate NCM
1589 Tax Rate NCM
1590 6-20-2018 Retirement Incentive NCM
1591 11-21-2018 Stormwater Management
Amendment
Ch. 379
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
1592 12-19-2018 Intergovernmental
Agreement
NCM 4
1593 12-19-2018 Tax Rate 2019 NCM 4
1594 7-17-2019 Retirement Plan NCM 4
1595 Not adopted
1596 10-16-2019 Municipal Claims
and Liens
Amendment
Ch. 282 4
1597 10-16-2019 Code Enforcement Ch. 165 4
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:671