Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-2-1990 by Ord. No. O-90-1, approved 7-2-1990]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)], the
codification of a complete body of ordinances for the Borough of Marcus
Hook, County of Delaware, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised,
codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General
Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 1 through 196, together
with an Appendix, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as
a single ordinance of the Borough of Marcus Hook, which shall be known
and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Borough of Marcus Hook,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Borough Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook, and it is
the intention of said Borough Council that each such provision contained
within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said
Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this
Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3
below, and only changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be
deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in
§ 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Borough of Marcus Hook and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to October 2, 1989.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond of the Borough, or other instruments
or evidence of the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances of the Borough for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended
to read as such.
B. General deletions.
(1) Sections pertaining to severability, effective dates and repeals have
been deleted, since such provisions are included in this ordinance
or are of no further effect.
C. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, the following changes and revisions of a
substantive nature are hereby made to various ordinances included in
the Code. These changes are made to bring provisions into conformity
with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is the intent of
the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally
amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be
deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-15 and are as follows:1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-6C, the following sections were added or amended:
§§ 34-2B, 48-5, 116-6B, 116-16G, 180-1, 180-2, 180-3, 180-6, 180-8, 180-23B, 188-3,
188-10, 196-14 and A199-9. The following chapters were adopted: Chs. 16, 111, 121, 142,
145, 178 and 191. The complete text of these changes is on file in the office of the
Borough Secretary.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Two copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Borough
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to the effective date
of this codification which the Borough shall adopt specifically as part of
the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code, or in supplements made to the Code, are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
ordinances.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
ordinances.
§ 1-7 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 1-11
1:6
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
books, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the maximum penalty
provided by law.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article or part
thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the
Borough Council that this ordinance and the Code would have been adopted
if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection,
section, article or part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after July 2, 1990.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
Chapter 5
AUDITOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions and retirement — See Ch. 31.
Purchasing — See Ch. 40.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 48.
§ 5-1. Appointment.
An independent auditor, who shall be a certified public accountant
registered in Pennsylvania, a firm of certified public accountants so
registered or a competent public accountant or a competent firm of public
accountants, is hereby appointed to make an annual independent
examination of the accounting records of the Borough.
§ 5-2. Time of appointment.
Such independent accountant shall be appointed annually by resolution
before the close of each fiscal year.
§ 5-3. Additional duties.
Such independent accountant shall also perform the other duties and
exercise the powers as conferred upon him by Subdivision (k) of Article XI
of the Borough Code, Section 1196 (53 P.S. § 46196).
Chapter 10
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police services — See Ch. 37.
§ 10-1. Commission created.
A Civil Service Commission is hereby created in the Borough to consist
of three Commissioners, who shall have all of the rights, powers and
authorities given to or imposed upon such a Commission by the Act of
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania approved the fifth
day of June 1941.2
2. Editor's Note: The Act referred to, which provided for police civil service, was included in
53 P.S. § 53251 et seq. Its provisions were repealed as to Boroughs by Act 1947, July 10,
P.L. 1621, § 95. Pertinent provisions are now included in 53 P.S. § 46171 et seq, which
provides for civil service for police and firemen.
§ 1-15 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 10-2
5:8
§ 10-2. Appointment of members.
The following duly qualified electors of the Borough are hereby appointed
as members of the said Commission, to serve for the terms designated:
Chapter 14
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN
§ 14-1. Adoption of plan; location of original.
The Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook does hereby approve, adopt and
place into immediate effect the Emergency Operations Plan of the Borough
of Marcus Hook, the original of which shall be kept at the Municipal
Building and copies thereof placed in the Police Department and Library.
The plan shall be revised on an annual basis to make certain it conforms to
the requirements of the Delaware County Emergency Operations Plan.
Chapter 15
ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 16
Recreation and Park Board — See Ch. 45.
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 51.
Junk dealers and junkyards — See Ch. 116.
§ 15-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known or may be cited by the title of "Environmental
Advisory Council Ordinance of the Borough of Marcus Hook."
§ 15-2. Council created; membership; appointment.
A. William J. Haebel, Jr., of the Fourth Ward of the said Borough, to serve
for the term of two years.
B. Albert L. Amis of the Third Ward of the said Borough, to serve for the
term of four years.
C. Emory L. Harris of the Fourth Ward of the said Borough, to serve for the
term of six years.
A. The Borough of Marcus Hook hereby creates an Environmental
Advisory Council, jointly with the communities of Lower Chichester
Township and Trainer Borough and shall continue to function until this
chapter is revoked.
§ 10-2 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN § 15-2
14:9
§ 15-3. Advisory function.
The Environmental Advisory Council is to be advisory to and shall
coordinate its activities with elected officials, planning commissions,
recreation and park boards and other such local government agencies
within the municipalities of Marcus Hook Borough, Lower Chichester
Township and Trainer Borough.
§ 15-4. Meetings.
Meetings of the Council shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at
such other times as the Council shall determine. All meetings of the Council
shall be open to the public. The Council shall keep records of its meetings
and activities and shall make an annual report to be made available to the
governing bodies of the three municipalities.
§ 15-5. Powers and duties.
The Environmental Advisory Council shall have the following powers and
duties:
B. The Environmental Advisory Council shall be composed of six members,
two residents representing each of the three municipalities.
C. Council members shall be appointed in accordance with the following
procedures:
(1) Each governing body shall appoint two members to the Council.
(2) Council members terms of office shall expire on the first Monday in
January following the last year of their term of office.
(3) Duly appointed Council members shall serve a term of three years,
except that initial appointment shall be so staggered that the terms
of 1/3 of the membership shall expire each year.
A. To identify environmental problems.
B. To recommend plans and programs to the appropriate agencies for the
promotion and conservation of the natural resources and for the
protection and improvement of the quality of the environment within
the area of the three municipalities.
C. To make recommendations as to the appropriate use of open land areas.
D. To promote a community environmental program.
E. To work cooperatively with private, commercial and industrial entities
in the area to better understand potential environmental impacts of
private sector actions and coordinate activities to minimize them.
§ 15-2 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 15-5
15:10
Chapter 15A
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 96.
§ 15A-1. Fire Department recognized. [Amended 1-2-2007 by Ord.
No. O-07-1, approved 1-2-2007]
The Marcus Hook Trainer Fire Department, organized and existing in the
Borough of Marcus Hook, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, is hereby
designated as the officially recognized Fire Department for the Borough.
§ 15A-2. Authorized activities.
F. To keep an index of all open areas publicly or privately owned, including
but not limited to flood-prone areas, wetlands and other unique natural
areas.
G. To advise the appropriate local government agencies in the acquisition
of property, both real and personal.
H. To undertake such environmental tasks as requested by the governing
bodies of the three municipalities.
A. The Fire Department authorized by the Borough is hereby authorized to
provide such services to the Borough as may be necessary for the
protection of property and persons situated therein, which include, by
way of example and not of limitation, the extinguishment and
prevention of loss of life and property from fire, automobile accidents,
medical emergencies, hazardous materials incidents and other
dangerous situations.
B. The Department may also provide nonemergency and public service
functions, such as, again by way of example and not of limitation,
removing water from property after storms, and assisting in the
removal, abatement and prevention of damage or injury to persons or
property, whether through natural causes or man-made situations.
C. The Department may also conduct and participate in such training
activities and drills, either within or outside of the Borough, as may be
deemed necessary by the officers of the Department to maintain
proficiency in providing service.
D. The Department may also respond to calls and provide services to
municipalities outside of the Borough.
§ 15-5 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 15A-3
15A:11
§ 15A-3. Authorized activities of members.
In addition to actually participating in the activities of the Fire Department
as authorized above, or in going to or returning from any activity, the
members of the Fire Department recognized by the Borough are also
authorized to do the following things:
Chapter 16
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 16, Board of Health, adopted 7-2-1990 by Ord. No.
O-90-1, approved 7-2-1990, was repealed 12-3-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-5, approved 12-3-2018.]
Chapter 17
HISTORICAL COMMISSION
§ 17-1. Declaration of public policy.
It is declared as a matter of public policy that the preservation and
protection of historic resources are public necessities and are in the interest
of the health, prosperity and welfare of the citizens of the Borough of
Marcus Hook, that the Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook does, this
date, enact and create the Borough of Marcus Hook Historical Commission,
as permitted by Section 1202(48) and (78) of the Pennsylvania Borough
Code, codified at 53 P.S. § 46202, as well as 53 P.S. § 8001 et seq., permitting
boroughs and other political subdivisions to protect the historical character
of their communities.
§ 17-2. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are:
A. Engage in any type of drill, training, ceremony, practice, test or parade
when duly called for or authorized by an officer or officers of the Fire
Department.
B. Engage in fund-raising activities for the Fire Department, when
authorized by an officer or officers of the Fire Department.
C. Engage in the performance of any other duty or activity authorized by
any officer of the recognized Fire Department.
A. To promote the general welfare by protecting the integrity of the
historic resources of the Borough of Marcus Hook;
B. To mitigate the negative effects of proposed changes upon historic
resources;
§ 15A-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 17-2
17:12
§ 17-3. Establishment of Historical Commission; membership;
terms; vacancies.
There shall be a Borough of Marcus Hook Historical Commission which
shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by Borough Council.
The membership of the Commission shall include individuals who have
interest in history, archaeology or historic preservation. Each Commission
member shall serve for a term of two years. The Commission shall notify
Borough Council of any vacancies within the Commission, and Council shall
act within 90 days to fill those vacancies. Appointments to fill vacancies
for unexpired terms shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term.
Commission members shall serve without pay, but shall be reimbursed
for any personal expenditures during the conduct of Commission business
when authorized by Borough Council.
§ 17-4. Organization; procedures; meetings; records.
The Commission shall annually elect from its own membership a Chairman
who will direct the activities of the Commission and such other officers as
may be required for the conduct of its business. A quorum shall be not
less than a majority of the current membership. The Commission may issue,
alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedures consistent with the
C. To encourage the continuation of historical resources and facilitate
their appropriate reuse;
D. To promote among residents of the Borough a knowledge of the history
of the community and an appreciation for the accomplishment of its
citizens;
E. To collect and preserve materials of historic value related to the
Borough;
F. To encourage research into the history of the Borough with a view to
discovering previously unknown facts concerning the Borough's
history;
G. To identify buildings and sites of historic interest and significance in the
Borough for the purposes of national registration;
H. To facilitate the efforts of Borough residents engaged in genealogical
research into family histories;
I. To encourage the preservation of historic settings and landscapes;
J. To discourage the unnecessary demolition or deterioration of historic
resources; and
K. To implement the goals of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania at Article I, Section 27 establishing the policy of this
commonwealth of encouraging the preservation of historic and
aesthetic resources.
§ 17-2 HISTORICAL COMMISSION § 17-4
17:13
ordinances of this Borough and laws and regulations of the commonwealth.
The Commission shall conduct business at regular public meetings. An
agenda of each public meeting may be available for inspection prior to
the meeting. The Commission shall keep full public records of its business
and shall submit a report of its activities to Borough Council by the first
Wednesday of October of each year.
§ 17-5. Expenditures for services.
Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Borough Council, the
Commission may employ staff or contract for clerical, consulting, or other
technical services. The Commission may also raise funds or monies through
sales of publications respecting the history of the Borough of Marcus Hook
and/or articles or mementos relative to the history of the Borough, or any
and all other such similar types of fund-raising activities. Any funds raised in
excess of the yearly budget for the Commission as determined by Borough
Council shall be returned to the Borough Treasurer in order to be used for
appropriations for the Commission in the following year or future years.
§ 17-6. Functions and duties.
In accordance with the purposes of this chapter, the Commission shall have
the following functions and duties:
A. Maintain a system for the survey and inventory of historic buildings,
sites, structures, objects and districts within the Borough of Marcus
Hook.
B. To conduct research upon and nominate significant resources to the
National Register of Historic Places and any other appropriate lists or
programs.
C. To conduct research upon and nominate significant historic resources
for inclusion within any lists or signage maintained or erected by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Historical and Museum Commission.
D. To promote among the citizenry of the Borough a knowledge and
awareness of the history of the Borough and appreciation for the
accomplishments and contributions of Marcus Hook residents and
citizens to the history of our Borough, commonwealth and nation.
E. To collect and preserve materials of historic value related to the
Borough, including Borough records, documents and materials,
especially those related to the early years of the Borough and/or its
creation, in addition to Delaware County and/or Pennsylvania Historic
Resource Survey forms, photographic records, newspapers, or
magazines, deeds, title searches, recorded interviews, transcribed
interviews, video tapes, etc.
F. To sponsor exhibits from time to time, concerning the history of the
Borough, and to publish papers, pamphlets or other documents relating
to the history of the Borough.
§ 17-4 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 17-6
17:14
Chapter 19
LIBRARY, PUBLIC
§ 19-1. Library as agent of Borough.
Whereas the Mary M. Campbell Marcus Hook Public Library was
established to provide free public library service, we hereby authorize and
designate the library to act as the agent of the Borough government to
provide public library service to the residents and taxpayers of the Borough
for and on behalf of the Borough government.
G. To advise the Code Enforcement Officer, Zoning Officer, Mayor, or
Borough Council respecting the issuance of permits for the
construction or demolition of historic sites or resources within the
Borough. When requested, in writing, to issue such comments by any of
the aforementioned officials, the Commission shall review and comment
upon the issuance of the aforementioned permits to the requesting
authority within 30 days of said request.
H. To advise the Planning Commission or Borough Council respecting a
subdivision or land development, or conditional use which may affect
historic resources or sites within the Borough. Within 30 days of a
written request by the Planning Commission or Borough Council, the
Commission shall issue a written review and comment upon the
proposed subdivision or land development, or conditional use directed
to the requesting authority.
I. To advise the Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council when
requested to comment, respecting all applications for special
exceptions, variances or zoning changes affecting historic resources or
historic sites. Within 30 days from such a written request by either the
Zoning Hearing Board or Borough of Council, the Commission shall
issue its written review and comment upon such request for special
exceptions, variances or zoning changes to the requesting authority.
J. To maintain and update a list which clearly identifies buildings, sites,
structures, objects and districts within the Borough of historical
significance.
K. The Chairman of the Commission, or his designee, may also, without
request, testify before either Borough Council, the Planning
Commission, the Zoning Hearing Board, or any other public forum,
regarding any and all matters affecting historical resources or sites
within the Borough of Marcus Hook.
L. To perform any other lawful activity which shall be deemed necessary
to further the purposes of this chapter.
§ 17-6 LIBRARY, PUBLIC § 19-2
19:15
§ 19-2. Maintenance of library.
We hereby agree further to assist in the maintenance of the Mary M.
Campbell Marcus Hook Public Library in accord with the provisions of
Section 401 of the Library Code,3 the Act of June 14, 1961, P.L. 324.4
§ 19-3. Borough representatives on Board. [Amended 8-7-2006 by
Ord. No. O-06-7, approved 8-7-2006]
In accord with Section 411 of the Library Code,5 the Borough Council
will appoint five persons to serve as its representatives on the Board of
Directors of the Mary M. Campbell Marcus Hook Public Library, each
representative to serve three years, the terms, when practicable, expiring
in different years.
§ 19-4. Bond of treasurer.
In accord with Section 412 of the Library Code,6 the Treasurer of the
Board of Directors of the library shall give bond to the municipality with
satisfactory surety in such amount as the Board of Directors may determine.
§ 19-5. Annual budget; free library service.
The Board of Directors shall present to the Borough Council by November
1 of each year a budget for the following year and such reports as are
required by Section 413 and 414 of the Library Code7 and shall give free
library service to the residents and taxpayers as provided in Section 415 of
the Library Code.8
Chapter 24
MANAGER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Purchasing — See Ch. 40.
§ 24-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to create a form of organization wherein
Council shall be responsible primarily for legislative policy making and
shall appoint a professional Borough Manager who shall be responsible for
3. Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. § 4401.
4. Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. § 4101 et seq.
5. Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. § 4411.
6. Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. § 4412.
7. Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. §§ 4413 and 4414.
8. Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. § 4415.
§ 19-2 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 24-1
24:16
the conduct of the administrative affairs of the Borough in a professional,
nonpartisan manner.
§ 24-2. Creation of office; appointment.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of Marcus
Hook. The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority
of all the members of Council, who shall fix his compensation on an annual
basis.
§ 24-3. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to the duties of his office as
herein outlined.
§ 24-4. Bond.
Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall furnish a fidelity bond
to the Borough, with a bonding company licensed to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as surety, to be approved by the Council, in
the sum of $10,000, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties,
the premium for said bond to be paid by the Borough. The amount of said
bond may be changed and determined from time to time by resolution of the
Council.
§ 24-5. Removal and suspension.
Whenever the Borough Manager declines to submit his resignation at the
request of Council, he may be removed from office in accordance with the
following procedures:
A. Council shall adopt a preliminary resolution of removal by a majority
vote of all members. Council may also, in such resolution, suspend the
Manager from duty. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly
to the Manager. If suspended, the Manager shall be paid forthwith any
unpaid balance of his salary to the date of adoption of the resolution.
B. Within 15 days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the
Manager, he may file with Council a written request for an informal
meeting with Council in executive session. This meeting shall be held by
Council not later than 15 days after the request is filed.
C. Council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be effective
immediately, by a majority vote of all the members at any time after the
15 days from the time the preliminary resolution was delivered to the
Manager, if he has not requested a meeting, or at any time after the
meeting. After the adoption of the resolution, the only obligation of
Council to the Manager will be payment of any salary earned to the date
of termination. However, if Council has not adopted a final resolution of
removal within two calendar months from the date of adoption of the
§ 24-1 MANAGER § 24-5
24:17
§ 24-6. Powers and duties.
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Borough, and
he shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper and
efficient administration of the affairs of the Borough. The Manager shall
have and exercise all powers and duties assigned to him by statute and such
other authority as may be granted by Borough Council. Subject to recall
by ordinance enacted by Borough Council, the powers and duties of the
Borough Manager shall include the following:
preliminary resolution of removal, then the preliminary resolution shall
be deemed null and void and the Manager shall resume his full duties
and be reimbursed for all lost salary. A new preliminary resolution
must then be adopted to begin the removal or suspension proceedings
against the same Manager.
D. Whenever the Manager declines to submit his resignation following his
conviction of any felony or misdemeanor, then Council may remove the
Manager from office by a simple motion adopted at a public meeting.
The motion shall state the effective date of removal, and the only
obligation of Council shall be to pay the Manager any unpaid balance of
his salary to that date.
E. Council may also suspend the Manager without salary during an
investigation, hearing or trial on any criminal charge, for the duration
of the proceedings, when suspension would be in the interest of the
Borough. If the Manager is exonerated, he will be reinstated to duty and
reimbursed for all lost salary. Should the Manager resign while under
suspension, the only obligation of Council shall be to pay the Manager
any unpaid balance of his salary to the date of suspension.
A. General. The Manager shall be charged with the enforcement of all
laws and ordinances within the municipality insofar as their
enforcement is within the powers of the Borough. The Manager shall
attend all meetings of the Borough Council with the right to take part in
discussions. He shall keep the Council informed as to the affairs of the
Borough and shall recommend to the Council such actions as may be
necessary or expedient for the benefit of the Borough. The Manager
shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Council and shall
supply facts pertinent thereto.
B. Offices and departments. Every administrative department of the
Borough shall be under the supervision and control of the Manager. The
Manager shall hold such other municipal offices as the Council may
from time to time designate by resolution.9
C. Personnel. All Borough employees shall perform their duties subject to
the direction of the Borough Manager or that of the superior to whom
9. Editor's Note: By Resolution No. R-83-11 adopted June 6, 1983, the Borough Council
appointed the Borough Manager to serve as the Borough Secretary and to carry out all
duties of that office as prescribed by law.
§ 24-5 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 24-6
24:18
the Manager may assign such employees. The Borough Manager may
appoint and, when he deems it necessary for the good of the Borough,
suspend or remove Borough employees and appointed officers, on the
basis of merit, except as otherwise provided by law. However, all
appointments and removals must be approved by Council prior to their
taking effect. Suspensions shall be reviewed by Council not later than
30 days following the suspension, with the resolution of such
suspension to be determined according to the applicable policy or law.
This subsection shall not apply to the Borough Solicitor or Borough
Engineer. The Borough Manager, in conjunction with the Councilman
responsible for each department, shall be responsible for the
preparation of annual personnel evaluations.
D. Budget. The Manager shall prepare and submit to Council, before the
close of each fiscal year, a budget for the next fiscal year and an
explanatory budget message. In preparing the budget, the Manager
shall obtain from the head of each department, agency or board
estimates of revenues and expenses and such supporting data as he
requires. The Manager shall review such estimates and may revise
them before submitting the budget to the Council for adoption. The
Manager shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after
its adoption by Council.
E. Appropriation and levies. It shall be the duty of the Manager to cause to
be prepared each year the annual appropriation ordinance in time for
consideration and enactment by the Council, and to prepare any tax
levy ordinances for passage and file a certified copy thereof with the
appropriate authorities within the time required by law. He shall keep
current accounts of the amounts appropriated and the amounts
expended for each appropriation, showing the unexpended
appropriations at all times.
F. Capital improvement plan. The Manager shall, in conjunction with the
preparation of the yearly budget, develop long-range fiscal and capital
improvement plans for the Borough, such plans to be presented
annually to the Council for its review and adoption.
G. Accounts. It shall be the duty of the Manager to keep current accounts
showing at all time the fiscal condition of the Borough, including the
current and anticipated expenses, appropriations, cash on hand and
anticipated revenue of all municipal funds and accounts; and he shall
see to the collection of all moneys due the municipality. As soon as
possible after the close of the fiscal year, he shall submit to Council a
complete report on the finances of the Borough for the preceding year
in the form of an audit by a certified public accountant.
H. Inventories and property. The Manager shall keep a current inventory
showing all real and personal property of the Borough and its location
and shall be responsible for the care and custody of all such property,
including equipment, buildings, parks and all other city property which
is not by law assigned to some other officer or body for care and control.
§ 24-6 MANAGER § 24-6
24:19
I. Contracts. The Manager shall negotiate, prepare and/or examine all
proposed contracts to which the Borough may be a party excepting
where the Council directs that some other officer or officers shall do so.
It shall be the duty of the Manager to see to it that all terms of any
contract to which the Borough is a party are fully performed by all
parties thereto and that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits
and privileges granted by the Borough are observed.
J. Purchases. The Manager shall be the general purchasing agent of the
Borough, and except where specific provision to the contrary is made
by law or by the Council, he shall make all purchases of supplies,
materials and equipment authorized by the Council, in the manner
prescribed by and subject to the limitations imposed by law. No
purchase shall be made or obligation incurred excepting upon
authorization by the Council, and no expense shall be incurred, except
for the purpose for which no prior appropriation is required by law, if
the amount thereof is not covered by an unexpended appropriation for
the purpose.
K. Reports and publications. It shall be the duty of the Manager to see to
the publication of all notices, ordinances or other documents required
by law to be published and to prepare or cause to be prepared all
reports which the Borough or any of the officials thereof are required by
law to prepare.
L. Records and certificates. The Manager shall prepare and have custody
of all municipal records required by law to be kept by the Borough and
not by a specific officer. Where the law makes it the duty of a specific
officer to keep or maintain records, the Manager shall make available to
such officer all necessary clerical assistance for the preparation of such
records and shall make available a place for the custody of such
records. And in compliance herewith, the Manager shall make available
to the Clerk stenographic or clerical assistance necessary for the
preparation of the journal of Council proceedings and the record of
ordinances and all other documents which by law the Clerk is required
to keep; and he shall perform similar service for the Treasurer in the
maintenance of bonds, registers and all other records or documents
which by law the Treasurer is required to keep or prepare.
M. Maps and plats. The Manager shall cause to be kept a complete set of
maps and plats showing the location of all Borough utilities and other
municipal properties, all street and other public places and lots or
parcels of land subdivided according to law.
N. Office location and working hours. The Manager shall maintain an
office in the Borough Hall and shall spend such time in the performance
of his duties as may be required by the Council.
§ 24-6 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 24-7
24:20
§ 24-7. Acting manager.
In the event of an extended absence or disability of the Borough Manager,
Borough Council, by majority vote, may appoint another person as Acting
Borough Manager to serve until the Manager returns or until his disability
ceases or may make some alternate arrangements for the period of absence
or disability.
§ 24-8. Procedural limitations.
Except for the purpose of inquiry or under emergency circumstances,
Council and its members shall deal with employees solely through the
Borough Manager.
Chapter 31
PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil Service Commission — See Ch. 10. Social security — See Ch. 54.
§ 24-7 MANAGER § 24-8
24:21

ARTICLE I
Police Pension Plan10
[Adopted 2-1-1999 by Res. No. R-99-3, approved 2-1-1999; amended
in its entirety 12-3-2012 by Res. No. R-12-9, approved 12-3-2012]
§ 31-1. Adoption.
Effective as of January 1, 2013, the accompanying joinder agreement and
the terms of the Pennsylvania State Association of Boroughs Master
Retirement Trust are hereby adopted by the employer, to be known as the
"Borough of Marcus Hook Police Pension Plan."11
§ 31-2. Continuation of prior plan.
Said Plan shall be deemed to be a successor to and a continuation of the
prior plan.
§ 31-3. (Reserved)
§ 31-4. (Reserved)
§ 31-5. (Reserved)
§ 31-6. (Reserved)
10.Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Police Membership in Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
System, adopted 6-2-1980 by Res. No. R-80-10, approved 6-2-1980, was repealed 2-1-1999
by Res. No. R-99-2, approved 2-1-1999.
11.Editor's Note: Said plan is on file in the Borough offices and may be examined there
during regular business hours.
§ 31-1 MANAGER § 31-6
24:23

ARTICLE II
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System
[Adopted 2-4-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-3,12 approved 2-4-2013]
§ 31-7. Election to amend plan.
Marcus Hook Borough (the Borough), being a member municipality of
the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System (the System), hereby elects
to amend its Municipal Pension Plan administered by the System in
accordance with Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law,
53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq. (Retirement Law), and does hereby agree to be
bound by all the requirements and provisions of the Retirement Law and
the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, 53 P.S.
§ 895.101 et seq., and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise,
placed upon member municipalities.
§ 31-8. Administration of benefits.
As part of this article, the Borough agrees that the System shall administer
and provide the benefits set forth in the amended Municipal Pension Plan
Contract entered into between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Board and the Borough effective January 1, 2013 (the Contract).
§ 31-9. Acceptance of contract and financial obligations.
The passage and adoption of this article by the Borough is an official
acceptance of the Contract and the financial obligations resulting from the
administration of the Contract.
§ 31-10. Payment for obligations.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and
the Contract shall be made by the Borough in accordance with the
Retirement Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act. The Borough hereby assumes all liability for any
unfundedness created due to the benefit structure set forth in the Contract.
§ 31-11. Authorization; when effective; repealer.
The Borough intends this article to be the complete authorization of the
Contract, and it shall become effective and specifically repeal Ordinance
No. 0-06-1, either immediately or on January 1, 2013, which is the effective
date of the Contract, whichever is later.
12.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Article II, Employee Membership in
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System, adopted 1-3-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-1,
approved 1-3-2006.
§ 31-7 MANAGER § 31-12
24:25
§ 31-12. Filing of article and contract.
A duly certified copy of this article and an executed Contract shall be filed
with the System.
§ 31-12 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 31-12
24:26
Chapter 34
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 196.
§ 34-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known or may be cited by the title of "Planning
Commission Ordinance of the Borough of Marcus Hook."
§ 34-2. Commission created; membership.
Creation.
§ 34-3. Rules of procedure.
The Planning Commission shall adopt rules in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.13
§ 34-4. Meetings.
Meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairman and
at such other times as the Commission may determine. The Chairman, or
in his absence, the Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to
the public. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
A. The Borough of Marcus Hook hereby creates a Planning Commission
consisting of three members, one of whom shall be designated to serve
until the first day of January 1982, one until the first day of January
1983 and one until the first day of January 1984. Their successors shall
be appointed on the expiration of their respective terms, to serve four
years. The members of the Commission shall be removable for cause, by
the appointing authority, upon written charges and after public hearing.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose
term becomes vacant.
B. Two additional members shall be appointed to the Planning
Commission, so that it shall have a total membership of five. The initial
terms of these members shall be for such periods that not more than
two members of the Commission shall be reappointed or replaced
during any calendar year. The successors to these members shall be
appointed for terms of four years. [Added 7-2-1990 by Ord. No.
O-90-1, approved 7-2-1990]
13.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10207.
§ 31-12 PLANNING COMMISSION § 34-4
34:27
the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the
Commission and shall be a public record.
§ 34-5. Notice of meetings.
The Commission shall give public notice of all meetings, as well as due
notice to any party in interest.
§ 34-6. Powers and duties of Commission.
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Prepare the comprehensive plan for the development of the Borough of
Marcus Hook as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code14 and present it for the consideration of Borough Council.
B. Maintain and keep on file records of its actions. All records and files of
the Planning Commission shall be in the possession of Borough Council.
C. The Planning Commission, at the request of Borough Council, may:
(1) Make recommendations to the Borough Council concerning the
adoption or amendment of an official map.15
(2) Prepare and present to Borough Council a zoning ordinance and
make recommendations to Borough Council on proposed
amendments to it as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.16
(3) Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision and land
development and planned residential development regulations as
set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.17
(4) Prepare and present to Borough Council a building code and a
housing code and make recommendations concerning proposed
amendments thereto.18
(5) Do such other acts or make such studies as may be necessary to
fulfill the duties and obligations imposed by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.19
(6) Prepare and present to Borough Council an environmental study.
14.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10301 et seq.
15.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10401 et seq.
16.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10601 et seq.
17.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 10701 et seq.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 76, Building Construction and Ch. 157, Property Maintenance.
19.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10209.1
§ 34-4 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 34-6
34:28
Chapter 37
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions and retirement — See Ch. 31.
(7) Submit to the Borough of Marcus Hook a recommended capital
improvements program.
(8) Promote public interest in and understanding of the comprehensive
plan and planning.
(9) Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private
agencies and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of
such agencies and individuals.
(10) Hold public hearings and meetings.
(11) Require from other departments and agencies of Marcus Hook,
Delaware County and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as well as
federal agencies, such available information as relates to the work
of the Planning Commission.
D. In the performance of its functions, the Commission may enter upon
any land to make examinations and surveys with the consent of the
owner.
E. In the performance of its powers and duties, any act or
recommendation of the Planning Commission which involves
engineering considerations shall be subject to review and comments of
the Borough Engineer, which shall be incorporated and separately set
forth in any report, written act or recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
§ 34-6 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 34-6
37:29

ARTICLE I
Police Services
[Adopted 4-2-1979 by Ord. No. O-79-8, approved 4-2-1979]
§ 37-1. Mutual aid agreement authorized; effect.20
The Borough hereby authorizes and directs the President of Council and
the Borough Secretary to enter into a mutual aid agreement with adjacent
municipalities wherein the Borough and each municipality signatory to the
agreement shall authorize the police of every party to the agreement to
answer calls, to provide police protection and services and to make arrests
in each municipality, when requested, in the same manner and to the same
extent as such police will perform services in their own municipality.
§ 37-2. Voluntary nature of aid.
The primary duty of the Borough of Marcus Hook is to provide adequate
police protection within its own geographical boundaries, and compliance
with requests for police assistance by any other signatory to the agreement
shall be voluntary and not compulsory for the Borough of Marcus Hook.
§ 37-3. Extent of aid.
The extent of any police aid to be furnished by the Borough for any other
municipality shall be determined solely by the Borough, and the aid
furnished may be recalled at the discretion of the Borough at any time.
§ 37-4. Control of personnel and equipment.
All Borough police personnel who are furnished to aid other municipalities
shall work as far as possible under their own supervisors and Chief of
Police, and the equipment furnished shall, to the extent possible, be
operated solely by the personnel of the Borough of Marcus Hook at all
times.
§ 37-5. Responsibility for cost of service.
The Borough shall not be required to pay any charge or compensation to
any other parties to the agreement for services rendered hereunder. Any
services performed or expenditures made in connection with the furnishing
of mutual aid under any agreement by the Borough shall be deemed to be
for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the
Borough.
20.Editor's Note: By the adoption of Resolution No. R-89-2, adopted and approved 2-6-1989,
the Borough of Marcus Hook entered into a mutual aid agreement with other
municipalities in Delaware County and on the same date executed a Declaration of Joinder
in Mutual Aid Agreement.
§ 37-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 37-6
37:31
§ 37-6. Responsibility for wages and benefits.
Any police officer of the Borough furnishing aid to any other municipality
shall at all times remain the employee of the Borough, and the Borough,
at all times, shall be responsible for such officer's wages, workmen's
compensation insurance and all other benefits to which said police officer
may be entitled and shall be responsible for all other duties and
responsibilities pertaining to his employment.
§ 37-7. Withdrawal from agreement.
The Borough shall have the right to withdraw from the mutual aid
agreement upon 30 days' written notice to each of the other signatories to
the agreement.
§ 37-6 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 37-7
37:32
ARTICLE II
Special Duty Police
[Adopted 3-1-1993 by Res. No. R-93-1, approved 3-1-1993]
§ 37-8. Regulation of police activities.
It is in the best interest of the Borough for the Borough to regulate the
performance of all police activities performed in the Borough, including all
activities of special duty police.
§ 37-9. Outside employment.
Outside part-time employment of Borough police officers, as permitted
by the Borough, does not include special police duty assignment in the
Borough or any other type of employment which requires the police officer
to wear a Marcus Hook police uniform and/or badge or perform police-type
activities.
§ 37-10. Administration.
The use of special duty police in the Borough shall be under the direction of
the Mayor and, in his absence, the Director of Public Safety and/or Officer-
In-Charge and in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 37-11. Authorization to provide extra police protection.
Where, in the opinion of the Mayor and, in his absence, the Director of
Public Safety and/or Officer-In-Charge, the conduct of an event or public
assemblage can be expected to require an extraordinary use of police
protection, or where the owner, operator, person or organization (including
churches, schools, funeral homes, shopping centers, business and industrial
establishments) which conducts such an event or public assemblage
requests the Borough of Marcus Hook to provide extraordinary police
protection for the maintenance of public order the safe and speedy conduct
of traffic, the protection of property or the supervision of assembled large
numbers of persons, the Director of Public Safety and/or the Officer-In-
Charge shall hereby be authorized to assign to duty the number of police
deemed necessary to properly provide for the maintenance of public order
and safety at such an event or public assemblage.
§ 37-12. Reimbursement; compensation for service.
Where, in the opinion of the Mayor and, in his absence, the Director of
Public Safety and/or Officer-In-Charge, the need for extraordinary police
protection is attributable to a particular event or public assemblage, the
owner, operator, person or organization which conducts such an event or
public assemblage is hereby required to reimburse the Borough of Marcus
Hook for the expense of such extraordinary police protection. The Borough
shall charge a police duty and administrative fee, as determined from time
§ 37-8 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 37-12
37:33
to time by the Borough Council, to cover police officer duty time, insurance,
use by vehicles, equipment and administrative time.
§ 37-13. Collection for cost of service rendered.
The Mayor and, in his absence, the Public Safety Director and/or the Officer-
In-Charge shall estimate the number of policemen and the length of time
required to provide the extraordinary police protection. In all cases the
owner, operator, person or organization which conducts such an event or
public assemblage shall pay to the Borough of Marcus Hook an hourly fee
as set forth by Borough Council to be invoiced by the Borough after the
service has been provided. In the event that the owner, operator, person
or organization conducting such an event or public assemblage shall fail or
refuse to pay the invoiced amount, the Borough of Marcus Hook shall have
the right to recover the said sum through a civil action or to file a municipal
lien in the Office of Judicial Support for the Court of Common Pleas for
Delaware County for the recovery of municipal expenses.
§ 37-14. Assignment for extra duty.
The Director of Public Safety and/or the Officer-In-Charge shall maintain a
roster of police officers who willingly desire to work as special duty police
officers during their off-duty hours and shall assign such officers, in an
equitable manner, to special duty police work.
§ 37-15. Nature of duty.
No police officer shall be assigned to any duty under this article which shall
not be of a kind or nature pertaining to the lawful office or duties as a
policeman.
§ 37-16. Service during on-duty hours.
In the event that it shall become necessary for the Mayor and, in his
absence, the Public Safety Director and/or Officer-In-Charge to assign onduty
police to perform such extraordinary duty, such officer shall receive
no additional compensation, and therefore no expense for such service shall
be charged to the owner, operator, person or organization conducting such
event or public assemblage.
§ 37-17. Waiver of availability.
The Borough of Marcus Hook does not guarantee the availability of
municipal special duty police for each and every request and assumes no
liability if a specific request cannot be met. The Borough of Marcus Hook
does not guarantee the availability of a municipal police vehicle for each
and every request. The assignment of a police vehicle will be determined by
the Director of Public Safety and/or the Officer-In-Charge on a case-by-case
basis.
§ 37-12 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 37-18
37:34
§ 37-18. Reports.
The Director of Public Safety and/or the Officer-In-Charge shall submit a
monthly report to the Mayor, Borough Police Committee and the Borough
Manager covering the assignments of police officers as special duty police.
§ 37-18 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 37-18
37:35

ARTICLE III
Police Services Recovery of Costs
[Adopted 11-1-1999 by Ord. No. O-99-3; approved 11-1-1999]
§ 37-19. Purpose and intent.
§ 37-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — The person or persons or corporation or other entity comprising
record owner or owners of any land or building.
POLICE SERVICE COSTS — An amount fixed by Borough Council to cover
estimated compensation of officers for amount of time normally spent in
A. The Borough Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook finds and
determines:
(1) That certain private properties require a disproportionate amount
of police service with many calls requiring response to maintain
order and public peace and to stop public disturbances so that
there is less police personnel and resources available for other
locations, emergencies and duties in the Borough, and
extraordinary police service at such properties puts a
disproportionate and unfair burden upon the citizens and taxpayers
of the Borough.
(2) That owners and/or rental agents in charge of such private
properties derive a benefit from such police service.
(3) That the owners and/or rental agents in charge of such private
properties have a responsibility to manage their properties to
minimize required police service to maintain order and public
peace and to stop public disturbances and to minimize the burden
upon citizens and taxpayers of the Borough and to promote the
health, safety and welfare of the public in general.
(4) That the owners and/or rental agents in charge of such private
properties can minimize required police service to maintain order
and public peace and to stop public disturbances by diligent and
strict management and regulation of their properties.
(5) That assessment of costs as provided in this article is reasonable
and will have a deterrent effect and encourage more responsible
management of such properties.
B. It is not the intent of this article to discourage or suppress requests for
police service, but rather to encourage and stimulate diligent and strict
management and regulation of private property by owners and/or
rental agents in charge.
§ 37-19 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 37-20
37:37
responding to a call or otherwise maintaining order and public peace and
stopping disturbances, appropriate administrative costs allocable thereto,
and medical treatment to injured officers and the cost of repairing damaged
Borough equipment or property. This amount shall be fixed from time to
time and shall be based upon an average cost for a typical police response.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any land or building, including single and
multifamily dwellings and commercial and industrial buildings not owned
by a public entity.
PUBLIC DISTURBANCES — Any party, gathering, event or disturbance
involving disorderly conduct as described by the Pennsylvania statutes.
PUBLIC ENTITY — Any federal, state or local government or school district
or agency or authority created or organized thereby.
§ 37-21. Owners and/or rental agents required to pay certain police
service costs.
Every owner of and/or rental agent with responsibility to manage private
property within the Borough is required to pay police service costs to
maintain order and public peace and to stop public disturbances at such
private property for each response by the police in excess of one response
per thirty-day period in an amount fixed by resolution of the Borough
Council; provided, however, that police service in connection with crimes
against residents and/or property by persons not residing or invited guests
or otherwise lawful occupants of the private property shall not be
considered responses for purposes of the article; and provided, further, that
police service in connection with spousal abuse or abuse of children by
parents or in connection with crimes classified as misdemeanors or felonies
under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code shall not be considered responses for
purposes of this article.
§ 37-22. Notice to owner and/or rental agent.
The Chief of Police or other duly authorized agent of the Borough shall
notify the owner of any/or rental agent with responsibility to manage private
property that a response has been made to such property to maintain order
or public peace or to stop a public disturbance. Such notice shall be given by
certified mail to the last known address of such owner and/or rental agent;
provided, however, that an owner and/or rental agent with responsibility
to manage private property shall be required to pay police service costs in
accordance with § 37-21 of this article whether or not such notice has been
given.
§ 37-23. Billing.
Police service costs due in accordance with § 37-21 hereof shall be billed
to the owner and/or rental agent with responsibility to manage private
property by the Borough Manager/Secretary or his duly authorized agent
and shall be due and payable within 30 days of such billing.
§ 37-20 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 37-24
37:38
§ 37-24. Failure to pay.
Unpaid police service costs may be collected by civil action by the Borough
against the owner and/or rental agent with responsibility to manage private
property and/or may be imposed or assessed against such private property
as a municipal claim under the Act of May 16, 1923, P.L. 207, as amended,
(53 P.S. § 7101). In either event, a penalty of 10% and interest at the rate of
10% per annum shall be added and collected as provided by law.
§ 37-24 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 37-24
37:39
Chapter 40
PURCHASING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Manager — See Ch. 24.
§ 40-1. Adoption of system.
A formal purchasing system shall be adopted to regulate the flow of
Borough funds for the purchase of all the items necessary to the operation
of the Borough.
§ 40-2. Purposes and objectives.
§ 40-3. Meaning of terms.
Materials and supplies shall include such items as are normally used or
consumed during the current budget year and for which an appropriation
in the annual budget has been made, and shall include the purchase of
automotive equipment, machinery, construction contracts or other
purchases of materials of a permanent or semipermanent nature.
§ 40-4. Designation of Purchasing Agent; duties.
A. The objectives of a purchasing system are economy and efficiency in the
procurement of supplies, equipment and services. A second objective is
to purchase materials which are best suited to the specific needs of an
operating department. Needed materials should also be in sufficient
supply so as to avoid any interruption in the delivery of services to the
public.
B. The procedures established herein are designed to accomplish the
following objectives:
(1) To assure that materials and services are ordered only by
authorized employees and officials.
(2) To assure that purchases over $10,000 are advertised and bids
obtained in accordance with the Borough Code. [Amended
6-2-1997 by Res. No. R-97-6, approved 6-2-1997]
(3) To assure that ordered goods are actually received prior to
authorizing payment.
(4) To assure that surplus and obsolete materials, equipment and
supplies are disposed of properly in accordance with the Borough
Code.
§ 37-24 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 40-4
40:40
§ 40-5. Supervision by Borough Council.
The Borough Council shall have general supervision of the authorized
Purchasing Agent.
§ 40-6. Initiation of purchase orders.
Purchase orders may be initiated by the following:
§ 40-7. Budget transfers.
Where a department head seeks to purchase an item for which no
appropriation has been made in the annual budget, he or she must first seek
the approval of the Purchasing Agent. Said Agent may authorize transfers
between accounts within the operating budget of a single department to
permit such a purchase. However, budget transfers between the accounts
of the operating department and transfers between or among separate
A. The Borough Manager shall be designated as Purchasing Agent for the
Borough. No one other than the Purchasing Agent shall commit the
Borough to any purchase, vendor or product. In the absence of the
Purchasing Agent due to illness or vacation, the appropriate committee
chairman's signature can substitute for the signature of the Purchasing
Agent.
B. The duties of the Purchasing Agent shall be to secure prices for all
supplies of every kind and character required by the various
departments of the Borough; to inspect materials and supplies
purchased by the Borough to determine that said materials and
supplies have been properly represented; to determine that the prices
paid for materials and supplies purchased by the Borough are the best
that can be obtained in the local market or elsewhere, and such other
duties as the Borough Council may from time to time prescribe.
C. The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to purchase materials
and supplies on the open market where the purchase price does not
exceed $1,000. Where the purchase price exceeds $1,000 but is less
than the limit currently established in the Borough for public bidding,
such purchase may be made by the Purchasing Agent only after formal
approval is received from the appropriate Council committee chairman.
A. Purchasing Agent.
B. Chief of Police.
C. Highway Foreman.
D. Librarian.
E. Recreation Director.
F. Council committee chairmen.
§ 40-4 PURCHASING § 40-7
40:41
governmental funds shall require formal authorization by the Borough
Council at a public meeting.
§ 40-8. Formal competitive bidding procedures.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, when the probable cost of a
purchase is estimated to exceed the dollar limit currently established in
the Borough for public bidding, the Purchasing Agent shall first seek
authorization from the Borough Council at a public meeting to prepare
specifications and advertise for competitive bids.
B. Upon authorization by the Borough Council, the Purchasing Agent in
cooperation with the department heads shall prepare specifications and
publish a "Notice for Bids" in one newspaper of general circulation in
the County of Delaware at least two times at intervals of not less than
three days where notice is published in a daily newspaper. The first
advertisement shall be published not more than 45 days and the second
advertisement not less than 10 days prior to the date fixed for the
opening of bids. [Amended 6-2-1997 by Res. No. R-97-6, approved
6-2-1997]
C. Acceptance of bids must be made only by public announcement at the
meeting at which bids are received or at a subsequent meeting, the
time and place of which must be publicly announced when bids are
received. If for any reason one or both of the above meetings will not be
held, the same business may be transacted at a subsequent meeting if
at least five days' notice is published in the newspaper.
D. The Council may direct the Purchasing Agent to receive, open and
review bids during normal business hours and forward the information
for subsequent award at a public meeting. [Added 6-2-1997 by Res.
No. R-97-6,21 approved 6-2-1997]
E. The Purchasing Agent shall report to the Borough Council the
tabulation of bids and the results of any investigation of the
responsibility of the bidders and shall recommend to the Council the
selection of the lowest responsible bidder. The term "responsible" shall
include considerations of the quality of previous work, record of
completing projects on time, history of payments to subcontractors and
suppliers, maintenance of a permanent place of business, adequacy of
equipment and plant to do the job, technical expertise and whether the
bidder has a solid financial base to guarantee contract completion.
F. Where the Purchasing Agent recommends an award to a bidder other
than the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of reasons shall
be prepared by the Purchasing Agent and submitted to the Borough
Council. Said statement shall be reviewed by the Solicitor for
compliance with the applicable provisions of the Borough Code.
21.Editor's Note: This resolution also redesignated former Subsections D, E and F as
Subsections E, F and G, respectively.
§ 40-7 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 40-8
40:42
§ 40-9. Requests for cost quotations, negotiations. [Amended
6-2-1997 by Res. No. R-97-6, approved 6-2-1997]
§ 40-10. Emergency purchases.
G. Borough Council shall not be required to follow formal public bidding
procedures involving advertising and bidding in the case of emergency
purchases authorized under the Emergency Management Services
Code and where specific exemptions are provided in the Borough Code.
A. All contracts or purchases estimated by the Purchasing Agent to cost
$4,000 or more, but less than the amount currently specified in the
Borough Code requiring advertisement and competitive bidding shall
be awarded on the basis of written or telephonic price quotations from
at least three qualified and responsible vendors or, in lieu of price
quotations, a memorandum shall be kept on file showing that fewer
than three qualified vendors exist in the market area within which it is
practicable to obtain quotations. A written record of telephonic price
quotations shall be made and contain the quotation date, name of the
vendor or vendor's representative, the work or items which were the
subject of the quotation and the price. All contracts and purchases less
than $4,000 but more than $1,000 shall be awarded on the basis of
written or telephonic price quotations from at least three vendors. This
requirement may be waived if there are fewer than three accessible
providers for an item.
B. Purchases of less than $1,000 shall be made in the open market by
negotiation. [Amended 6-2-1997 by Res. No. R-97-6, approved
6-2-1997]
C. Competitive vendors shall be treated equally. Every effort shall be made
to share Borough business among responsible vendors.
D. The Purchasing Agent or department head shall exercise discretion in
making all purchases where quality, as well as price and service, is
involved.
A. In all cases where there is an immediate need for materials or supplies
or where an emergency should arise after office hours, on weekends or
holidays and where it is not possible or convenient to contact the
Purchasing Agent, any purchase necessary up to a limit of $1,000 may
be made by the appropriate Council committee chairman or person in
charge and such purchase reported to the Purchasing Agent without
delay.
B. In the event that a "local disaster emergency" is declared by the
Borough Council or Borough Manager for the purpose of activating the
response and recovery aspects of any and all applicable local
emergency management plans, the Borough Council, Borough Manager
or person in charge shall have the power to enter into contracts and
incur obligations necessary to disaster emergency management,
§ 40-8 PURCHASING § 40-10
40:43
§ 40-11. Cooperative purchasing.
The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to join with other units of
government in cooperative purchasing plans so that the best interests of the
Borough shall be served thereby.
§ 40-12. Charge accounts.
§ 40-13. Bids to be kept on file.
All bids for goods or materials of any kind or character purchased by the
Borough shall be kept on file in the office of the Borough Manager. After
award has been made, the bids shall be subject to inspection at any time by
any citizen of the Borough.
§ 40-14. Disposal of surplus items.
response and recovery without regard to procedures and formalities
prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work,
entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of
temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase of supplies
and materials and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds.
(See Emergency Management Services Code, 1978, P.L. 1332, No. 323;
35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101). Such purchases shall be reported to the
Purchasing Agent without delay.
A. The use of charge accounts as a method of purchase is intended to
expedite the procurement of frequently needed supplies and services,
such as vehicle repairs.
B. Department heads shall provide the Purchasing Agent with a list
containing the names and signatures of all personnel authorized to sign
for supplies, repairs and materials under each charge account
agreement. Any changes to the name/signature list shall be made in
writing and filed with the Purchasing Agent.
C. Where supplies and materials are obtained by charge accounts, the
vendor's invoice shall be signed by the authorized employee who
receives the items as well as by the department head. All signed
invoices resulting from charge account purchases shall be forwarded to
the Purchasing Agent. The Purchasing Agent shall receive all signed
invoices in order to verify the accuracy of vendors' monthly bills.
D. The Purchasing Agent shall not authorize payment of any invoice unless
such invoice is signed by authorized personnel and approved and
signed by the department head.
A. The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to transfer surplus
supplies, materials and equipment to other using departments or to sell
Borough personal property which is valued at less than $1,000 per item
§ 40-10 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 40-14
40:44
§ 40-15. Petty cash.
and which has become unsuitable for public use. [Amended 6-2-1997
by Res. No. R-97-6, approved 6-2-1997]
B. The procedure for sale of surplus items of personal property valued at
less than $1,000 per item shall be as follows: [Amended 6-2-1997 by
Res. No. R-97-6, approved 6-2-1997]
(1) The Purchasing Agent shall identify in writing to the members of
the Borough Council each item of surplus property and the
estimated value thereof.
(2) A list identifying each item or group of items offered for sale shall
be posted at the front entrance to the Municipal Building until such
time as an offer is made for purchase of the item(s).
(3) Where no offer of purchase is made within a thirty-day period, the
Purchasing Agent, at his discretion, may dispose of the item(s) by
any available means.
C. Surplus, unusable or obsolete supplies, materials and equipment valued
at $1,000 or more per item shall be sold upon the approval of the
Borough Council by motion of Council and in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the Borough Code. Each item valued at $1,000
or more shall be advertised for sale once in at least one newspaper of
general circulation in the Borough not less than 10 days prior to the
date fixed for the opening of bids announced in the advertisement. The
sale of property advertised in this manner shall be made to the best
responsible bidder. [Amended 6-2-1997 by Res. No. R-97-6,
approved 6-2-1997]
D. The above provisions shall not apply where Borough property is to be
traded in or exchanged for new Borough property or where Borough
property is to be sold to another political subdivision or to the types of
organizations which are specified in the Borough Code.
A. The Borough shall establish a petty cash fund to handle nonrecurring
emergency purchases, express charges on shipments of goods and
materials and minor expenditures, such as reimbursement of an
employee for postage.
B. Petty cash shall not be used in situations where an item can be charged
and a check issued for payment. Petty cash shall not be a substitute for
proper purchasing procedures.
C. The items purchased from the petty cash fund shall be accounted for
and these expenditures shall be reflected in the Borough book of
accounts.
§ 40-14 PURCHASING § 40-15
40:45
Chapter 45
RECREATION AND PARK BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 151.
§ 45-1. Board created.
There is hereby created a Recreation and Park Board known as the
"Recreation and Park Board of Marcus Hook."
§ 45-2. Membership and terms of office. [Amended 9-8-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-5, approved 9-8-2015]
The Board shall be composed of seven members to be appointed by the
Borough Council, with the power to advise Borough Council on the
provision and conduct of recreation and cultural activities and the
maintenance of public recreation areas, facilities and centers subject to
all the responsibilities of the recreation enabling legislation.22 The Board
members shall serve for terms of five years and until their successors are
appointed, except that the members first appointed shall be so appointed
that the term of at least one member shall expire annually thereafter.
Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments and
for the unexpired term. Members shall serve without pay.
§ 45-3. Organization.
The Recreation and Park Board shall appoint from its membership a
Chairman and such other officers as it may deem necessary for the orderly
procedure of its business, and may adopt bylaws, rules and regulations
D. The use of petty cash funds shall be limited to the Office of the Borough
Manager. The Borough Manager shall be designated as petty cash
custodian for the Borough.
E. Each petty cash fund shall be limited to a maximum amount of $100.
[Amended 6-2-1997 by Res. No. R-97-6, approved 6-2-1997]
F. The custodian is responsible for maintaining a petty cash book to record
all petty cash transactions by amounts, person receiving funds,
purchase made and account code numbers. Vouchers and receipts shall
be maintained by the custodian for all expenditures.
G. The funds shall be replenished from time to time by checks drawn on
the general fund account.
22.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 47701 et seq., particularly 53 P.S. §§ 47708 and 47709.
§ 40-15 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 45-3
40:46
covering its procedure, not inconsistent with the provisions of the state
laws. The Recreation and Park Board shall, from time to time, make rules
governing the operation and conduct of the recreational facilities operated
by the Board. The Board shall hold regular meetings at such time and place
as it may designate.
§ 45-4. Advisory functions.
The Recreation and Park Board shall advise Borough Council on the
maintenance, operation and supervision of the public parks, playfields and
all outdoor and indoor recreation facilities owned or controlled by the
Borough of Marcus Hook.
§ 45-5. Acceptance of grants and gifts. [Amended 2-4-2019 by Ord.
No. O-19-1, approved 2-4-2019]
The Recreation and Park Board may not procure or accept any grant, gift,
bequest or donation of services, equipment, real estate or money from any
individual or group on behalf of the Borough without approval from Borough
Council first. The Recreation and Park Board shall have no authority to
enter into any contract or incur any obligation binding upon the Borough
of Marcus Hook, other than current obligations or contracts to be fully
executed within the then-current fiscal year and all within the budget
appropriations made by the governing body of the Borough of Marcus Hook.
§ 45-6. Appointment of Executive Director.
The Recreation and Park Board shall advise Borough Council on the
appointment of an Executive Director or Superintendent of Recreation and
parks who possesses the necessary qualifications and who has
demonstrated by actual work his/her ability to organize and direct a
community recreation system, and such other personnel as may be deemed
necessary and are recommended by the Executive Director.
§ 45-7. Disbursement of funds.
The funds appropriated by the governing body of the Borough of Marcus
Hook and budgeted to the Recreation Board shall be disbursed by the
Treasurer of the Recreation and Park Board and approved by a Councilman
responsible for recreation.
§ 45-8. Annual budget and report.
The Recreation and Park Board shall submit an annual budget request and
an annual report and such other reports as needed to the governing body at
such other times as may be designated or requested by the governing body.
The fiscal year of said Recreation and Park Board shall conform to that of
the Borough.
§ 45-3 PURCHASING § 45-9
40:47
§ 45-9. Powers of Board.
Such powers as are now or may hereafter be provided by statute of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by ordinances of the Borough of Marcus
Hook relating to the development and operation of recreation systems,
public parks and playgrounds are hereby vested in the Recreation and Park
Board, to be exercised by it subject to any and all restrictions contained in
such statutes and ordinances.
Chapter 48
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 48-1. Statutory requirement.
The Borough Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania requires that
Borough Council set the salaries of the Mayor, President of Council and
members of Council by ordinance, and this chapter is designed to comply
with that requirement.
§ 48-2. Salary of Mayor. [Amended 1-5-1999 by Ord. No. O-99-1,
approved 1-5-1999]
The salary for the Mayor of the Borough of Marcus Hook, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, shall be equal to and in accordance with the maximum
permitted by Section 1001 of the Act of February 1, 1966 (1966 P.L. 1656,
No. 581), known as the "Borough Code,"23 1/12 of the amount being paid
each month.
§ 48-3. Salary of President of Council. [Amended 1-5-1999 by Ord.
No. O-99-1, approved 1-5-1999]
The salary for the President of Borough Council of Marcus Hook, Delaware
County, Pennsylvania, shall be equal to and in accordance with the
maximum permitted by Section 1001 of the Borough Code,24 1/12 of the
amount being paid each month.
§ 48-4. Salary of members of Council. [Amended 1-5-1999 by Ord.
No. O-99-1, approved 1-5-1999]
The salary of each member of Borough Council of Marcus Hook, Delaware
County, Pennsylvania, shall be equal to and in accordance with the
maximum permitted by Section 1001 of the Borough Code,25 1/12 of the
amount being paid each month.
23.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46001.
24.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46001.
25.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46001.
§ 45-9 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 48-5
48:48
§ 48-5. Continuing effect. [Added 7-2-1990 by Ord. No. O-90-1,
approved 7-2-1990]
The salaries established by this chapter for the Mayor, the President of the
Borough Council and the members of the Borough Council shall remain in
effect from year to year without annual reenactment until such time as they
shall be changed or amended by an ordinance of the Borough Council.
Chapter 51
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
§ 48-5 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 48-5
51:49

ARTICLE I
Short Title and Definitions
§ 51-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipal Shade Tree
Ordinance of the Borough of Marcus Hook, County of Delaware."
§ 51-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular
include the plural. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Marcus Hook.
PARK — Includes all public parks.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRINCIPAL THOROUGHFARE — Any street upon which trucks are not
prohibited.
PROPERTY LINE — The outer edge of a street or highway.
PROPERTY OWNER — The person owning such property as shown by the
County Assessor's Plat of Delaware County.
PUBLIC PLACES — Includes all other grounds, in addition parks, owned by
the Borough of Marcus Hook.
PUBLIC TREES — Includes all shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter
growing on any street or any public areas where otherwise indicated.
SHADE TREE COMMISSION — The body under whose jurisdiction all street
trees fall.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width of every public way or right-ofway
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of
right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
TREE LAWN — That part of a street or highway, not covered by sidewalk or
other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street
or highway usually used for vehicular traffic.
TREES —
A. LARGE TREES — Those attaining a height of 45 feet or more.
B. MEDIUM TREES — Those attaining a height of 30 to 45 feet.
C. SMALL TREES — Those attaining a height of 20 to 30 feet.
§ 51-1 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 51-2
51:51

ARTICLE II
Establishment of Commission; Powers and Duties
§ 51-3. Commission created; membership.
There shall be created a commission to be known and designated as the
"Shade Tree Commission." The Commission shall consist of three members,
all of whom shall be residents of the municipality. All will serve without
compensation.
§ 51-4. Duties.
The duties of the Shade Tree Commission shall be as follows:
A. One member shall serve for three years, one for two years and one for
one year.
B. On the expiration of the term of any Commissioner, a successor shall be
appointed by the municipal governing body to serve for a term of three
years.
C. Vacancies in the office of Commissioner shall be filled by the municipal
governing body for the unexpired term.
A. General powers. The Commission shall have exclusive custody and
control of the shade trees in the municipality and is authorized to plant,
remove, maintain and protect shade trees on the public streets and
property within the municipality.
B. Specific duties include, but are not limited to:
(1) Studying the problems and determining the needs of the Borough
of Marcus Hook, County of Delaware, in connection with its tree
planting program.
(2) Recommending to the proper authority the type and kind of trees to
be planted upon such municipal streets or parts of municipal
streets or in parks as are designated.
(3) Assisting the properly constituted officials of the Borough of
Marcus Hook, County of Delaware, as well as the municipal
governing body and citizens of the municipality, in the
dissemination of news and information regarding the selection,
planting and maintenance of trees within the corporate limits,
whether the same be on private or public property, and making
such recommendations from time to time to the municipal
governing body as to desirable legislation concerning the tree
program and activities for the municipality.
(4) Providing regular and special meetings at which the subject of
trees, insofar as it relates to the municipality, may be discussed by
the members of the Commission, officers and personnel of the
§ 51-3 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 51-4
51:53
§ 51-5. Organization.
Within a reasonable time after the appointment of said Commission and the
approval of the members thereof, upon call of the municipal governing body,
said Commission shall meet and organize by the election of a Chairman. The
said Commission shall then provide for the adoption of rules and procedures
and for the holding of regular and special meetings as said Commission
shall deem advisable and necessary in order to perform the duties set forth.
municipality and its several divisions and all others interested in
the tree program.
§ 51-4 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 51-5
51:54
ARTICLE III
Permits for Planting, Maintenance and Removal
§ 51-6. Permit required; application; issuance.
§ 51-7. Planting requirements.
§ 51-8. Maintenance.
The application required herein shall state the number of trees to be
sprayed, fertilized, pruned or otherwise preserved; the kind of treatment to
be administered; the composition of the spray material to be applied; and
such other information as the Shade Tree Commission shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued.
§ 51-9. Removal, replanting and replacement.
A. No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut or
otherwise disturb any trees on any street or municipal-owned property
without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the
Shade Tree Commission. The person receiving the permit shall abide by
the Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice adopted by
the Shade Tree Commission.
B. Application for permits must be made at the office of the Shade Tree
Commission not less than 48 hours in advance of the time the work is to
be done.
C. The Shade Tree Commission shall issue the permit provided for herein
if, in its judgment, the proposed work is desirable and the proposed
method and workmanship thereof are of a satisfactory nature. Any
permit granted shall contain a definite date of expiration, and the work
shall be completed in the time allowed on the permit and in the manner
as therein described. Any permit shall be void if its terms are violated.
D. Notice of completion shall be given within five days to the Shade Tree
Commission for its inspection.
A. Application data. The application required herein shall state the
number of trees to be set out; the location, grade, species, cultivar or
variety of each tree; the method of planting; and such other information
as the Shade Tree Commission shall find reasonably necessary to a fair
determination of whether a permit should be issued.
B. Improper planting. Whenever any tree shall be planted or set out in
conflict with the provisions of this section, it shall be lawful for the
Shade Tree Commission to remove or cause removal of the same, and
the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as provided by law
in the case of special assessments.
A. Wherever it is necessary to removal tree or trees from a tree lawn in
connection with the paving of a sidewalk or the paving or widening of
§ 51-6 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 51-9
51:55
the portion of a street or highway used for vehicular traffic, the
municipality shall replant such trees or replace them. Where conditions
prevent planting on tree lawns, this requirement will be satisfied if any
equivalent number of trees of the same size and species as provided for
in the Arboricultural Specifications are planted in an attractive manner
on the adjoining property.
B. No person or property owner shall remove a tree from the tree lawn for
the purpose of construction or for any other reason without first filing
an application and procuring a permit from the Shade Tree Commission
and without replacing the removed tree or trees in accordance with the
adopted Arboricultural Specifications. Such replacement shall meet the
standards of size, species and placement as provided for in a permit.
The person or property owner shall bear the cost of removal and
replacement of all trees removed.
C. The municipality shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead
or diseased tree on private property within the municipality when such
trees constitute a hazard to life and property or harbor insects or
disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the
municipality. The Shade Tree Commission will notify in writing the
owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their
own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the
event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the
municipality shall have the authority to remove such trees and the exact
cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as provided by law in the
case of special assessments.
D. All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface
of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the
surface of the ground.
§ 51-9 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 51-9
51:56
ARTICLE IV
General Regulations
§ 51-10. Trees obstructing streets.
It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real
property bordering on any street, upon which property there may be trees,
to prune such trees in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade
the streetlights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct
vision of traffic signs or obstruct view of any street or alley intersection. The
minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be 10 feet over
sidewalks and 12 feet over all streets except truck thoroughfares, which
shall have a clearance of 16 feet. This section does not pertain to owners of
real property upon whose property street trees are planted by the Borough
after the effective date of this chapter.
§ 51-11. Mutilation of public trees.
Unless specifically authorized by the Shade Tree Commission, no person
shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree; attach
any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to any tree;
allow any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees
to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when
such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree.
§ 51-12. Interference with Shade Tree Commission.
No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the Shade Tree
Commission or its assistants while engaged in carrying out the execution
or enforcement of the ordinance, regulations, etc.; provided, however, that
nothing herein shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of
any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for
the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the
municipality.
§ 51-13. Protection of trees.
A. Notice to prune. Should any person or persons owning real property
bordering on any street fail to prune trees as hereinabove provided, the
Municipal Shade Tree Commission shall order such person or persons,
within five days after receipt of written notice, to so prune such trees.
B. Order required. The order required herein shall be served by mailing a
copy of the order to the last known address of the property owner, by
certified mail.
C. Failure to comply. When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail
to comply within the specified time, it shall be lawful for the
municipality to prune such trees, and the exact cost thereof shall be
assessed to the owner as provided by law in the case of special
assessments.
§ 51-10 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 51-13
51:57
§ 51-14. Placing materials on public property.
No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place
of the municipality any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials
which may impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots
of any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the Shade Tree
Commission.
A. All trees on any street or other publicly owned property near any
excavation or construction of any building, structure or street work
shall be guarded with a good, substantial fence, frame or box not less
than four feet high and eight feet square or at a distance in feet from
the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk in inches (diameter at breast
height), whichever is greater, and all building material, dirt or other
debris shall be kept outside the barrier.
B. No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches or lay any drive
within a radius of 10 feet from any public tree without first obtaining a
written permit from the Municipal Shade Tree Commission.
§ 51-13 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 51-14
51:58
ARTICLE V
Specifications for Selection, Planting and Maintenance
§ 51-15. Requirement for trees.
Street trees shall be required wherever a proposed subdivision shall
average three or more lots per gross acre or where the proposed
subdivision is adjacent to any existing or recorded development having
street trees.
§ 51-16. Commission review.
The Shade Tree Commission shall review all development and
redevelopment plans meeting the above criteria to assure the planting of
the proper trees.
§ 51-17. Species of trees; specifications.
A. Preferred tree species.
(1) All plant material used shall be selected from the following plant
list. If the developer is confronted with an unforeseen problem
pertaining to tree species, the Shade Tree Commission shall be
consulted for advice and recommendations.
(2) Street trees within the same block shall be of the same species
except to achieve a special effect, as approved by the Shade Tree
Commission.
Small Trees (under 30 feet)
Acer campestre -- hedge maple
Acer ginnala -- Amur maple
Acer tataricum -- Tatarian maple
Amelanchier canadensis (tree form) -- shadblow serviceberry
Amelanchier laevis (tree form) -- Allegheny serviceberry
Cornus florida -- flowering dogwood
Cornus kousa -- Chinese kousa dogwood
Crataegus monogyna, selected varieties -- hawthorn
Crataegus phaenopyrun -- Washington hawthorn
Halesia carolina -- Carolina silverbell
Malus, selected varieties -- crab apple
Prunus sargentii cv. columnara -- columnar Sargent cherry
Prunus serrulata cv. Amanogawa -- Amanogawa cherry
Prunus serrulata cv. Kwanzan -- Kwanzan cherry
Pyrus calleryana cv. Chanticleer -- Chanticleer pear
§ 51-15 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 51-17
51:59
Syringa amurensis japonica -- Japenese tree lilac
Medium Trees (30-45 feet)
Carpinus betulus -- European hornbeam
Carpinus betulus cv. Fastigiate -- upright European hornbeam
Cercidiphyllum japonicum -- katsura tree
Chionanthus virginica -- white fringe tree
Crataegus lavallei -- Lavalle hawthorn
Koelreuteria paniculata -- goldenrain tree
Malus cultivars -- crab apple
Adams
Snowdrift
White Angel
hupenhensis
zumi calocarpa
Becerly
Nyssa sylvatica -- sour gum
Phellodendron amurense -- Amur cork tree
Prunus yedoensis -- Yoshino cherry
Pyrus calleryana cultivars -- Callery pear
Aristocrat
Bradford
Dwarf Korean
Quercus acutissima -- sawtooth oak
Sorbus alnifolia -- Korean mountain ash
Sorbus aucuparia -- European mountain ash
Ulmus parvifolia -- Chinese elm
Large Trees (over 45 feet)
Acer rubrum (selected cultivars) -- red maple
Acer saccharum (selected cultivars) -- sugar maple
Corylus colurna -- Turkish filbert
Ginkgo biloba (male selections only) -- ginkgo
Metasequoia glyptostroboides -- dawn redwood
Quercus alba -- white oak
Quercus borealis -- red oak
Quercus cerris -- Turkey oak
Quercus imbricaria -- shingle oak
§ 51-17 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 51-17
51:60
§ 51-18. Tree locations and planting specifications.
Quercus phellos -- willow oak
Quercus shumardi -- Shumard oak
Sophora japonica -- Japenese pagoda tree
Taxodium distichum -- common bald cypress
Tilia cordata -- littleleaf linden
Tilia euchlora (selected cultivars) -- Crimean linden
Tilia tomentose -- silver linden
Zelkova serrata (selected cultivars) -- Japanese zelkova
(3) The use of any tree other than those listed above required the
approval of the Shade Tree Commission.
(4) Not all trees on this list are suitable for all situations. Suitability
shall be determined by the Shade Tree Commission.
B. Acquisition of trees. Only plant material grown in nurseries shall be
procured for shade tree planting. Trees should be true to form and
typical of the species.
C. Tree specifications.
(1) Each tree shall be at least eight feet in height and have a diameter
of at least 1 1/2 inches as measured at a height of six inches above
the finished ground level.
(2) Plant material shall be balled and burlapped with native soil in
which the material had been growing (no manufactured balls).
(3) The relationship between tree caliper, tree height and diameter of
the root ball shall be as follows:
Caliper
(inches)
Height Range
(feet)
Minimum Ball
Diameter
(inches)
1 1/2 to 1 3/4 8 to 10 20
1 3/4 to 2 10 to 12 22
2 to 2 1/2 12 to 14 24
NOTE: Trees with larger caliper trunks shall have ball diameters
in proportion to their size and in accordance with accepted
nursery practices.
A. Planting locations.
§ 51-17 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 51-18
51:61
(1) The actual location of each individual tree shall be determined
considering views, proximity of utility poles, overhead and guy
wires, driveways and subsurface utility installations.
(2) Trees shall be planted at least 30 feet from street intersections, at
least 15 feet from driveways and alleys and at least 10 feet from
utility poles.
(3) Spacing of trees should be determined by the Shade Tree
Commission according to local conditions, the species, cultivars or
varieties used, their mature height, spread and form. Generally, all
large trees shall be planted 40 to 60 feet on center; all mediumsized
trees shall be planted a minimum of 35 feet on center; and all
small trees shall be planted a minimum of 25 feet on center.
Whenever possible, shade trees shall be planted alternately along
each side of all streets of the development. Trees shall be spaced
without regard to property lines.
(4) The cross-sectional location of street trees shall be as follows (as a
guide):
(a) No overhead utility wires. Trees shall be located within rightof-
way, on-center between the curb and sidewalk.
(b) Utility wires overhead. Trees shall be located preferably
between the sidewalk and building setback line and at least
three feet from the sidewalk. Small trees may be planted under
utility wires with Shade Tree Commission approval.
B. Planting specifications.
(1) Tree pits shall be at least 10 inches wider in diameter than the
diameter of the root ball. Unless building debris is encountered, the
hole shall be excavated to a depth no greater than to permit the top
of the ball to be level with the rim of the hole. All encountered
debris should be removed to a minimum depth of 30 inches.
(2) Planting time. Except where waived by the Shade Tree
Commission, trees within the same block shall be planted at the
same time. Balled and burlapped material may be planted during
any period of the year when the soil is frost-free and friable.
(3) The burlap and twine covering the upper half of the ball shall be
rolled back or cut away after the plant has been set.
(4) Trees shall be staked with no less than two-by-two-inch stakes
driven 2 1/2 to three feet into the ground. Two stakes shall be
required for trees less than two inches in caliper, and three for
trees greater than two inches in caliper. The trunk shall be
protected by placing a short piece of three-fourth-inch-diameter,
two-ply reinforced hose around the guy wire where it comes in
§ 51-18 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 51-18
51:62
§ 51-19. Establishment of trees; maintenance.
contact with the tree. All stakes shall be of the same height for
uniform appearance and support.
(5) The planting hole shall be backfilled to 3/4 full with soil, followed by
10 gallons of water. When the water has been absorbed, the hole
shall be filled with topsoil and tamped lightly to finished grade.
(6) Upon completion of the transplanting operation, a wood chip or
bark mulch, two inches deep, shall be placed over the planting
area.
(7) All unused soil or other debris resulting from the planting or plant
material shall be removed from the project area.
A. Maintenance.
(1) Plant maintenance shall begin immediately after each plant is
satisfactorily installed and shall continue until final inspection by
the Shade Tree Commission.
(2) Plant maintenance shall include, but need not be limited to,
replacing mulch that has been displaced by erosion or other means,
maintaining stakes and guys as originally installed, watering when
needed or directed and performing any other work required to
keep the plants in a healthy condition. An adequate moisture
supply is estimated to be the equivalent of one inch of water per
week, delivered at weekly intervals in the form of rain or
augmented as required by periodic watering.
(3) The developer shall remove and replace all dead, defective and
rejected pants as occur during this period.
B. Guaranty. In addition to other standard provisions, the developer's
improvement bond shall also provide for the following:
(1) Maintenance necessary during establishment period.
(2) Replacement in kind, or with a substitute acceptable to the Shade
Tree Commission, of all plant material which is not in a healthy
growing condition, which has died back or is beyond normal
pruning limits.
§ 51-18 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 51-19
51:63

ARTICLE VI
Penalties
§ 51-20. Violation and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with any
provision of this chapter or any regulation promulgated pursuant thereto
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense, by a fine of
up to the maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
§ 51-20 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 51-20
51:65
Chapter 53
SMOKING
§ 51-20 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 51-20
53:66
ARTICLE I
Municipal Facilities
[Adopted 7-6-1992 by Res. No. R-92-7, approved 7-6-1992]
§ 53-1. Prohibition.
The Borough of Marcus Hook, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, hereby
establishes a prohibition on the smoking of cigarettes, cigars, pipes or
any other substance in buildings owned by the Borough of Marcus Hook,
buildings or rooms housing Borough-sponsored programs, and in municipal
vehicles.
§ 53-2. Intent.
We enact this article being mindful of the hazards of smoking and believe
it to be our responsibility to take appropriate steps to curtail this obvious
health hazard.
§ 53-1 SMOKING § 53-2
53:67
Chapter 54
SOCIAL SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions and retirement — See Ch. 31.
§ 54-1. Legislative declaration.
It is the considered opinion of the Borough Council that the extension of the
social security system to employees and officers of the Borough of Marcus
Hook will be of great benefit, not only to the employees of the Borough by
providing that said employees and officers may participate in the provisions
of the old-age and survivors insurance system, but also to the Borough of
Marcus Hook by enabling it to attract and retain in employment the best of
personnel and thus increase the efficiency of its government.
§ 54-2. Authority of Borough to accept coverage.
The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in regular session, enacted a statute, known as "Act No.
491,"26 which is the enabling act provided for in Section 218 of Public
Law 734, 81st Congress, which designated the Secretary of Labor and
Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act as the state agency
to implement the coverage of employees and officers under the said oldage
and survivors insurance system. The Borough of Marcus Hook is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver to the state agency a plan or plans and
agreement, required under Section 6 of said enabling act27 and the Social
Security Act, to extend coverage to employees and officers of the Borough
of Marcus Hook and do all other necessary things to effectuate coverage of
employees and officers under the old-age and survivors insurance system.
§ 54-3. Authority of Borough Secretary.
The Secretary is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll
deduction to be matched by payments by the Borough of Marcus Hook to
be made into the contribution fund of the Social Security Act through the
office of the state agency, and to make charges of this tax to the fund or
funds from which wage or salary payments are issued to employees of the
Borough of Marcus Hook. Such payments are to be made in accordance
with the provisions of the law and regulations promulgated by the state
agency and the Federal Security Administrator. Such payments which are
delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month until such
time as payments are made.
26.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq.
27.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 206.
§ 53-2 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 54-4
54:68
§ 54-4. Appropriation; commencement of participation.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the Borough
of Marcus Hook in the necessary amount to pay into the contribution fund
as provided in Section 4 of the enabling act28 and in accordance with the
plan or plans and agreement. Authority is given to the Burgess and the
Secretary of the Borough of Marcus Hook to enter into an agreement with
the state agency, which agreement shall be in accordance with Act No.
49129 and with paragraph 218 of the Social Security Act. Such plan and
agreement shall provide that the participation of this Borough of Marcus
Hook shall commence as of July 1, 1952.
Chapter 57
VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 34.
§ 57-1. Committee created.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Urban Redevelopment Law, Act of May
24, 1945, P.L. 991, as amended,30 there is hereby created a Vacant Property
Review Committee to function within the Borough of Marcus Hook and
which shall exercise all powers and be subject to all limitations as provided
in said Act.
§ 57-2. Membership.
The membership of the Vacant Property Review Committee shall consist of
the following persons:
A. A member of Borough Council.
B. A representative of the County of Delaware Redevelopment Authority.
C. A representative of the Borough Planning Commission.
D. A representative appointed by the chief executive officer of the Borough
of Marcus Hook.
E. A representative of the Marcus Hook Community Development
Corporation.
28.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 204.
29.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq.
30.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1701 et seq.
§ 54-4 VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE § 57-3
57:69
§ 57-3. Officers.
The Chairman of the Vacant Property Review Committee shall be appointed
by the President of the Borough Council from those persons identified in
§ 57-2. The members of the Committee shall select from among themselves
a Vice Chairman, a Secretary and such other officers as the Committee may
determine.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 62
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 196.
§ 57-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 57-3
62:70
ARTICLE I
Public Indecency
[Adopted 10-7-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-5, approved 10-7-1996]
§ 62-1. Prohibited conduct.
A person who knowingly or intentionally, in a public place, A. engages in
sexual intercourse; B. engages in deviate sexual intercourse as defined by
the Pennsylvania Crimes Code; C. appears in a state of nudity; or D. fondles
the genitals of himself, herself or another person commits public indecency,
a summary offense.
§ 62-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genital, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; the
exposure of any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance
of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum anal region or
pubic hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the
nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives
the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes all outdoor places owned by or open to the
general public and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open
to the general public, including such places of entertainment, taverns,
restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls
limited to specific members restricted to adults or to patrons invited to
attend, whether or not an admission charge is levied.
§ 62-3. Exemptions.
The prohibition set forth in § 62-1C shall not apply to:
§ 62-4. Public nuisances; abatement.
In addition to the specific penalties provided in this article, it is hereby
decided that any building, portion of a building or enclosed place regularly
used for the prohibited display of public nudity is a public nuisance,
subjecting the owner, proprietor or other operator thereof to any and all
actions authorized by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the abatement
of pubic nuisances, including but not limited to the procedures set forth in
the Codified Ordinances.
A. Any child under 10 years of age; or
B. Any individual exposing a breast in the process of breastfeeding an
infant under two years of age.
§ 62-1 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 62-5
62:71
§ 62-5. Construction and severability.
It is the intention of the Borough of Marcus Hook that the provisions
of this article be construed, enforced and interpreted in such a manner
as will cause the least possible infringement of the constitutional rights
of free speech, free expression, due process, equal protection or other
fundamental rights consistent with the purposes of this article. Should a
court of competent jurisdiction determine that any part of this article, or
any application or enforcement of it, is excessively restrictive of such rights
or liberties, then such portion of the article, or specific application of the
article, shall be severed from the remainder, which shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 62-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article either by commission of a
public indecency or by the promotion or maintenance of a public indecency
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up
to the maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
§ 62-5 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 62-6
62:72
ARTICLE II
Obscene Materials
[Adopted 10-7-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-6, approved 10-7-1996]
§ 62-7. Purpose.
Pursuant to the authority granted in the Borough Code to prohibit
nuisances; to promote the health, cleanliness, comfort and safety of the
citizens of the Borough of Marcus Hook and the authority of political
subdivisions of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to enact local
ordinances to regulate, inter alia, the sale, distribution, display and
exhibition of and activities concerning obscene and other sexual material
as provided for in 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903(k) and as upheld by the United
States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, in Brown v.
Pornography Commission of Lower Southampton Township, 620 F. Supp
1199 (1985), the Borough of Marcus Hook enacts the following article.
§ 62-8. Prohibited conduct; definitions.
A. Offenses defined. No person, knowing the obscene character of the
material or performances involved, shall, within the Borough of Marcus
Hook:
(1) Display or cause or permit the display of any explicit, sexual
materials as defined in Subsection C in or on any window,
showcase, newsstand, display rack, billboard, display board,
viewing screen, motion-picture screen, marquee or similar place in
such a manner that the display is visible from any public street,
highway, sidewalk, transportation facility or other public
thoroughfare, or in any business or commercial establishment
where minors, as a part of the general public or otherwise, are or
will probably be exposed to view all or any part of such materials;
(2) Sell, lend, distribute, exhibit, give away or show any obscene
materials to any person 18 years of age or older or offer to sell,
lend, distribute, exhibit or give away or show, or have in his
possession with intent to sell, lend, distribute, exhibit or give away
or show, any obscene materials to any person 18 years of age or
older, or knowingly advertise any obscene materials in any manner;
(3) Design, copy, draw, photograph, print, utter, publish or in any
manner manufacture or prepare any obscene materials;
(4) Write, print, publish, utter or cause to be written, printed,
published or uttered any advertisement or notice of any kind giving
information, directly or indirectly, stating or purporting to state
where, how, from whom or by what means any obscene materials
can be purchased, obtained or had;
§ 62-7 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 62-8
62:73
(5) Produce, present or direct any obscene performance or participate
in a portion thereof that is obscene or that contributes to its
obscenity; or
(6) Hire, employ, use or permit any minor child to do or assist in doing
any act or thing mentioned in this subsection.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings given to them in this subsection:
COMMUNITY — For the purpose of applying the contemporary
community standards in this article, "community" means the state.
KNOWING — As used in Subsection A, having general knowledge of or
reason to know or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further
inspection or inquiry of the character and content of any material
or performance described therein which is reasonably susceptible of
examination by the person charged with violation of this article.
MATERIAL — Any literature, including any book, magazine, pamphlet,
newspaper, storypaper, bumper sticker, comic book or writing; any
figure, visual representation or image, including any drawing,
photograph, picture, videotape or motion picture.
NUDE — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area
or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or showing the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple.
OBSCENE — Any material or performance, if:
PERFORMANCE — Any play, dance or other live exhibition performed
before an audience.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — In a sexual context, flagellation or
torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments, a
mask or in a bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound
or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one who is nude or so
clothed.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Patently offensive representations or
descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including sexual intercourse, anal or oral sodomy and sexual
bestiality; and patently offensive representations or descriptions of
The average person applying contemporary standards would find
that the subject matter taken as a whole appeals to the prurient
interest;
(1)
The subject matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive way
sexual conduct of a type described in this article; and
(2)
The subject matter taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, educational or scientific value.
(3)
§ 62-8 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 62-8
62:74
masturbation, excretory functions, sadomasochistic abuse and lewd
exhibition of the genitals.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — Any conveyance, premises or place
used for or in connection with public passenger transportation, whether
by air, rail, motor vehicle or any other method, including aircraft,
railroad cars, buses and air, boat, railroad and bus terminals and
stations.
C. Dissemination to minors. No person shall knowingly disseminate by
sale, loan or otherwise explicit sexual materials to a minor. "Explicit
sexual materials," as used in this subsection, means materials which are
obscene or:
(1) Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion-picture film,
videotape or similar visual representation or image of a person or
portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or
sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors; or
(2) Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, however
reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter
enumerated in this section, or explicit and detailed verbal
descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual
conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is
harmful to minors.
D. Admitting minor to show. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly
to exhibit for monetary consideration to a minor or knowingly to sell to
a minor an admission ticket or pass or knowingly to admit a minor for a
monetary consideration to premises whereon there is exhibited a
motion-picture show or other presentation or performance which, in
whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic
abuse and which is harmful to minors, except that the foregoing shall
not apply to any minor accompanied by his parent.
E. Definitions. As used in Subsections C and D of this article:
HARMFUL TO MINORS — That quality of any description or
representation, in whatever form of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, when it:
Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest
of minors;
(1)
Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community
as a whole with respect to what is suitable materials for minors;
and
(2)
Taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political,
educational or scientific value for minors.
(3)
§ 62-8 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 62-8
62:75
§ 62-9. Exemptions.
Nothing in this article shall apply to any recognized historical society or
museum accorded charitable status by the federal government, any county,
city, borough, township or town library, any public library, any library of any
school, college or university or any archive or library under the supervision
and control of the Commonwealth or a political subdivision.
KNOWINGLY — Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a
belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry
of both:
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of
the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion
thereof below the top of the nipple or the depiction of covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person who is clad in undergarments, a mask or in bizarre costume
or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically
restrained on the part of one so clothed.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual
intercourse, sexual bestiality or physical contact with a person's clothed
or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be a
female, breast.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female
genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
The character and content of any material or performance
described herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by
the person charged with violation of this article; and
(1)
The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake
shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the person
charged with violation of this article made a reasonable bona fide
attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
(2)
F. Requiring sale as a condition of business dealings. No person shall
knowingly require any distributor or retail seller as a condition to sale
or delivery for resale or consignment of any literature, book, magazine,
pamphlet, newspaper, storypaper, paper, comic book, writing, drawing,
photograph, videotape, figure or image, or any written or printed
matter, or any article or instrument to purchase or take by consignment
for purposes of sale, resale or distribution any obscene literature, book,
magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, storypaper, paper, comic book,
writing, drawing, photograph, videotape, figure of image or any written
or printed matter of an obscene nature or any article or instrument of
an obscene nature.
§ 62-8 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 62-10
62:76
§ 62-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the maximum
amount provided from time to time by state statute.
§ 62-10 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 62-10
62:77
Chapter 64
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 124.
§ 64-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ALCOHOL — Ethyl alcohol of any degree of proof originally produced by
the distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted with
or without water, whatever may be the origin thereof, and shall include
synthetic ethyl alcohol but shall not mean or include ethyl alcohol, whether
or not diluted, that has been denatured or otherwise rendered unfit for
beverage purposes.
PERSON — Includes any individual, whether a resident or nonresident of
the Borough of Marcus Hook and whether male or female.
PUBLIC WAY OR PLACE — Every way or place, of whatever nature, located
within the Borough of Marcus Hook, open to the use of the public as a
matter of right for the purposes of vehicular or pedestrian travel.
§ 64-2. Consumption in public places prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully consume in or upon public
ways or places within the Borough of Marcus Hook any beverage containing
any percentage of alcohol whatsoever.
§ 64-3. Prima facie evidence of consumption.
The possession of an open container containing a beverage with any
percentage of alcohol whatsoever in or upon the public ways or places of
the Borough of Marcus Hook shall be prima facie evidence of consumption
of such beverage in violation of this chapter.
§ 64-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person found guilty after hearing before a District Justice having
jurisdiction within the Borough of Marcus Hook of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by up
to the maximum fine as provided from time to time by state statute.
§ 62-10 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 64-4
64:78
Chapter 67
AMUSEMENTS, LICENSING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 151.
§ 67-1. License required; fee.
Any person or persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations now
conducting or hereafter desiring to open in the Borough of Marcus Hook a
poolroom or poolrooms or bowling alley or alleys and to conduct the same
shall first obtain a permit or license from the Borough Secretary and pay to
the said Secretary therefor the following fees: for each and every pool table,
bowling alley and shuffleboard, the sum of $10 per year.
§ 67-2. Hours of operation.
No poolroom, bowling or shuffleboard alley shall open for business before
7:00 a.m. each day; and when open, such business shall continue to remain
open until 12:00 midnight, and no such poolroom, bowling or shuffleboard
alley shall be open for the transaction of business on any Sabbath day of the
year.
§ 67-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
Chapter 70
BILLBOARDS AND ADVERTISING STRUCTURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 157.
Zoning — See Ch. 196.
§ 70-1. Insecure advertising structures prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or company to erect
and construct within the limits of the Borough any insecure showboard,
billboard, advertising structure or other boards or structures for the
purpose of painting, pasting, posting or otherwise putting and placing
§ 64-4 AMUSEMENTS, LICENSING OF § 70-1
67:79
thereon any advertisement, sign, notice or show bill of any nature or kind
whatsoever, provided that the provisions hereof shall not apply to any sign
or advertisement in front of and at any church, theater, place of amusement,
store, office or place of business, which may remain or be put up and placed
under existing laws and ordinances.
§ 70-2. Construction standards.
No showboard, billboard, advertising structure or other board or structure
shall be constructed and erected in the Borough limits unless the same
shall be constructed of galvanized iron or other similar material, built on
substantial timber or other substantial support in a safe and workmanlike
manner, and the same shall not be constructed or erected within 10 feet of
the building line of any premises.
§ 70-3. Indecent advertisements prohibited.
There shall not be painted, pasted or put on such secure boards or
structures, located as aforesaid, any immoral or indecent advertisements or
pictures.
§ 70-4. Nuisances prohibited.
The said boards or structures shall not be permitted to become nuisances
either from the construction or maintenance or use thereof.
§ 70-5. License tax.
All such boards and structures shall each be liable to an annual license
tax of $10. The said tax shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Borough
on or before the first day of April of each year, and it shall be the duty
of said Treasurer, upon the payment of said tax, to issue a license to the
person, firm, corporation or company paying, authorizing the construction
and erection as aforesaid.
§ 70-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
Chapter 73
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 157.
§ 70-1 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 70-6
70:80
§ 73-1. Weeds or grass over certain height prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons or corporation, owners and/or
occupiers of land in the Borough of Marcus Hook, to permit the growth of
grass or weeds upon said lands in excess of six inches in height or to plant
or permit to grow any vegetation to create unpleasant or obnoxious odors
or to create or produce pollen detrimental to the health of any citizen or
citizens of the Borough.
§ 73-1.1. Front yard vegetable gardens prohibited. [Added 5-4-2009
by Ord. No. O-09-3, approved 5-4-2009]
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons or corporation, owners and/or
occupiers of land in the Borough of Marcus Hook to plant or maintain a
vegetable garden in the front, yard of a residential property.
§ 73-2. Height of hedges; obstructing view of vehicles.
It shall also be unlawful for any person, persons or corporation, owners and/
or occupiers of land in the Borough of Marcus Hook, to grow or permit to
grow any hedge, bushes or vegetation which encroaches upon the sidewalk,
roadway, lane or streets of the Borough of Marcus Hook, or to permit any
hedge, bushes or vegetation growing along any sidewalk, street, lane or
road in the Borough of Marcus Hook to exceed four feet in height, or to
permit the same to grow in such a manner as to obstruct the view of vehicles
approaching in the highway.
§ 73-3. Notice to cut or remove vegetation. [Amended 12-3-2018 by
Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
Any person, persons or corporations violating the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon receipt of five days' notice from the Code Enforcement Officer
or Police Department, remove, cut or destroy any such grass, weeds or
vegetation growing in violation of the terms of this chapter.
§ 73-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
In the event of the refusal of said owners or occupiers of the land to remove
any grass, weeds or vegetation growing in violation of the terms of this
chapter, they shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense
by a fine of up to the maximum amount as provided from time to time by
state statute.
§ 73-5. Removal by Borough; lien for cost.
In addition to the penalty prescribed in the foregoing section, the Borough
Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook shall have the right to cut and
remove any grass, weeds or vegetation growing in violation of this chapter
§ 70-6 BILLBOARDS AND ADVERTISING § 73-5
70:81
after five days' notice has been served upon the owners and/or occupiers
of the property and to file a municipal lien in the Office of Judicial Support
of the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County for the cost of the
removal of such grass, weeds or vegetation against the premises violating
the provisions of this chapter, or in the discretion of Council, an action at
law may be commenced against the owners and/or occupiers of land to
recover the costs of the removal of such grass, weeds or vegetation at an
action at law.
Chapter 76
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 84.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 96.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 99.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 132.
Plumbing — See Ch. 154.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 157.
§ 76-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-4; approved 12-3-2018]
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401
to 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of the Borough of
Marcus Hook.
§ 76-2. Repealer.
By this chapter, former Chapter 76, entitled "Building Construction," of the
Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Marcus Hook, Pennsylvania, 1990, as
supplemented and amended, and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances
in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.31
§ 76-3. Amendments.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. In Section 101.1, second line, insert "the Borough of Marcus Hook,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania."
B. In Section 104.1, Code official, insert "For the purpose of this chapter,
the term 'code official' shall be synonymous with 'Code Enforcement
Officer' wherever it may appear."
31.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 76 consisted of Ord. No. O-83-12, adopted 12-5-1983, approved
12-5-1983, as amended.
§ 73-5 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 76-3
70:82
C. In Section 108.5, Approved construction documents, add a second and
third sentence to read as follows: "Where required, approval of local
boards, commissions or Borough Council shall be secured prior to the
issuance of a permit. Approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor
and Industry shall be secured, where applicable, prior to the issuance of
a permit."
D. In Section 110.0, Demolition of Structures, insert the following:
110.1.1 Other permits required: At the time of filing an application
for a permit, the applicant must provide evidence of receipt of all
necessary permits, licenses, approvals and/or variances as may be
required by the laws of the municipality and the commonwealth.
Individuals, agencies, boards and commissions issuing aforesaid
permits, licenses, approvals and/or variances shall include, but not
be limited to, the Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board, the Fire
Chief, the State Police Fire Marshal, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources, the Pennsylvania Department of Community
Affairs, the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry and
applicable federal agencies.
110.1.2 Stay of demolition: The code official is to advise the Council
of the Borough of Marcus Hook of any application received for a
permit to demolish any structure included in the Delaware County
Historic Resources Survey for Marcus Hook Borough, August 1981.
The Council may order a stay of demolition for no more than 120
days in order to develop alternative strategies for preserving any
and all buildings included in the Delaware County Historic Resources
Survey for Marcus Hook Borough, such structures having historic and/
or cultural value to the community.
110.1.3 Determination of Building Official: In the event that the
owner or agent is unable to obtain the releases required in Section
110.1, the code official shall inspect the premises for which application
has been made to determine that utility service connections and
appurtenant equipment have been removed or scaled and plugged in a
safe manner.
110.1.4 Technical specifications: All demolition shall conform to
the following requirements: Where, under these requirements,
responsibilities are imposed upon a "contractor," that term shall also
mean any person performing the demolition work, including
contractors and the owner or agents of the owner. Final responsibility
for compliance with all requirements shall be that of the owner of the
structure being demolished.
110.1.5 Inclusions in work: The work to be performed shall include
the demolition of all structures, vaults, steps and walls and the disposal
of all excess material, junk and rubbish.
§ 76-3 BILLBOARDS AND ADVERTISING § 76-3
70:83
110.1.6 Building permit required: The contractor shall not
commence work, nor shall be remove from the site of demolition
anything or any materials, until the contractor has received a building
permit from the Borough of Marcus Hook.
110.1.7 When sidewalk shed required: If the structure to be
demolished is more than two stories or 25 feet high, measured from
sidewalk or street level, and the horizontal distance from the inside of
the sidewalk to the structure is 15 feet or less, a substantial sidewalk
shed shall be constructed over the entire length of the sidewalk,
adjacent to the structure, of sufficient width to accommodate
pedestrian traffic without causing congestion. The sidewalk shed shall
be lighted either by natural or artificial means sufficient to ensure
safety at all times.
110.1.8 Fencing: When the horizontal distance from the inside of the
sidewalk to a structure is more than 15 feet and less than 25 feet,
a sidewalk shed may be constructed over the sidewalk as described
above, or, in place of such a shed, a substantial fence shall be
constructed along the inside edge of the sidewalk, or, if permission has
been granted to close the sidewalk, a substantial fence eight feet high
may be constructed at the curbline, and a safe place to walk in the
cartway of the street shall be provided. When demolition work using
machinery methods is employed, the buildings may be demolished in
a step-like fashion as long as adequate lateral support of the structure
exists. No wall, chimney or other construction shall be allowed to fall
in mass on an upper floor. Bulky material, such as beams and columns,
shall be lowered and not allowed to fall.
110.1.9 Barriers: Suitable barriers subject to the approval of the
code official shall be erected and maintained by the contractor around
all openings in the ground as long as such openings shall, in the
opinion of the code official, constitute a hazard or a dangerous
condition.
110.1.10 Warning signs: The contractor shall furnish, erect and
maintain approved danger, warning and "keep-out" signs at places and
locations where the placing of such signs is warranted, especially in
working areas, or as directed by the code official.
110.1.11 Prevention of spread of dust: During the demolition of
buildings and structures, the work shall be kept thoroughly wetted
down to prevent the spread of dust. The contractor shall provide
necessary water and connections therefor.
110.1.12 Capping of sewer laterals: All sewer laterals must be
capped at the curb by the contractor before any demolition starts. A
permit must be obtained from the Plumbing Inspector of the Borough
of Marcus Hook.
110.1.13 Removal of combustible materials: All combustible
material from the demolition activity shall be removed from the site,
and any basements or pits exposed by such demolition activity shall be
backfilled to at least the adjacent grade levels.
§ 76-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 76-3
70:84
110.1.14 Window and door frames: Window and door frames shall
not be removed until the demolition work shall have progressed to
their elevations in the walls.
110.1.15 Walls above first floor: No portions of walls above the
elevation of the first floor and located immediately adjacent and
parallel to any street shall be thrown, but they shall be barred loose
and demolished piecemeal.
110.1.16 Removal of floors, fixtures and apparatus: All floor
construction, except basement floor, shall be removed regardless of
elevation or location. All basement partitions, furnaces, heating
apparatus, piping, gasoline or oil tanks, miscellaneous fixtures and
stairways shall be removed from the area of demolition.
110.1.17 Adjacent buildings: The contractor shall leave contiguous
buildings in a safe condition and shall not deface, mar, hurt or
jeopardize any adjacent buildings, and any damage done to such
adjacent or nearby building shall be repaired or restored by the
contractor to the satisfaction of the code official. Extreme care must
be exercised in the demolition of buildings adjacent to other structures
which are to remain. The contractor shall be responsible for damages
to adjacent buildings, and all repairs shall be made by the contractor
at no expense to the adjacent building owner. Any walls of contiguous
buildings left exposed by this demolition shall be preserved-treated
in the manner specified in BOCA Section 3309.3.1 so as to seal the
surface of such walls and provide adequate weather protection. All
work required by this section shall be completed within 30 days from
the date any demolition work results in exposure to the elements of
contiguous building walls or parapets, which time may be extended by
the code official for good cause.
110.1.18 Additional materials: The contractor shall furnish, at his
expense, all additional materials required for filling subsurface areas
to the grade of the surface of the adjoining ground. Said material
required shall be of a quality acceptable to the code official, and a
sufficient quantity shall be on hand to ensure uninterrupted progress
in completing the backfilling. On completion of the demolition, the
cellar shall be filled to a level not higher than the existing sidewalk and
yard. All backfilling shall be done in twelve-inch layers and each layer
compacted by a ten-ton roller or its equivalent. Compacting the backfill
with any loader is not acceptable. 18 inches of soil free from stones,
clods and debris shall be evenly spread over all demolished structures.
The entire area shall be cleaned and graded so that a rotary mower
can be used in cutting the grass or weeds.
110.1.19 Burning prohibited: No burning shall be permitted on the
site. Combustible material shall be disposed of by the contractor.
§ 76-3 BILLBOARDS AND ADVERTISING § 76-3
70:85
110.1.20 Removal of debris and equipment: The contractor shall
remove all debris and equipment and dispose of all material from the
site of the work and leave the ground clear of all materials, rubbish and
debris and in a clean, neat condition as demolition of each structure is
completed.
E. Section 112.3.1, Fee schedule, shall be changed to read as follows:
"Fees for plan examination, building permit and inspection shall be
determined by resolution by the Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook
and may, from time to time, be changed by resolution."
F. Section 112.5, Refunds: delete in its entirety.
G. In Section 117.2, Unlawful continuance, the last part of the sentence
shall read "shall be liable to a fine as prescribed in this chapter."
H. Section 119.0, Unsafe Structures and Equipment, is revised as follows:
119.1.1 Right of condemnation: To further clarify the intent of
this section regarding unsafe structures, where conditions or defects
herein described exist to the extent that life, health, property or safety
of the public or the occupants of the structure is endangered, such
structures shall be deemed to fall within the meaning of this chapter.
1. Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means
of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to
provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
2. Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, wind,
explosion, flood, subsidence or by any other cause so that the
structural strength or stability is less than the minimum
requirements of this code and is likely to fail or become dislodged
or to collapse and thereby injure persons or property.
3. Whenever any building or structure has become so dilapidated or
deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children or
a harborage for vagrants or criminals, so as to enable persons to
resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful acts.
4. Whenever any building or structure, because of deterioration,
damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-restrictive
construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating
apparatus or other cause, is determined by the Fire Chief or the
code official to be a fire hazard.
5. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a
site after demolition or destruction so as to cause an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
§ 76-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 76-3
70:86
119.3 Notice: All buildings or structures regulated by this code which
are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress or which
constitute a fire hazard or are otherwise dangerous to human life
are, for the purpose of this section, unsafe. Any use of buildings or
structures constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare
by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire
hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment are, for the purpose of this
section, unsafe uses. Parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks,
statuary and other appendages or structural members which are
supported by, attached to or a part of a building and which are in
deteriorated condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads
which are specified in the Building Code are hereby designated as
unsafe building appendages.
All such unsafe buildings, structures or appendages are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the code or such alternate procedures as may
have been or may be adopted by this jurisdiction. As an alternative,
the code official, or official of this jurisdiction as designated by the
governing body, may institute any other appropriate action to prevent,
restrain, correct or abate the violation.
119.6 Disregard of unsafe notice:
1. General. After any order of the code official made pursuant to this
chapter shall have become final, no person to whom any such order
is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any
such person who fails to comply with any such order shall be guilty
of a summary offense.
2. Failure to obey order. If, after any order of the code official made
pursuant to this chapter has become final, the person to whom such
order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order,
the code official may cause such person to be prosecuted for a
summary offense or institute any appropriate action to abate such
building as a public nuisance.
3. Failure to commence work. Whenever the required repair or
demolition is not commenced within the stipulated time or 30 days
after any final notice and order issued under this chapter becomes
effective:
(a) The code official shall cause the building described in such
notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance
thereto a notice reading: "Unsafe Building. Do Not Occupy. It
Is a Summary Offense To Occupy This Building or To Remove
or Deface This Notice. Code Official, Borough of Marcus
Hook."
§ 76-3 BILLBOARDS AND ADVERTISING § 76-3
70:87
(b) No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as
specified in this subsection. No person shall remove or deface
any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or
removal ordered by the code official have been completed and
a certificate of occupancy permit has been issued pursuant to
the provisions of the BOCA Building Code Section 118.1.
(c) The Code Official may, in addition to any other remedy herein
provided, cause the building to be repaired to the extent
necessary to correct the defect or, if the notice and order
required demolition, cause the building to be demolished and
the materials, rubble and debris therefor removed and the lot
cleaned.
The cost of such repairs, improvements or vacating and
closing, removal or demolition shall be placed as a municipal
lien against the real property upon which the cost was
incurred. If the structure is removed or demolished by the
order of the Code Official, he shall sell the materials of such
structure for the best price attainable and shall credit the
proceeds of such sale against the cost of removal or
demolition. Any surplus realized from the demolition of any
such building over and above the cost of demolition and
cleaning the lot shall be paid over to the person or persons
lawfully entitled thereto.
(d) Extension of time to perform work. Upon receipt of an
application from the person required to conform to the order
and an agreement by such person that he will comply with
the order if allowed additional time, the code official may,
at his discretion, grant an extension of time, not to exceed
an additional 60 days, within which to complete said repair,
rehabilitation or demolition if the code official determines
such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a
situation imminently dangerous to life or property. An
additional 60 days may be granted at the discretion of the
Building Code Board of Appeals.
4. Abatement of unsafe buildings. All buildings or portions thereof
which are determined after inspection by the code official to be
unsafe as defined in this chapter are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition
or removal in accordance with the following standards or as
otherwise provided in this chapter:
(a) If the unsafe building, whether or not vacant, can reasonably
be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the
terms of this chapter, it shall be ordered to be repaired in
accordance with the current Building Code.
§ 76-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 76-3
70:88
§ 76-4. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any lawsuit or proceeding impending in any court or
any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 76-2 of this chapter, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 78
OPEN BURNING AND AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
§ 78-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Marcus
Hook Open Burning-Air Pollution Control Ordinance of 1999."
§ 78-2. Policy.
Whereas the Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook has determined that
air pollution from open burning may be detrimental to the health, comfort,
living conditions, welfare and safety of the citizens of the Borough, it is
hereby declared to be the policy of the Borough to safeguard the citizens of
the Borough of Marcus Hook from such air pollution.
(b) If the cost of such repair, alterations to any unsafe building or
improvement shall exceed 50% of the value of the structure
or if it cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in
violation of the provisions of this chapter, it may be ordered to
be demolished by the Building Official.
I. In Section 121.1, Application for appeal, delete the first sentence and
add: "Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code
official to the Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook. An application
for a special hearing may be made in writing to the Manager/
Secretary's office within 20 days of the time the notice was served."
J. In Section 121.2, Membership of board, replace with: "For the purpose
of this chapter, the word 'Board,' wherever it may appear in this code,
will be defined as meaning the Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook."
K. Sections 121.2.1 through 121.2.6 are hereby deleted.
L. In Section 121.5, Postponed hearing, change the words "When five
members" to the words "When any four Council members."
§ 76-3 BILLBOARDS AND ADVERTISING § 78-3
70:89
§ 78-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the chapter, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them:
AIR BASIN — The Southeast Pennsylvania air basin which is comprised of
the Counties of Bucks, Chester, Delaware, Montgomery and Philadelphia.
AIR CURTAIN DESTRUCTOR — A mechanical device which forcefully
projects a curtain of air across a pit in which open burning is being
conducted so that combustion efficiency is increased and smoke and other
particulate matter are contained.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Marcus Hook.
BURNING — The act of consuming by fire; to flame, char, scorch or blaze.
As used in this chapter, "smoldering" shall have the same meaning as
burning, and any smoldering shall be deemed a burning.
CLEARING and GRUBBING WASTES — Trees, shrubs and other native
vegetation which are cleared from land during or prior to the process of
construction. The term does not include demolition wastes and dirt laden
roots.
OPEN BURNING — A fire, the air contaminants from which are emitted
directly into the outdoor atmosphere and not directed thereto through a
flue.
PERSON — Any individual, sole proprietorship, public or private
corporation, for profit or not for profit, association, partnership, joint
venture, firm, trust, estate, department, board, bureau or agency of the
commonwealth, of the federal government, political subdivision,
municipality, district, authority or any other entity of whatever type.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, garden residue, tree trimmings,
chipped shrubbery and other vegetative material.
§ 78-4. Regulations.
After September 7, 1999, no person may intentionally, maliciously,
recklessly or negligently cause or permit the open burning of any material
with the exception of the following:
A. A fire set to prevent or abate a fire hazard, when approved by the
Department of Environmental Protections' Regional Air Quality
Program office and set by or under the supervision of a public officer.
B. Any fire set for the purpose of instructing personnel in fire fighting,
when approved by the Department of Environmental Protections'
Regional Air Quality Program office.
C. A fire set for the prevention and control of disease or pests, when
approved by the Department of Environmental Protections' Regional
Air Quality Program office.
§ 78-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 78-4
70:90
D. A fire set for the purpose of burning, clearing and grubbing waste. If
within an air basin, an air curtain destructor must be used and must be
approved by the Department of Environmental Protections' Regional
Air Quality Program office.
E. Industrial flaring in compliance with Pennsylvania's air pollution
control regulations.
F. A fire set solely for food cooking in a barbecue grill or outdoor stove
used strictly for food cooking and fueled by natural gas, propane,
charcoal, or other appropriate fuels. [Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-4, approved 9-3-2013]
G. Fires set solely for recreational purposes, provided they are fully
contained within a screened chiminea or an aboveground fire-retardant
container, subject to the following restrictions: [Amended 9-3-2013
by Ord. No. O-13-4, approved 9-3-2013]
(1) Only cleaned seasoned firewood or charcoal may be burned. No
burning of trash, leaves, brush, pressure-treated wood or painted
wood is permitted.
(2) All openings in the container must be covered with wire mesh or
other noncombustible screening materials that will prevent the
passage of sparks or embers.
(3) Fires must be kept in the rear yard at least five feet from any
structure, property line, or combustible exterior wall.
(4) All fires must be constantly attended by at least one adult person,
18 years of age or older, until they are completely extinguished. A
minimum of one portable fire extinguisher with a minimum 4-A
rating or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such
as dirt, sand, water barrel, water bucket or garden hose shall be
available for immediate utilization.
(5) Fires are not permitted during adverse wind or weather conditions.
(6) Fires shall not be permitted to smolder.
(7) Fires shall not impact neighboring properties by discharging
obnoxious odors, dense smoke, or fly ash.
(8) All open fires as set forth herein shall be extinguished no later than
12:00 midnight.
(9) Any fire permitted to burn in an unsafe manner, under adverse
weather conditions, unsupervised, determined unsafe by the Fire
Marshal, a police officer or the Code Enforcement Officer, or in
violation of any provision of this chapter, shall be extinguished
immediately upon demand of such official.
§ 78-4 BILLBOARDS AND ADVERTISING § 78-4
70:91
§ 78-5. Enforcement orders.
§ 78-6. Responsibility of owners and operators.
H. Fires set solely for recreational and ceremonial purposes, such as
school pep rally bonfires, scouting, historical reenactments, and
community-sponsored events, all with prior written approval from the
Borough Manager and Fire Marshal. [Added 9-3-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-4, approved 9-3-2013]
A. The Borough Police Department, Code Enforcement Officer, Zoning
Officer or any other duly authorized agent shall have the power and
duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Borough may issue such orders as are necessary to aid in the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Such orders may be
issued if the Borough finds that any condition existing is causing or
contributing to open burning or if the Borough finds that any person is
in violation of any provision of this chapter.
C. The Borough may, in its order, require compliance with such conditions
as are necessary to prevent or abate open burning or effect the
purposes of the chapter.
D. An order issued under this section shall take effect upon notice or the
posting thereof, unless the order specifies otherwise. An appeal of the
Borough's order shall not act as a supersedeas.
E. The authority of the Borough to issue an order under this section is in
addition to any remedy or penalty which may be imposed pursuant to
this chapter. The failure to comply with any such order is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
A. Whenever a police officer, the Code Enforcement Officer, the Zoning
Officer or any other duly authorized agent of the Borough finds that
open burning is occurring in the Borough, other than those exceptions
noted in § 78-4 of this chapter, the enforcement officer may order the
owner or operator to take corrective action in a manner satisfactory to
the Borough or the officer may order the owner or operator to allow
access to the land by the officer or a third party to take such action.
B. For purposes of collecting or recovering the costs involved in taking
corrective action or pursuing a cost recovery action pursuant to an
order or recovering the cost of litigation, oversight, monitoring,
sampling, testing and investigation related to a corrective action, the
Borough may collect the amount in the same manner as civil penalties
are assessed and collected following the process for assessment and
collection of a civil penalty contained in § 78-8 of this chapter.
§ 78-4 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 78-7
70:92
§ 78-7. Criminal penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished for each
separate offense by a fine up to the maximum amount and or imprisonment
up to the maximum period provided from time to time by state statute. Each
day of violation and or each occurrence shall constitute a separate violation.
Police officers and other employees of the Borough authorized to conduct
inspections or investigations are hereby declared to be law enforcement
officers authorized to issue or file citations for summary violations under
this chapter, and the Borough Solicitor is hereby authorized to prosecute
these offenses. There is no accelerated rehabilitative disposition authorized
for a summary offense.
§ 78-8. Civil penalties.
In addition to proceeding under any other remedy available at law or in
equity for a violation of a provision of this chapter or any order issued
pursuant to this chapter, the Borough may assess a civil penalty for the
violation. The penalty may be assessed whether or not the violation was
willful. The civil penalty so assessed shall not exceed the maximum amount
provided from time to time by state statute and shall be recovered from the
owner or owners of such property or premises or from any person causing
or maintaining the same in the same manner as fines and penalties are now
by law collectible.
§ 78-9. Unlawful conduct.
It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with or to cause or desist in the
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or to fail to comply with any
order or other requirement of the Borough; or to cause a public nuisance; or
to cause air, soil or water pollution resulting from an open burning incident;
or to hinder, obstruct, prevent or interfere with the Borough or its personnel
in their performance of any duty hereunder, including denying the Borough
access to the source or facility. The owner or operator of an open burning
source shall not allow pollution of the air, water or other natural resources
of the Borough to result from the source.
§ 78-10. Public nuisance.
A violation of this chapter or of any order issued by the Borough under
this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance. The Borough shall have the
authority to order any person causing a public nuisance to abate the public
nuisance. In addition, when abating a public nuisance, the Borough may
recover the expenses of abatement following the process for assessment
and collection of a civil penalty contained in § 78-8. Any person who causes
the public nuisance shall be liable for the cost of abatement.
Chapter 80
§ 78-7 CARNIVALS § 78-10
80:93
CARNIVALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parades — See Ch. 145.
§ 80-1. Carnivals prohibited; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to hold or conduct
any carnival within the limits of the Borough, except that the Council of
the Borough may grant permission to volunteer fire companies having their
principal firehouses in the Borough to hold or conduct carnivals within the
limits of the Borough, and then only after written request from said fire
companies, which request shall set forth all the details of the same.
§ 80-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
Chapter 82
CHECKS, FRAUDULENT
§ 82-1. Imposition of service charge authorized.
In the event that any payment tendered by check or other written
instrument on any account owing to the Borough is returned for insufficient
funds, there is hereby authorized the imposition of a service charge to be
added to that account owing to the Borough in the sum of $15 per check
or other written instrument so returned, and the principal of such account
shall be increased accordingly.
§ 82-2. Collection of service charge.
Any service charge authorized by this chapter shall be collected in the same
manner prescribed by law for the collection of the account for which the
check or other written instrument was tendered.
§ 82-3. Future payments.
The officer or agent of the Borough whose duty it is to collect an account
owing to the Borough may, in his or her sole discretion, require that future
payments on an account upon which a service charge has been imposed
in accordance herewith shall be payable only in the form of cash, certified
check or cashier's check, and, after having given written notice of such
§ 78-10 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 82-3
82:94
requirement to the obligor of such account, that officer or agent may refuse
tender of payment not in compliance with such requirement.
Chapter 82A
CLAIMS, MUNICIPAL
§ 82A-1. Administrative charge.
Any administrative fee and all costs incurred in mailing a notice of
delinquency, not to exceed $50, shall be added to the unpaid claim.
§ 82A-2. Interest.
Interest will be assessed upon all delinquent unpaid municipal claims and
taxes at a rate of 10% per annum and added to the unpaid claim.
§ 82A-3. Assessment of legal fees.
A. The Borough of Marcus Hook hereby approves the following fee
schedule to compensate its attorneys for the collection of unpaid
claims, which fees shall be added to the unpaid claim:
Legal Service Fee
Initial review and sending first
demand letter
$30
File lien and mail second demand
letter
$100
Prepare writ of scire facias $75
Obtain reissued writ $30
Prepare and mail letter under
Pa.R.C.P. § 237.1
$75
Prepare motion for alternate
service
$125
Prepare default judgment $175
Prepare writ of execution $200
Attendance at sale; review
schedule of distribution and
resolve distribution issues
$350
Continue sheriff sale $50
Petition to assess damages $50
Petition for free and clear sale $300
Prepare bankruptcy proof of claim $100
Handling fee for returned check $30
§ 82-3 CHECKS, FRAUDULENT § 82A-3
82:95
§ 82A-4. Collection procedures.
The following collection procedures are hereby established in accordance
with the Act:32
Legal Service Fee
Handling fee to issue refund
check
$20
Bookkeeping fee for payment plan
of more than three payments
$50
Services not covered above At an hourly rate between $60 and
$225 per hour
B. The amounts of fees determined as set forth above are fair and
reasonable for the services to be provided and shall be added to the
Borough of Marcus Hook's claim in each account.
C. There shall be, added to the above amounts the reasonable out-ofpocket
charges, costs, expenses, commissions and fees, such as, but not
limited to, postage, title searches, prothonotary fees and sheriff fees.
D. The amount of charges, expenses, commissions and fees determined as
set forth above shall be added to the Borough of Marcus Hook's claim in
each account.
A. At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney fees in
connection with the collection of an account, the Borough of Marcus
Hook or its designee shall mail or cause to be mailed, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, a notice of such intention to the taxpayer or
other entity liable for the account (the "property owner").
B. If the certified-mail notice is undelivered, then, at least 10 days prior to
the assessing or imposing such attorney fees, the Borough of Marcus
Hook or its designee shall mail or cause to be mailed, by first class mail,
a second notice to the property owner.
C. All notices required by this chapter shall be mailed to the property
owner's last known post office address as recorded in the records or
other information of the Borough of Marcus Hook, or such other
address as it may be able to obtain from the County Office of
Assessment and Revision of Taxes.
D. Each notice as described above shall include the following:
(1) The type of tax or other charge, the date it became due and the
amount owed, including penalty and interest;
32.Editor's Note: The Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 82A-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 82A-4
82:96
§ 82A-5. Related action.
The proper officials of the Borough of Marcus Hook are hereby authorized
and empowered to take such additional action as they may deem necessary
or appropriate to implement this chapter.
§ 82A-6. Further amendment by resolution.
The fee schedule may be further amended from time to time by a duly
enacted resolution of Borough Council.
Chapter 83
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 124.
§ 83-1. Curfew established for certain minors. [Amended 6-4-2001
by Ord. No. O-01-3, approved 6-4-2001; 5-1-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-2, approved 5-1-2006]
For the protection of the health, morals and welfare of the children of the
Borough of Marcus Hook, it shall be unlawful for any child or children under
the age of 18 years to be on the streets of the Borough alone or in groups
later than 8:00 p.m. of any day and before 5:00 a.m. of the following day.
§ 83-2. Violations by parents. [Amended 6-4-2001 by Ord. No.
O-01-3, approved 6-4-2001; 5-1-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-2, approved
5-1-2006]
It shall be unlawful for any parent or parents to permit children under the
age of 18 years to be on the streets of the Borough of Marcus Hook either
alone or in groups after 8:00 p.m. of any day and before 5:00 a.m. of the
following day.
(2) A statement of the Borough of Marcus Hook's intent to impose or
assess attorney fees within 30 days after the mailing of the first
notice, or within 10 days after the mailing of the second notice;
(3) The manner in which the assessment or imposition of attorney fees
may be avoided by payment of the account; and
(4) The place of payment for accounts and the name and telephone
number of the Borough of Marcus Hook representative designated
as responsible for collection matters.
§ 82A-4 CURFEW § 83-3
83:97
§ 83-3. Violations by minors. [Amended 6-4-2001 by Ord. No.
O-01-3, approved 6-4-2001; 5-1-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-2, approved
5-1-2006]
It shall be unlawful for any child or children under the age of 18 years to be
alone or in groups on the streets of the Borough of Marcus Hook after the
hour of 8:00 p.m. of any day and before 5:00 a.m. of the following day.
§ 83-4. Penalties for parents. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988; 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. O-01-3, approved
6-4-2001; 5-1-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-2, approved 5-1-2006]
Any parent or parents violating the terms of this chapter and permitting
their child or children to be on the streets of the Borough of Marcus Hook
after 8:00 p.m. of any day and before 5:00 a.m. of the following day, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to
the maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
§ 83-5. Disposition of minor offenders.
Any child or children violating the terms of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before any District Justice of Delaware County, be
delivered by the said Justice to the juvenile authorities of the County of
Delaware.
Chapter 84
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Open burning — See Ch. 78.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 96.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 99.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 132.
Plumbing — See Ch. 154.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 157.
Zoning — See Ch. 196.
§ 84-1. Local enforcement option.
The Borough of Marcus Hook hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999 (35
P.S. §§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103), as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 84-2. Adoption of standards.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa Code, Chapters 401 to
405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
§ 83-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 84-2
84:98
herein by reference as the municipal building code of the Borough of
Marcus Hook.
§ 84-3. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code within the Borough
shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined from time to
time by resolution of the Borough Council:
§ 84-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Borough
Council in conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions of
the Code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes set forth
therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is undertaken jointly
with one or more other municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be
established by joint action of the participating municipalities.
§ 84-5. Effect on prior provisions.
A. By the designation of an employee of the Borough to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of the Borough.
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough.
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement.
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of this Borough.
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances, including but
not limited to Chapter 76, Building Construction; Chapter 96, Fire
Prevention; Chapter 132, Mechanical Standards; and Chapter 154,
Plumbing, which equal or exceed the requirements of the Code shall
continue in full force and effect until such time as such provisions are
repealed or such provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum
requirements of the Code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter, including but not limited to
Chapter 76, Building Construction; Chapter 96, Fire Prevention;
Chapter 132, Mechanical Standards; and Chapter 154, Plumbing, and
whose requirements are less than the minimum requirements of the
Code are hereby repealed.
§ 84-2 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 84-5
84:99
§ 84-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Borough for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the Code shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 84-7. Modifications to standards. [Added 6-6-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-2; approved 6-6-2005]
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Borough not
governed by the Code shall remain in full force and effect.
A. Sprinkler systems. The standards adopted herein covering automatic
sprinkler systems apply to newly constructed buildings and to existing
buildings and supersede any and all provisions and requirements found
in the International Building Code, Chapters 9 and 34, the International
Existing Building Code, and the International Residential Code.
(1) Applicability. This Subsection A shall apply to two-family and
multifamily residential structures, and commercial, industrial,
educational and religious occupancies of one or more stories in
height.
(2) Definitions. As used in this Subsection A, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION — The Borough of Marcus
Hook.
COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES — Any structure used for retail and
service use which is intended to service both regional and
neighborhood customers.
EDUCATIONAL OCCUPANCIES — Any building, structure or
dwelling that houses students, including but not limited to schools,
day cares, preschools, learning centers, etc.
INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES — Any structure used for light/heavy
or limited industrial use in the form of both industrial parks and
individual industrial structures.
MULTIPLE-OCCUPIED DWELLINGS — Occupancies where there
are three or more living units, including but not limited to
apartment buildings, rooming houses, convents, rectories, assisted
living facilities and halfway houses.
RELIGIOUS OCCUPANCIES — All houses of worship including any
common area on the premises that provides a place of gathering
for members, congregants or parishioners.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS — An occupancy where a living unit
is occupied by members of one family, including occupancies of the
same description where rooms are rented.
§ 84-5 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 84-7
84:100
SPRINKLER SYSTEM — For fire-protection purposes, an
integrated system of underground and overhead piping designed
in accordance with fire-protection engineering standards. The
installation includes a water supply and/or connection by
underground piping to a city main. The portion of the sprinkler
system aboveground is a network of specially sized or hydraulically
designed piping installed in a building, structure or area, generally
overhead, and to which sprinklers are connected in a systematic
pattern. The system includes a controlling valve and a device for
activating an alarm when the system is in operation. The system is
usually activated by heat from a fire and discharges water over the
fire area. The sprinkler system shall meet NFPA-13 specifications
for sprinkler performance.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS — Any occupancy where the living
units are occupied by two separate families with independent
cooking, sleeping and bathroom facilities.
(3) Compliance requirements.
(a) Buildings and/or structures hereinafter constructed shall be
equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
(b) Plans of all proposed automatic fire-protection systems
installations shall first be submitted to the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer for approval, prior to the issuance of any
building permit.
(c) Vacant or unoccupied buildings or portions thereof which now
have automatic sprinkler systems shall be maintained so as to
keep the system active and functional at all times.
(d) All buildings and/or structures that are being renovated,
rebuilt or modified for more than 50% of their value shall
conform to the provisions of this Subsection A.
(e) All buildings, structures and dwellings that are converted from
single-family owner-occupied dwellings to single-, multiple- or
two-family rental units or where the number of living units is
increased by one or more units shall conform to the provisions
of this Subsection A.
(f) All buildings or structures that are converted from commercial
or industrial occupancies to residential, educational or
religious occupancies shall conform to the provisions of this
Subsection A.
(4) Combination system allowed. In single-, multiple- and two-family
residential structures with a maximum of two stories, a
combination automatic fire-protection sprinkler system shall be
allowed. In a combination system, the automatic sprinkler system
and domestic water system can utilize the same common water
§ 84-7 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 84-7
84:101
service supply pipe to the premises so long as they meet NFPA-13
and Chester Water Authority requirements.
(5) Installation of system.
(a) All automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed in compliance
with the applicable sections of the NFPA 13, 13-D or 13-R and
any requirements imposed by the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer.
(b) When an automatic sprinkler system is required by these
regulations, it shall be meant to require 100% coverage of all
interior spaces, except those areas that are given special
exception by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer.
(c) A complete set of drawings showing the design, spacing and
location of all equipment as well as a listing of all hydraulic
calculations shall be submitted to the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer with approved engineer seals, prior to the
commencement of any work.
(d) A permit shall be obtained from the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer prior to the commencement of any work.
(6) Maintenance. It shall be the legal duty of the owner of each
building, structure or dwelling occupancies to maintain the
automatic sprinkler system so as to keep the automatic sprinkler
system active and functional at all times.
(7) Testing of system.
(a) Systems in commercial, industrial or multifamily dwellings
shall be flow tested and inspected once per year by a certified
fire-protection engineer, and a report on such testing shall be
filed with the Borough Code Enforcement Officer.
(b) Systems in single-family and two-family dwellings shall be flow
tested and inspected once every two years by a certified fireprotection
engineer, and a report on such testing shall be filed
with the Borough Code Enforcement Officer.
(c) Systems in owner-occupied single-family dwellings are not
required by this Subsection A to be tested, but, in the interest
of fire safety, all owners are encouraged to have their systems
checked at least every two years.
(d) All systems in existence at the time of adoption of this
Subsection A shall be tested and inspected in compliance with
the applicable subsections of this subsection.
(8) Enforcement. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall ensure
proper compliance with all provisions of this Subsection A.
§ 84-7 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 84-7
84:102
Chapter 88
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
(9) Liability of Borough. This Subsection A creates no legal liability to
the Borough of Marcus Hook other than to ensure that, at the time
of inspection, the system was present and functional.
(10) Violations and penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions
of this Subsection A shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable
for each offense by a fine of up to the maximum amount provided
from time to time by state statute.
§ 84-7 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 84-7
84:103

ARTICLE I
Control of Dogs and Other Animals
[Adopted 9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 04-4, approved 9-7-2004]
§ 88-1. Short title.
this article shall be known as the "Marcus Hook Animal Control Law."
§ 88-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ANIMAL — Dogs, cats, domestic fowl, poultry, domesticated hares, rabbits,
mink and members of the equine, bovine and porcine species.
DOMESTICATED — To adapt an animal to a life of intimate association with
and to the advantage and pleasure of man.
DOMESTICATED ANIMAL — Every animal domesticated by man so as to
live and breed in a tame condition.
KENNEL, PET SHOP — Any kennel or person that acquires and sells dogs
for the purpose of resale, whether as owner, agent, or consignee, and sells
or offers to sell such dogs on a retail basis.[Added 7-6-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-3, approved 7-6-2010]
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of an animal, shall include
every person having a right of property in such animal and every person
who keeps or harbors such animal or has it in his care and every person who
permits such animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
PERSON — Includes state and local officers or employees, individuals,
corporations, copartnerships and associations. Singular words shall include
the plural. Masculine words shall include the feminine or neuter.
POLICE OFFICER — Any person employed, appointed or elected by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any municipality or county, and whose
duty is to preserve peace, to make arrests or to enforce state and local
health and animal laws.
WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMAL — Any animal of a species prohibited by Title 50,
Code of Federal Regulations, or otherwise controlled by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. It shall include any animal which is wild, fierce, dangerous,
noxious or naturally inclined to do harm. "Wild animals," however
domesticated, shall also include but not be limited to:
Dog family (Canidea): all except domesticated dogs, including wolf, fox,
coyote, dingo, wolf hybrids, etc.
A.
Cat family (Felidea): all except commonly accepted domestic cats,
including lions, pumas, panthers, mountain lions, cougars, lynxs,
bobcats, leopards, jaguars, ocelots, margays, tigers, wild cats, etc.
B.
§ 88-1 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 88-2
84:105
§ 88-3. Responsibilities of owners.
No person who owns, maintains, keeps or has custody of a dog, cat or
other animal shall fail to use all reasonable precautions to confine or
contain such dog, cat or other animal to the property of such person or the
property which the owner, custodian or keeper has permission to use for
such purpose.
§ 88-4. License required.
Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of any dog over
six months of age within the Borough must obtain a Pennsylvania state dog
license for the current year from the proper licensing authority.
§ 88-5. Running at large and other nuisances.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to permit any dog, cat or
other animal to become a nuisance in any way within the Borough of Marcus
Hook.
Bears (Ursidea): all bears, including grizzly bears, brown bears, black
bears, etc.
C.
Weasels (Mustelidea): all, including weasels, martens, mink, wolverine,
ferrets, badgers, otters, ermine, mongoose, etc.
D.
E. Raccoons (Procynniddae): all raccoons and civets.
F. Porcupine (Erethizontidae): all porcupines.
G. Skunks.
H. Snakes: all venomous and constricting snakes.
I. Venomous lizards.
J. Crocodillians: all alligators, caimans, crocodiles, gavials, etc.
K. Venomous fish and piranha.
L. Venomous invertebrates.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to permit any dog, cat or
other animal to run at large within the Borough of Marcus Hook.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to allow or permit his or
her dog, cat or other animal to be upon any public or private property,
including sidewalks and streets, within the Borough of Marcus Hook
unless said dog, cat or other animal is on a leash or upon property
owned by the owner of said dog, cat or other animal.
C. Any person or persons who keeps or maintains a dog, cat or other
animal shall be responsible for the immediate removal of droppings
when said dog, cat or other animal is upon property other than that of
§ 88-2 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 88-5
84:106
§ 88-6. Animals at large; tying in streets.
No person shall cause or permit any dog, cat or other animal to run at large
in any public place or street in the Borough or shall tie or fasten any dog,
cat or other animal in any of the streets of the Borough for the purpose of
grazing, feeding or exercising.
§ 88-7. Restriction on number. [Amended 7-6-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-3, approved 7-6-2010]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep or maintain in excess
of two dogs over six months of age or two cats, except that a litter of kittens
or a portion of a litter may be kept for not more than 10 weeks from birth.
This section shall not apply to any premises operated as a pet shop kennel
for which a zoning permit has been obtained and for which a pet shop
kennel license has been obtained pursuant to the Pennsylvania Dog Law.
§ 88-8. Disturbing the peace.
the owner or any place where people congregate or walk in the
Borough of Marcus Hook, or upon the floor or stairways of any building
or place frequented by the public or used in common by the tenants, or
upon the outside walls, walkways, driveways, alleys, curbs or stairway
of any building abutting on a public street or park, or upon private
property without the permission of the owner of said property. Said
person is required to carry and use a plastic bag and scoop, or other
suitable sealed, nonabsorbent, leakproof container, for the immediate
removal and disposal of the droppings in a trash or litter receptacle or
for disposal in a toilet. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply
to guide dogs accompanying blind persons or to a dog used to assist
any other physically disabled person.
A. No person shall harbor or keep any dog, cat, or other animal which
disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. Any person who
keeps, owns or harbors a dog shall be required to restrain the dog,
whether inside or outside of the owner's or guardian's property, from
prolonged, continuous and unwarranted barking and howling any time
of the day or night, so as not to annoy or disturb neighboring residents,
schools, churches, businesses, nursing homes, and hospitals.
Complaints made by residents who suffer from this type of noise may be
made to the Police Department.
B. The Police Department, in receiving such complaint, shall dispatch an
officer to the location of the barking dog, and if such complaint is
authenticated by the officer, the officer shall attempt to contact the
owner or guardian of said dog.
C. In order to abate the nuisance created by a dog howling or barking in
violation of this section, a police officer or animal control officer may
enter the yard and may seize the dog from the yard where the violation
§ 88-5 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 88-8
84:107
§ 88-9. Treatment.
No person shall treat an animal in the Borough in a cruel or inhuman
manner. Beating, underfeeding, overloading and abandoning animals shall
be considered cruel and inhuman treatment within the meaning of this
section.
§ 88-10. Dangerous or vicious animals.
No person shall maintain, keep, harbor or transport any dangerous or
vicious animal of any kind or cause or permit the same to run at large within
the Borough. Exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae naturae
in the eyes of the law may be conducted only by securing the written
permission of the Chief of Police.
§ 88-11. Protection of persons and property.
Members of the Police Department and the Animal Control Officer are
hereby authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any kind when it is
necessary for the protection of persons or property.
§ 88-12. Diseased animals.
§ 88-13. Keeping of certain animals prohibited.
is occurring if the officer is unable to contact the owner or if the owner
is unable or unwilling to take action to stop the howling or barking.
A. No person shall maintain or expose any dog, cat or other animal that is
afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease whereby the health of
man or beast may be affected, nor shall any person ship any such
deceased animal or remove it from the premises of the owner thereof
except under the supervision of the Chief of Police, Animal Control
Officer or the Health Officer.
B. It is hereby made the duty of the Animal Control Officer or the Health
Officer to secure such disposition of any diseased animal and such
treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication or
spread of the contagion or infection.
A. No person shall keep a wild or exotic animal in any place other than a
zoological park, veterinary hospital or clinic, humane society, circus,
sideshow, amusement show or facility used for educational or scientific
purposes which provides proper cages, fences and other protective
devices adequate to prevent such animal from escaping or injuring the
public.
B. No person shall sell, offer for sale or adoption, exchange for transfer,
with or without charge, any wild or exotic animal.
C. No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall keep or maintain an
apiary or any live swine or pig, live chicken, turkey, pigeon, horse or
§ 88-8 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 88-13
84:108
§ 88-14. Removal and disposal of dead animals.
It shall be the duty and obligation of all owners, lessors or occupiers of real
property within the Borough to provide for the removal and disposal of any
and all dead cats, dogs and other animals upon such real property. It shall
be the duty of the Animal Control Officer of the Borough to remove and
dispose of all dead cats, dogs and other animals from the streets, highways
and other public ways and places of the Borough.
§ 88-15. Cleanliness of enclosures.
No person shall cause or allow any house, hut, area or place where any dog,
cat or other animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome.
§ 88-16. Impounding.
Any dog, cat, or other animal found in the Borough either without a
Pennsylvania state license or running at large under conditions set forth in
this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be impounded as
hereinafter provided.
§ 88-17. Use of immobilizing instruments.
Police officers or the Animal Control Officer of the Borough are hereby
authorized to secure and use, with reasonable precautions, any device
or gun that propels an instrument, pellet or drug for the purpose of
immobilizing or anesthetizing an animal for the purpose of securing and
impounding such animal.
§ 88-18. Animal Control Officer.
Police officers of the Borough and such other persons as may be retained
by Council shall act as the Animal Control Officer. The duty of such Animal
Control Officer shall be to take into custody any and all dogs, cats or other
animals found in violation of any provision of this article and not restrained,
leashed or secured upon the owner's property or property which the owner
has permission to use and to convey the same to such shelter or pound as
is from time to time designated by Council. A notice of seizure shall be sent
to the owner of such dog, cat or other animal, if known, in accordance with
commonwealth law. It shall be a violation of this article to interfere with an
animal control officer in the performance of his duties.
pony or other domestic or wild fowl within the Borough. Exempted from
this prohibition are those domesticated fowl who can be maintained in
a cage within the living confines of the owner's residence.
D. No person shall keep or maintain within the Borough any reptile with
an overall length in excess of two feet, nor any poisonous or
constricting reptile regardless of length, or any arachnid.
§ 88-13 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 88-19
84:109
§ 88-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the maximum
amount provided from time to time by state statute, plus costs of
prosecution. Each day's failure to comply with any such provision shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 88-20. Redemption fee.
Any dog, cat or other animal taken to the Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals after being picked up, seized or captured under the
terms of this article shall subject the owner of said dog, cat or other animal
to any additional cost or fee or charge which the Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals shall impose to accept such dog, cat or other animal,
in addition to the fines and costs set forth in this article.
§ 88-19 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 88-20
84:110
ARTICLE II
Cat Control
[Adopted 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-3, approved 10-1-2012]
§ 88-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HARBORING — Maintaining custody or control over a cat, or permitting a
cat to remain on premises or providing shelter or food, which shall include
the leaving of food in an area to which stray cats have access.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — A cat that damages either public or private property
or harms the lawful users or occupants thereof; a cat that defecates on
private or public property, or runs loose, stray or unattended.
STRAY CAT — A cat having no known owner or custodian or known place
of care and shelter, or not identified with the owner's name and address on
the collar of the cat, or unattended or running loose.
§ 88-22. Prohibited activities; requirements.
A. No cats shall be stray; no cats shall be permitted to run loose,
unattended, nor be permitted to cause a public nuisance.
B. Any person who owns, keeps or harbors any cat located within the
Borough of Marcus Hook or permits a cat to enter the Borough of
Marcus Hook shall exercise sufficient and proper care and control over
such animal at all times so as to prevent the animal from becoming a
public nuisance or other violation of this article.
C. No person owning, keeping or harboring any cat shall permit it to soil,
defile or commit any nuisance on any place where people congregate or
walk or upon any public or private property whatsoever. This provision
shall also apply to all privately owned property in the Borough,
including the property of the owner or keeper of the cat and the
property owned or controlled by persons who have invited or permitted
the owner or keeper of a cat to bring such cat upon the premises.
D. No person owning or keeping a cat shall permit such cat to become a
public nuisance as defined herein. No person shall harbor any
nonowned, unidentified or stray cat or make food or shelter available to
the same.
E. No person shall abandon any cat of any age or permit a cat to become a
stray.
F. No person shall interfere with the Marcus Hook Animal Control Officer
or any agent of the Borough in the performance of his duties relating to
the control of stray cats in the Borough.
§ 88-21 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 88-22
84:111
§ 88-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the maximum
amount provided from time to time by state statute, plus costs of
prosecution. Each day's failure to comply with any such provision shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 88-24. Redemption fee.
Any cat picked up, seized or captured by the Marcus Hook Animal Control
Officer and taken the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals,
Humane Society or other approved location shall subject the owner of said
cat to any cost or fee or charge to pick up, seize or capture the cat and any
costs or fee or charge imposed by the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals, Humane Society or any approved receiving entity in addition to
the fines and costs set forth in this article.
G. All cats must be identified on the cat's collar with the owner's name and
address. All cats must be currently vaccinated for rabies and tagged to
confirm current vaccination.
H. No person shall harbor any nonowned, unidentified or stray cat or make
food or shelter available to the same following receipt of a notice from
the Secretary of the Borough or Code Enforcement Officer advising said
person that a harboring in violation of this article is occurring and
giving said person seven days within which to cease and desist such
harboring. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved
12-3-2018]
§ 88-22 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 88-24
84:112
Chapter 90
DUMPSTERS AND PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage and rubbish — See Ch. 106.
Junkyards — See Ch. 116.
Littering — See Ch. 121.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 157.
Solid waste — See Ch. 172.
§ 90-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them therein:
BULKY WASTE — Stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines,
appliances, furnaces, plumbing equipment (e.g., toilets, sinks, tubs),
furniture and other waste materials.
COMPACTOR CONTAINER — Any receptacle designed or utilized for the
purpose of crushing, compressing, storage and/or collection of refuse,
trash, debris or other solid waste materials.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS — Conventional building materials waste
resulting from building construction, remodeling, repair and/or demolition
operations, such as lumber, drywall and flooring.
DUMPSTER — A device or container used or intended for the storage and/or
collection of construction debris, bulky waste, refuse, trash, debris or other
solid waste materials.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Material which is hazardous, volatile, highly
inflammable, radioactive, or otherwise dangerous, including asbestos
fibers, infectious waste, all petroleum-based distillates, liquids, gasses and
suspensions, alcohol-based liquids and any other material which, under
federal, state or Borough law must be disposed of in any manner other than
by being placed in a sanitary landfill.
OPEN-TOP CONTAINERS — Any uncovered receptacle utilized for the
storage and/or collection of refuse, trash, debris, or other solid waste
materials.
PERMIT — A permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or a
designated representative authorizing the temporary placement of a
dumpster, portable outdoor storage facility or container in or upon a street
or public grounds or upon private property.
PORTABLE OUTDOOR STORAGE FACILITY (POD) — A portable device or
container intended for the storage of personal property on a temporary
basis. A POD shall not include containers customarily used for household
waste and debris. A POD shall not include dumpsters.
§ 88-24 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 90-1
84:113
REFUSE — Any and all waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, grass
cuttings, dead plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees or branches thereof, chips,
shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, discarded
mattresses, discarded clothing, shoes and boots, waste pulp, and other
products such as are used for packaging or wrapping ashes, cinders, floor
sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and any and all other
waste materials not otherwise included in the definitions herein.
§ 90-2. Applicability; enforcement.
This chapter shall be applicable to and shall be enforced upon the use of
any container as described in § 90-1 above. Furthermore, this chapter shall
not be applicable to or enforced upon any business within Marcus Hook
Borough which uses any container as described in § 90-1 above as a regular
part of its business or as part of any regular scheduled trash removal.
§ 90-3. Temporary placement.
It shall be illegal for any person to place one or more dumpsters or PODs in
or upon any street or public grounds or upon private property without first
obtaining a permit.
§ 90-4. Insurance.
Each applicant for a permit hereunder shall be accompanied by evidence
of insurance and/or copy of a homeowner's policy, in a form approved by
the Code Enforcement Officer, issued by one or more insurance companies
authorized to do business within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
certifying that said company or companies have issued or have written the
following policies, which shall not be canceled except on 15 days' written
notice to the Borough:
§ 90-5. Permit requirement.
A. Comprehensive general liability, naming the Borough as an additional
insured, from the applicable hauling company in limits acceptable to
the Borough.
B. A homeowner's policy to protect the Borough against any loss due to
damage caused to any street or other public property owned by the
Borough by reason of the placement, maintenance, or use of any item as
defined in § 90-1 above pursuant to any permit issued hereunder.
C. If any item as listed in § 90-1 above is placed solely on private property,
a certificate of liability insurance will not be required at the discretion
of the Code Enforcement Officer.
A. Every person, firm or corporation desiring to place one or more
dumpsters or PODs in or upon a public street or private property within
the Borough shall apply to the Code Enforcement Officer or a
designated representative by submitting an application for a permit.
§ 90-1 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 90-5
84:114
§ 90-6. Permit fees.
The application fee for a permit allowing the temporary placement of
dumpsters and PODs may be amended from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council. The application fee for a permit, as first established
by the chapter, allowing the temporary placement of dumpsters and PODs
shall be as follows:
§ 90-7. Duration of permit.
The application shall set forth the name of the owner and operator, if
not the same, the location and size of the container, the dates of use and
such other information as the Code Enforcement Officer may require.
No permit shall be issued for placement of one or more dumpsters
or PODs on a street or public grounds unless placement on private
property is not reasonably feasible.
B. No permit shall be required as follows:
(1) On private or public property where a container is required as a
regular part of the use of the property.
(2) On private or public property where an active and valid building
permit has been issued for said property.
(3) On private property on which is located an apartment house or
multifamily dwelling.
(4) On property operated as a religious or educational use.
A. Commercial property: $25 for each permit and/or extension requested.
B. Residential property: There shall be no fee for a permit to place a
dumpster or POD on a residential property for up to 90 days.
Thereafter, the owner shall pay a permit fee of $25 for each extension
requested.
C. Public right-of-way: There shall be no fee for a permit to place a
dumpster or POD within the public right-of-way in order to service a
residential property for up to five days. Thereafter, the owner shall pay
a permit fee of $25 for each extension requested.
A. Permits issued for placement on streets and/or public grounds shall be
limited in duration to five business days.
B. Permits issued for placement on private property shall be limited in
duration to 90 days.
C. The duration of permits may be extended for good cause shown at the
discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer or a designated
representative up to a maximum of 90 total days for placement on
streets and/or public grounds and 180 total days for placement on
§ 90-5 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 90-7
84:115
§ 90-8. Maintenance.
Any container not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter is hereby declared a nuisance and shall be subject to the
appropriate abatement procedures.
§ 90-9. General restrictions and requirements.
private property within each twelve-month period measured from the
issuance of the first permit.
A. No dumpster or POD shall be transported, emptied, or serviced
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday,
7:00 p.m. and 8:30 a.m. on Saturday or legal holiday, nor shall any
mechanical, hydraulic or electric loader, compactor, packer or conveyor
be utilized during such hours.
B. No dumpster shall be filled beyond the top of such container.
Containers shall be emptied as soon as practical when full, or within 48
hours upon receipt of written notice from the Borough.
C. No dumpster shall be filled by means of a chute, conveyor, belt or other
device located in, above, on or across a street, or by dropping or
throwing items in, above, on or across a street, unless the permit
authorizing placement of such container specifically authorizes such
methods.
D. When not in use, all dumpsters shall be covered with a tarpaulin or
otherwise secured, to prevent debris from blowing out of said container.
E. No dumpster may be placed on a public street within Marcus Hook
Borough unless the container has reflectors or some other type of
reflective materials attached to all four of its sides and no permit shall
be issued for the use of any such dumpster which does not have such
reflectors attached to all four sides. All such reflectors or reflective
materials must be located on areas of the dumpsters which are readily
visible to vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
F. All dumpsters and PODs shall be in good condition, free from rust,
peeling paint and other forms of deterioration.
G. The dumpster and/or POD must not contain any excess advertising
beyond the identification of the company name and phone number of
the company which placed the container on the property.
H. On or before the expiration of the permit, the permit holder shall
remove or cause to be removed the dumpster, unless a renewal permit
is obtained through the Code Enforcement Department. The permit
holder is responsible for the cleanup of the area where the container is
located.
§ 90-7 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 90-9
84:116
§ 90-10. General placement.
The Code Enforcement Officer or a designated representative must approve
the proposed location of any dumpster or POD placed in or upon a street
or public grounds. Such units shall not be placed in such a manner that a
person lawfully using the sidewalk must detour into the street in order to
go around the unit. Containers shall not be placed closer than 30 feet to any
intersection or within 15 feet of any fire hydrant.
§ 90-11. Location in residential districts.
I. Every applicant for a permit to place one or more containers upon a
street or public grounds shall be responsible for repairing and/or
replacing any damage caused by the applicant's use of the street or
public grounds for such purpose.
J. Every permit holder shall allow access to private property by the Code
Enforcement Officer during reasonable hours of the day to verify
compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
K. Only one dumpster shall be placed on any property at one time unless
the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine there is good cause for
permitting more than one at a time.
L. The use of a POD shall not be for the storage of any commercial or
business-related items. The use of a POD must be for temporary
relocation of items from or for the premises the permit indicates only.
No household items from any locations other than the premises
indicated on the permit (the premises on which the POD is located) can
be stored in the POD. A POD is not a shed and shall not be used as a
shed.
M. Hazardous materials including flammable and inflammable, and
biohazard substances or organic matter shall not be stored in any
container.
N. It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to maintain the
dumpster and/or POD free of any rodents, vermins or insects.
O. No trash or debris shall be stored in any POD.
P. No dumpster or POD shall exceed 40 cubic yards in area.
A. Dumpsters and PODs are prohibited from being placed on the streets or
the front yard of a property, where it is practicable to locate the
dumpster or POD elsewhere on the property in the opinion of the Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. No dumpster or POD shall be placed on a side yard of a corner property
which fronts on a street, where it is practicable to locate the dumpster
elsewhere on the property in the opinion of the Code Enforcement
Officer.
§ 90-9 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 90-11
84:117
§ 90-12. Emergency removal.
In the event of any emergency, any container may be removed by the
Marcus Hook Borough Police Department, Code Enforcement Department,
Highway Department, Fire Department or Emergency Management
Coordinator.
§ 90-13. Revocation of permit.
Violation of any terms or conditions of this chapter by the applicant, his
agents, employees or any container hired by the applicant shall be reason
for immediate revocation of the permit. The container shall be removed
from the public or private property immediately upon revocation. Such
action shall be in addition to the penalties provided in § 90-14.
§ 90-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute. Each day that
a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 93
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
C. Dumpsters and PODs shall not be located in any required open space,
landscaped area, on any sidewalk, or in any location that blocks or
interferes with any vehicular and/or pedestrian circulation, and shall be
located in accordance with all applicable building and fire code
regulations for the purpose of ensuring safe ingress and egress to
dwellings, access to utility shut-off valves, and for fire protection.
§ 90-11 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 90-14
93:118
ARTICLE I
Air Rifles
[Adopted 12-22-1953 by Ord. No. 558, approved 12-22-1953]
§ 93-1. Use or sale prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to use and/or sell any
device known as "air rifles," B.B. guns or guns of any nature which expel,
shoot or project a bullet, pellet, shot or any article whatsoever by the
use of air or otherwise within the limits of the Borough of Marcus Hook
unless an approved business establishment authorized and approved by the
Marcus Hook Borough Council in accordance with the Marcus Hook Zoning
Ordinance.33
§ 93-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 196, Zoning.
§ 93-1 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 93-2
93:119

ARTICLE II
Switchblade Knives
[Adopted 12-22-1953 by Ord. No. 559, approved 12-22-1953]
§ 93-3. Sale prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to sell or expose for sale in
any store or any place whatsoever in the Borough of Marcus Hook knives
commonly called "switchblade knives."
§ 93-4. Possession in certain places prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to carry a switchblade knife
on his person or have the same in his possession within the limits of the
Borough of Marcus Hook on any street or in any automobile, store or public
place whatsoever.
§ 93-5. Declaration of nuisance.
The possession and/or sale of switchblade knives is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance in the Borough of Marcus Hook and detrimental and
injurious to the health and well-being of the people of the Borough.
§ 93-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
§ 93-3 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 93-6
93:121
Chapter 94
FIRE INSURANCE ESCROW
§ 94-1. Enforcement official designated.
The Municipal Treasurer or such official's designee is hereby appointed as
the designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated herein.
§ 94-2. Municipal certificate required.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within
the Borough of Marcus Hook (hereinafter the "municipality"), where the
amount recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies
exceeds $5,000, unless the named insured or insuring agent is furnished
by the Municipal Treasurer with a municipal certificate pursuant to Section
508(b) of Act 98 of 199234 and unless there is compliance with Section
508(c) and (d) of Act 98 of 1992 and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 94-3. Payment by insuring agent; procedures.
A. Where, pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(I) of Act 98 of 1992, the
Municipal Treasurer issues a certificate indicating that there are no
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against real
property, the insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured;
provided, however, that if the loss is agreed upon by the named insured
and the insuring agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of
liability on all fire policies covering the building restructure, the
following procedures must be followed:
(1) The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to
the designated officer of the municipality in the aggregate of
$1,000 for each $20,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that
amount of a claim, this section to be applied such that if the claim is
$20,000 or less, the amount transferred to the municipality shall be
$1,000.
(2) If, at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named
insured and the insuring agent, the named insured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure, the insuring agent shall
transfer to the municipality from the insurance proceeds the
amount specified in the estimate.
34.Editor's Note: References throughout this chapter to "Act 98 of 1992" may be found in 40
P.S. §§ 636.1 and 638.
§ 93-6 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 94-3
94:122
(3) The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all
companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or
other structure.
(4) After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, and the designated officer shall return
the amount of the funds transferred to the municipality in excess of
the estimate to the named insured, if the municipality has not
commenced to remove, repair or secure the building or other
structure.
(5) Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the municipality shall
do the following:
(a) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in the separate
fund to be used solely as security against the total costs of
removing, repairing or securing the building or structure
which are incurred by the municipality. Such costs shall
include, without limitation, any engineering, legal or
administrative costs incurred by the municipality in connection
with such removal, repair or securing of the building or any
proceeding related thereto.
(b) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the municipality with the name and
address of the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred
funds and the name and address of the named insured, the
designated officer shall contact the named insured, certify that
the proceeds have been received by the municipality and notify
the named insured that the procedures under this subsection
shall be followed.
(c) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all
applicable regulations and orders of the municipality and the
required proof of such completion received by the designated
officer, and if the municipality has not incurred any costs for
repairs, removal or securing, the fund shall be returned to the
named insured. If the municipality has incurred costs for
repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure,
the costs shall be paid from the fund, and if excess funds
remain, the municipality shall transfer the remaining funds to
the named insured.
(d) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
municipality pursuant to this section, and not returned to the
named insured, such interest shall belong to the municipality.
To the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured,
interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the
named insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
§ 94-3 FIRE INSURANCE ESCROW § 94-3
94:123
§ 94-4. Procedures and regulations.
The Borough Council may by resolution adopt procedures and regulations
to implement Act 98 of 1992 and this chapter and may by resolution fix
reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or services provided
pursuant to Act 98 of 1992 and this chapter, including but not limited to
issuance of certificates and bills, performance of inspections and opening
separate fund accounts.
§ 94-5. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for each
offense by a fine of up to the maximum amount provided from time to time
by state statute.
Chapter 96
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 84.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 132.
Plumbing — See Ch. 154.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 157.
§ 96-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Manager/Secretary of the Borough of Marcus Hook, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, being marked and designated as the "BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code, Ninth Edition, 1993," as published by the Building
Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., be and hereby is
adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the Borough of Marcus Hook in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the control of buildings, structures and
premises as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National Fire Prevention Code
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out
in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 96-3 of this chapter.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the municipality and the
named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
transfer of funds to the named insured of some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
§ 94-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 96-2
96:124
§ 96-2. Repealer.
By this chapter, Chapter 96, entitled "Fire Prevention," of the Codified
Ordinances of the Borough of Marcus Hook, Pennsylvania, 1990, as
supplemented and amended, and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances
in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.35
§ 96-3. Amendments.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. In Section F-101.1 insert "Borough of Marcus Hook."
B. Whenever the word "municipality" is used in this code, it shall be held
to mean the Borough of Marcus Hook.
C. Whenever the words "Fire Official" are used in this code, they shall be
held to mean the Fire Chief and/or the Assistant Fire Chief.
D. In Section F-107.2, Permits required, delete "permit fees, if any, shall
also be stipulated in the local adopting legislation" and replace with
"permit fees, if any, will be calculated using the fee schedule adopted by
resolution by the Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook."
E. In Section F-113.1, Application for appeal, delete the first sentence and
add: "Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Fire
Chief to the Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook." Delete the third
sentence and add: "An application for a special hearing may be made in
writing to the Manager/Secretary's office within 20 days of the time
that the notice was served."
F. In Section F-113.2, Membership of Board, replace with: "For the
purposes of this chapter, the word 'Board,' wherever it may appear in
this code, will be defined as meaning the Council of the Borough of
Marcus Hook."
G. Sections F-113.2.1 through F-113.2.6 are hereby deleted.
H. In Section F-113.5, Postponed hearing, change the words "When five
members" to the words "When any four Council members."
I. In Section F-202.0, General Definitions, add the following definition for
"Fire Lane": "The words 'fire lane' shall mean those aisles, roadways,
passageways or other areas located on private property which are
designated by the Fire Chief as fire lanes to ensure ingress and egress
of fire or other emergency vehicles for the protection of persons and
property and where such areas, when blocked or congested, would
interfere with the free movement of such emergency vehicles."
35.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 96 consisted of Ord. No. O-83-15, adopted 12-5-1983, approved
12-5-1983, as amended.
§ 96-2 FIRE PREVENTION § 96-3
96:125
§ 96-4. Establishment of limits.
The limits referred to in Section F-3003.2 of the BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code/1993 in which the storage of explosive materials is
prohibited are hereby established as follows: the boundaries of the Borough
of Marcus Hook.
§ 96-5. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any lawsuit or proceeding impending in any court or
any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 96-2 of this chapter, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 96-6. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 99
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 84.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 157.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 174.
Zoning — See Ch. 196.
J. In Section F-311.1, Fire lane designation, add the following after the
last sentence: "The plans for fire lanes shall be submitted to and
approved by the Fire Chief, and a permanent record of the
establishment of said fire lanes shall be maintained by the Borough of
Marcus Hook. The cost of marking and maintaining said fire lanes and
plan of the same shall be borne by the owner of the property where said
lanes are located. A fire lane shall be designated by a solid yellow line
or lines and marked on the paved surface as a fire lane and by signs
establishing such lanes which read NO PARKING FIRE LANE or similar
wording."
K. In Section F-311.2 Fire lane obstructions, add the following sentence:
"The parking of any vehicle or otherwise obstructing fire lanes shall be
prohibited at all times."
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
§ 96-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 96-6
96:126
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 99-1.01. Authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,36 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of
its citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook does
hereby order as follows.
36.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 99-1.01 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-1.01
96:127

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 99-2.01. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 99-2.02. Applicability.
§ 99-2.03. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 99-2.04. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 99-2.05. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within any identified floodplain area within the
Borough of Marcus Hook unless a permit has been obtained from the
Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
§ 99-2.01 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-2.05
96:129
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Marcus Hook or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 99-2.05 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 99-2.05
96:130
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 99-3.01. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 99-3.02. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough of Marcus Hook.
§ 99-3.03. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby appointed to administer and
enforce this chapter and is referred to herein as the Floodplain
Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may: (A) fulfill the duties
and responsibilities set forth in these regulations, (B) delegate duties
and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical
personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees, or (C)
enter into a written agreement or written contract with another agency
or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these
regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another
entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to
the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR
59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Borough Manager.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);37 the U.S. Clean Water
Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this
determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
37.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq., and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.,
respectively.
§ 99-3.01 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-3.03
96:131
§ 99-3.04. Application procedures and requirements.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Council for whatever
action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter including, but not
limited to, finished construction, elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain administrator/
manager.
J. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or the latest edition thereof
adopted by the State of Pennsylvania.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of Marcus
Hook. Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
§ 99-3.03 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 99-3.04
96:132
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
§ 99-3.04 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-3.04
96:133
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other access
ways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC or latest edition thereof
adopted by the State of Pennsylvania.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within floodway area (see § 99-4.02A), when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the base flood elevation at any point.
(d) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an AE Area/District without floodway (see
§ 99-4.028), when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point within the
community.
(e) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood.
Such statement shall include a description of the type and
extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
§ 99-3.04 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 99-3.04
96:134
§ 99-3.05. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 99-3.06. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 99-3.07. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard,
or similar document, which shall be displayed on the premises during the
time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
permit and the date of its issuance, and shall be signed by the Floodplain
Administrator.
(f) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 99-5.03F, Storage, and § 99-5.04, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 99-5.03F and 99-5.04 which
are intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in
§ 99-5.04 during a base flood.
(g) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(h) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
Borough, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed construction
as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 99-3.04 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-3.08
96:135
§ 99-3.08. Start of construction.
§ 99-3.09. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request and the original
permit is compliant with this chapter and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time
the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
§ 99-3.08 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 99-3.09
96:136
§ 99-3.10. Appeals.
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine of up to
the maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute, plus
costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions
are hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and any
other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
§ 99-3.09 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-3.10
96:137

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 99-4.01. Identification.
§ 99-4.02. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of Borough of Marcus Hook, classified as Special Flood
Hazard Areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated
September 2, 2015, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study; and
(2) Any community-identified Flood Hazard Areas.
B. The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by Borough of Marcus Hook and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those Special Flood Hazard Areas where no floodway
has been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
§ 99-4.01 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-4.02
96:139
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
(2) AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE
Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which
base flood elevations have been provided but no floodway has been
determined.
(a) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development would not, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
(b) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site.
(1) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality.
D. Community-identified Flood Hazard Areas shall be those areas where
Borough of Marcus Hook has identified local flood hazard or ponding
areas, as delineated and adopted on a Local Flood Hazard Map using
best available topographic data and locally derived information such as
flood of record, historic high water marks, soils or approximate study
methodologies.
§ 99-4.02 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 99-4.03
96:140
§ 99-4.03. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change
to the Special Flood Hazard Area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the
date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA
of the changes to the Special Flood Hazard Area by submitting technical
or scientific data. See § 99-5.01B for situations where FEMA notification is
required.
§ 99-4.04. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator and
any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the
Council. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 99-4.05. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 99-4.03 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-4.05
96:141

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 99-5.01. General.
§ 99-5.02. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When the Borough of Marcus Hook proposes to permit the following
encroachments: any development that causes a rise in the base flood
elevations within the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones
A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a
rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or
relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts
and bridges), the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 99-5.01 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-5.02
96:143
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 99-4.02C of this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania, and ASCE 24 and 34
Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized,
where they are more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 99-4.02C of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the above
referenced standards.
§ 99-5.02 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 99-5.02
96:144
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania, and ASCE 24 and 34
Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized,
where they are more restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basements)
is prohibited.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement, as
defined in this chapter, must comply with all requirements that do not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
Documentation that a specific requirement will cause removal of the
structure from the National Register of Historic Places or the State
Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the Secretary of the
Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
§ 99-5.02 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-5.02
96:145
§ 99-5.03. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill.
(1) If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to,
and approved by, the Floodplain Administrator; and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
§ 99-5.02 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 99-5.03
96:146
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
#348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages" and
"The International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 99-5.04, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
§ 99-5.03 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-5.03
96:147
§ 99-5.04. Development which may endanger human life.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code Coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions, shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof
adopted by the State of Pennsylvania: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603,
1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania: Secs. R104,
R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: (1) will be used for the production or storage
of any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or (2) will be
used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than
550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or (3) will involve
§ 99-5.03 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 99-5.04
96:148
the production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive
substances; shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition
to all other applicable provisions. The following list of materials and
substances are considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any
identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential
structure of the kind described in § 99-5.04A, above, shall be elevated
to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation and built in accordance with §§ 99-5.01, 99-5.02, and 99-5.03.
C. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind described in
§ 99-5.04A above shall be built in accordance with §§ 99-5.01, 99-5.02,
and 99-5.03, including:
(1) Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
§ 99-5.04 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-5.04
96:149
§ 99-5.05. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 99-5.06. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
§ 99-5.07. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood;
(3) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992), or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. No variance shall be granted.
A. Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; and
(3) Be removed from the floodplain when a flood warning is issued.
§ 99-5.04 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 99-5.07
96:150
ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Activities
§ 99-6.01. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall be
prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
§ 99-6.01 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-6.01
96:151

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 99-7.01. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 99-7.02 shall apply.
§ 99-7.02. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in
BFE.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within AE Area/District without floodway that would, together with all
other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 25% or more of
its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa. Code,
as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or most recent
revision thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of less than 25% of
its market value shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
F. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 99-7.01 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-7.02
96:153

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 99-8.01. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Borough of Marcus Hook may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 99-8.02. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough of Marcus
Hook in accordance with the procedures contained in § 99-3.10 and the
following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any Floodway Area/District that would cause
any increase in the BFE.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that
would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
(3) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by § 99-5.04, Development which may endanger human
life.
(4) No variance shall be granted for manufactured homes (see
§ 99-5.06) and prohibited activities (see Article VI).
(5) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(6) In granting any variance, the Borough of Marcus Hook shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(7) Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough of Marcus Hook shall
notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(8) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough of Marcus
Hook shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
§ 99-8.01 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-8.02
96:155
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense; nor
[2] Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public,
or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(9) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Borough of Marcus Hook. In addition, a
report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in
the annual report to FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent annual chance flood.
§ 99-8.02 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 99-8.02
96:156
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 99-9.01. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 99-9.02. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
§ 99-9.01 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-9.02
96:157
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse, and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 99-9.02 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 99-9.02
96:158
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
Special Flood Hazard Area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study, but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See §§ 99-4.01 and 99-4.02 for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after September 2, 2015, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after September
16, 1981, and before September 2, 2015, is subject to the ordinance in
effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction
was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
§ 99-9.02 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-9.02
96:159
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated September
16, 1981, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated September
16, 1981, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 99-9.02 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 99-9.02
96:160
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 25% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
§ 99-9.02 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-9.02
96:161
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
§ 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be
in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 99-9.02 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 99-9.02
96:162
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 99-10.01. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on September 2, 2015, and shall remain in
force until modified, amended or rescinded by Borough of Marcus Hook,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
§ 99-10.01 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-10.01
96:163
Chapter 102
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 99-10.01 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 99-10.01
96:164
ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 102-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and referred to as the "Rules and Regulations
Governing the Health Aspects of Food Establishments."
§ 102-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the Rules and Regulations Governing the Health Aspects of
Food Establishments is to prevent the introduction and spread of infectious
or contagious diseases and food poisonings in food establishments.
Prevention is achieved through public health methods of control.
§ 102-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-2
96:165

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 102-3. Definitions of terms.
For application of the Rules and Regulations Governing Health Aspects of
Food Establishments, terms shall be defined and used herein as follows:
ADULTERATED FOOD —
BACKSIPHONAGE — The backflow of used or polluted water from a
plumbing fixture or other piece of equipment into a water supply pipe due
to a lower than atmospheric pressure in such pipe.
CUSTARD MIX or CUSTARD-FILLED — Any product consisting principally
of flour, sugar, eggs and milk, with or without cornstarch, heated, cooled
and applied to pastry without subsequent heating and to filled pastry such
as cream puffs or eclairs which may be heated subsequent to filling.
DRINK — Any beverage intended for human consumption.
EMPLOYEE — A person who works for an employer in a food establishment.
EMPLOYER (owner, manager, proprietor) — A person, partnership,
association or corporation for purposes of operating a food establishment.
EQUIPMENT — Stoves, ranges, hoods, meat blocks, tables, counters,
refrigerators, sinks, dishwashing machines, steam tables and similar
articles (other than those defined as utensils) used in food establishments,
as approved by the Health Officer.[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
FISH — A vertebrate animal living only in water and having gills, fins and a
long, often scale-covered body, used for human consumption.
Food which contains any poisonous substance in a quantity which may
render such food hazardous to health.
A.
Food which contains any added poisonous substance for which no safe
tolerance has been established or in excess of such tolerance if one has
been established.
B.
Food which consists in whole or in part of any soiled, putrid or
decomposed substance making such food unfit for human consumption.
C.
Food which has been processed, prepared, packed or held under
insanitary conditions whereby such food may have become
contaminated with soil material or otherwise rendered hazardous to
health.
D.
Food which is in whole or in part the product of a diseased animal or of
an animal which had died other than by slaughter.
E.
Food which is placed in a container composed in whole or in part of any
poisonous substance which may render the food contents hazardous to
health.
F.
§ 102-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-3
96:167
FOOD — Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or
ingredient intended in whole or in part for human consumption.
FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES — Surfaces of equipment and utensils which
normally come in contact with food, directly or indirectly.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any business or operation, wholesale or retail,
engaged in storing, manufacturing, preparing, dressing, handling or serving
food.
PUBLIC EATING AND DRINKING PLACE — Any business or operation
engaged in serving, selling preparing or giving away without cost any
food, drink or other refreshment which is intended for human
consumption on the premises. Types of "public eating and drinking
places" are: restaurants; coffee shops; cafeterias; luncheonettes; shortorder
cafes, taverns; sandwich stands; soda fountains; private clubs;
hospital kitchens, dining rooms and snack bars; school cafeterias and
lunchrooms; and itinerant public eating and drinking places which are
operated for a temporary period of time not to exceed 14 consecutive
days in connection with fairs, carnivals, circuses, camp kitchens, public
exhibitions or similar gatherings. An "itinerant public eating and
drinking place" shall include any mobile food service establishment.
A.
FOOD MANUFACTURING ESTABLISHMENT — Any operation engaged
in processing ingredients into food which is intended for human
consumption off the premises of said operation.
B.
FOOD PREPARATION ESTABLISHMENT — Any place of business
engaged in processing ingredients into food or combining foods which
are intended for human consumption off the premises of said place of
business.
C.
FOOD STORAGE AND HANDLING ESTABLISHMENT — Any place of
business engaged in receiving, storing, handling and/or delivering food
which is intended for human consumption off the premises of said place
of business.
D.
FOOD VENDING ESTABLISHMENT — Any place of business engaged
in offering food from a truck, trailer, cart, bicycle or other vehicle or
from any vending machine, container or other type of equipment, which
food is intended for human consumption.
E.
ICE MANUFACTURING ESTABLISHMENT (ICE PLANT) — Any place of
business, vehicle or establishment where potable water is processed to
produce ice or where ice is stored, processed or offered for sale as ice.
F.
MEAT ESTABLISHMENT, WHOLESALE — Any place of business
engaged in processing meat intended for human consumption off the
premises of said place of business.
G.
MILK ESTABLISHMENT, RETAIL AND/OR WHOLESALE — Any place of
business or operation, retail or wholesale, engaged in processing milk
H.
§ 102-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 102-3
96:168
FOOD HANDLER — A person, including an employee, employer or other
person, who comes in contact with food, directly or indirectly.
FOOD VENDOR — Any person who transports, distributes or sells prepared
food or perishable food from a truck, trailer, cart, bicycle or other type of
equipment, for human consumption.
GARBAGE — Putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes, including
animal and vegetable offal.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Municipal Health Officer.[Amended 12-3-2018
by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
ICE — The product which is obtained in any form as a result of freezing
water mechanically or naturally.
LEGAL PERMIT LICENSE — The legal permission to operate a food
establishment.
LICENSEE — Person to whom a license is granted to operate a food
establishment.
LICENSOR — Person or agency granting a license to operate a food
establishment. The "licensor" of food establishments is the Health
Officer.[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
MEAT — The edible portion of mammals.
MILK — The lacteal secretion obtained by complete milking of one or more
cows or goats.
MILK PRODUCTS — Skim milk, milk derivative, cream, sour cream,
buttermilk, half and half, cottage cheese, creamed cottage cheese, yogurt,
butter, condensed milk, condensed skim milk, evaporated milk, powdered
milk, powdered milk products, eggnog, whipped cream and all other fluid
derivates of milk.
PERISHABLE FOOD — Any food of such type or in such condition as may
become spoiled, decomposed or otherwise unfit for human use.
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD — Any perishable food consisting in
whole or in part of milk, milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish, shellfish
or other ingredients capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of
infectious or toxigenic microorganisms.
POULTRY — The edible portion and eggs of domestic fowl such as chickens,
turkeys, ducks and geese.
and milk products intended for human consumption off the premises of
said place of business or operation.
MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any vehicle from which food is
sold and intended for human consumption.
I.
RETAIL AND/OR WHOLESALE FOOD STORE — Any place of business,
retail and/or wholesale, offering food for sale which is intended for
human consumption off the premises of said place of business.
J.
§ 102-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-3
96:169
PUTRESCIBLE — Capable of being partially decomposed by action of
microorganisms, producing foul-smelling matter.
REFUSE — Nonputrescible wastes generally regarded and classified as
rubbish, trash, junk and similar designations, which wastes have been
rejected as useless or worthless.
SANITIZE — The bactericidal treatment of clean surfaces of equipment and
utensils by any process approved by the Health Officer as being effective
in destroying all pathogens.[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5;
approved 12-3-2018]
SEAFOOD — Edible foods from the sea, exclusive of shellfish.
SEWAGE — Any substance which contains waste products or excrements
or other discharge from human beings or animals, and any noxious or
deleterious substance harmful to public health or harmful to animals or
aquatic life or harmful to the use of water for domestic water supply or for
recreation.
SEWERAGE — A system of sewers, whether community or individual,
publicly owned or privately owned, for the collection and disposal of sewage
or industrial wastes of a liquid nature, or both, including various devices for
the treatment of such sewage or industrial wastes.
SHELLFISH — Edible mollusks, including oysters, clams, scallops, mussels,
shrimp, crab, lobster and any other mollusks intended for human
consumption.
SINGLE-SERVICE ARTICLES — Cups, containers, lids, closures, plates,
knives, forks, spoons, stirrers, paddles, straws, placemats, napkins, doilies,
wrappers and similar articles which are constructed wholly or in part from
paper, paperboard, molded pulp, foil, wood, plastic, synthetics or other
readily destructible material and which are intended to be used once only
and then discarded in a sanitary manner.
UTENSILS — Tableware and kitchenware used in the storage, preparation,
conveying and serving of food.
VENDING EQUIPMENT — Any self-service device which will dispense unit
servings of food, either in bulk or in package, without the necessity of
replenishing the device between unit servings.
WASTE — Materials discarded as being useless or worthless, including
refuse, garbage, sewage and other materials of similar nature.
WATER SUPPLY — Sources of water (well, spring, cistern, reservoir, stream,
pond or lake, etc.) as well as water treatment, storage, transmission and
distribution facilities.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY — Any water system serving or intended to
serve water for human consumption or for domestic uses or purposes
to more than one service connection. The system includes the sources,
treatment works and distribution lines to the point of service
connection at the meter, property line or any similar premises'
A.
§ 102-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 102-3
96:170
connection point, which are under one ownership, management and
operation.
PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY — Any water system not classified as public,
intended primarily for use of occupants of one premises. The system
includes sources, treatment works and distribution piping by which
water is furnished to water taps or outlets of the system.
B.
BOTTLED WATER — Any water from artificial or natural mineral spring
or other source of water, bottled for human consumption, which has
been certified by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources.
C.
§ 102-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-3
96:171

ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 102-4. Approval of plans.
§ 102-5. Bakery products.
Bakery products shall be transported fully enclosed in clean and sanitary
containers. Multiple-use containers shall be of such design and construction
as to facilitate cleaning and shall be kept clean and sanitary.
§ 102-6. Bulk ice cream. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5;
approved 12-3-2018]
Bulk ice cream shall not be dispensed unless running water is provided
next to the cabinet containing the ice cream or except by other methods
approved by the Health Officer. The utensils used in dispensing bulk ice
cream shall be sterilized at least once daily, washed by running water after
each usage and kept dry when not in use.
§ 102-7. Custard filled and whipped-cream pastries.
A. Prior to construction of a new food establishment building or to altering
an existing structure or any portion thereof for use as a food
establishment, an applicant shall submit two copies of detailed plans to
the Code Enforcement Officer. Said plans shall be accompanied by data
describing in detail the construction or alteration planned. Plans and
details will be reviewed by the Building Code Official. If approved, one
set of plans bearing Building Code Official approval will be returned to
the applicant. If plans are not approved by the Building Code Official,
the manner in which said plans do not meet requirements shall be
indicated on both sets of plans and one set returned to the applicant.
[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
B. The same procedure as outlined above applies to equipment for the
same purpose.
A. Custard-filled pastries and whipped-cream pastries shall be
refrigerated immediately after manufacture and kept at 40° F. or less
until delivered to consumer.
B. Custard-filled pastries and whipped-cream pastries shall be kept
wrapped or packaged during transportation.
C. Name of manufacturing baker, month and day of manufacture and
"Refrigerate and consume within 24 hours" shall be printed or written
legibly on each wrapper or package.
§ 102-4 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-8
96:173
§ 102-8. Closure of food establishment. [Amended 12-3-2018 by
Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
Whenever a food establishment is not maintained in a sanitary condition
or whenever the preparation, handling or serving of food is likely to cause
or transmit illness, the Health Officer, upon proper notification, shall order
the food establishment closed. The establishment shall remain closed until
the health hazard is corrected. The proprietor, when so ordered, shall
immediately comply with the Health Officer's orders and shall not conduct
further operations of the food establishment until written permission has
been granted by the Health Officer.
§ 102-9. Condemnation and embargo. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord.
No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
Samples of food, food ingredients, containers or any substance used in
preparation of food may be taken for examination as often as judged
necessary for the detection of an impure product or insanitary condition.
Said substance or substances may be condemned, removed or destroyed by
or under the direction of the Health Officer if in its judgment the substance
is adulterated, decomposed, impure, unfit for human consumption or
dangerous to public health. Any food or food ingredients may be stopped
from sale or use and placed under embargo for a reasonable period of time
in order to conduct an investigation or examination to determine if the
substance is unfit for human consumption or otherwise dangerous to public
health.
§ 102-10. Delivery of food.
Delivery of food to a food establishment shall be made inside the
establishment.
§ 102-11. Drinking cups.
Drinking cups for common use shall not be permitted in food
establishments.
§ 102-12. Care of food.
Food shall be stored, handled, cooked, processed, prepared, displayed,
dispensed or transported in a sanitary manner, protected from flies, insects,
dust, dirt, handling, droplet infection, overhead leakage or other
contamination. Food shall be further protected from deterioration or
spoilage by means of adequate temperature controls.
§ 102-13. Health of food handlers.
A. No employee shall be employed in any food establishment to work with
food if he or she has a disease in its communicable form or who
manifests symptoms of any such disease or who is a carrier of any such
disease.
§ 102-8 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 102-13
96:174
§ 102-14. Towels.
Hand towels for common use shall not be permitted in food establishments.
§ 102-15. Hot and cold water. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
Hot and cold running water of at least 15 pounds' pressure shall be
accessible to all rooms in which food is prepared or utensils are washed,
and said water shall be supplied from a source approved by the Health
Officer.
§ 102-16. Licenses.
B. No manager (proprietor, etc.) shall employ an employee to work with
food if the manager suspects such employee of having any disease in its
communicable form or whom he suspects of being a carrier of any
communicable disease.
C. A manager (proprietor, etc.) of a food establishment, if he suspects such
employee of having communicable disease or being a carrier of a
communicable disease, shall report the facts to the Health Officer.
[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
D. The Health Officer may at any time require medical examination and
laboratory tests as may be necessary to determine whether an
employee can transmit any disease. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord.
No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
E. Infection suspected. When there is a reasonable basis to suspect the
transmission of disease by an employee in a food establishment, the
manager (proprietor, etc.) can be required to carry out any of the
following measures:
(1) Immediate exclusion of employee from food establishment.
(2) Immediate closing of food establishment until hazard is corrected.
(3) Medical examination as required of employees, including manager.
(4) Restriction of employee to some work area in the establishment
where there would be no possibility of transmitting disease.
A. An application for a license to operate a food establishment shall be
submitted on a form provided by the Borough. [Amended 12-3-2018
by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
B. The application requires name of applicant, residence, business
address, together with additional information required by the Health
Officer. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved
12-3-2018]
§ 102-13 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-16
96:175
§ 102-17. Live animals.
Live animals or fowl shall not be permitted or kept in any room in a
food establishment where food is stored, prepared, handled or served. The
exception is that a trained Seeing Eye dog accompanying a blind person
may be permitted in a customer-service area.
§ 102-18. Location of establishment. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord.
No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
Food establishment or food preparation areas shall not be located in a
cellar, basement or other location below the natural surface of the ground.
§ 102-19. Lockers.
Lockers or dressing facilities shall be provided for employees' clothing and
shall be adequate in space and location and shall be kept clean.
§ 102-20. Plumbing. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5;
approved 12-3-2018]
Plumbing installation and operations shall meet the minimum requirements
of the Plumbing Code of the Borough of Marcus Hook.
C. License is required prior to operating a food establishment. If
application is approved, license will be issued for one calendar year or
remaining portion of calendar year.
D. Application for renewal of license shall be submitted at least 10 days
before expiration of a current valid license.
E. License certificate shall be conspicuously displayed at all times in the
place licensed, to be viewed by the public and the Health Officer.
[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
F. License is not transferable.
G. License may be suspended or revoked for violations, but licensee shall
be given a hearing before the Borough Council prior to such suspension
or revocation. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved
12-3-2018]
H. The license fee for a public eating place or food establishment per
calendar year shall be $100. The license fee may be amended from time
to time by resolution of the Borough Council. [Added 12-7-1987 by
Res. No. R-87-19, approved 12-1-1987; amended 1-3-1994 by
Res. No. R-94-1, approved 1-3-1994; 11-4-2002 by Res. No.
R-02-14, approved 11-4-2002]
§ 102-16 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 102-21
96:176
§ 102-21. Right of entry. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5;
approved 12-3-2018]
The Health Officer, in the performance of its duty, shall have full access
to any place, container or conveyance used in the production, preparation,
manufacture, packing, storage, transportation, handling, distribution or
sale of any food. The Health Officer shall have the power to examine, open
any package or container and take therefrom a sample for analysis of any
food or food ingredients found in said package or container.
§ 102-22. Cleanliness of premises.
The premises of every food establishment shall be kept clean and free of
refuse and all other waste material.
§ 102-23. Maintenance of records. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
Records for administrative purposes, in the operation of a food
establishment, shall be maintained for review by the administrative offices
of the Borough as needed.
§ 102-24. Refrigeration equipment.
Refrigeration equipment in food establishments shall be of satisfactory
construction and be capable of maintaining temperatures recommended by
the Health Officer.
§ 102-25. Right of appeal. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5;
approved 12-3-2018]
Any person, establishment or corporation shall have the right to appeal, in
writing, to the Borough Council any ruling under these regulations.
§ 102-26. Sleeping facilities.
Sleeping facilities or domestic activities shall not be permitted in any room
which is part of or which opens into any room where food is prepared,
stored, served or in which utensils are washed or stored.
§ 102-27. Soiled clothing.
Soiled linens, coasts, aprons, etc., shall be stored in insectproof containers
provided for this purpose.
§ 102-28. Placement of thermometers. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord.
No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
Thermometers, indicating and/or recording, shall be in place where
recommended by the Health Officer, in working order and accurate within
2° F.
§ 102-21 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-29
96:177
§ 102-29. Vending vehicles.
§ 102-30. Waste containers.
Waste containers shall be made of metal, adequate in size and with tightfitting
lids. Waste containers shall be used to receive all waste. Waste,
including refuse, shall be removed from the premises at frequent intervals
to minimize a potential health hazard.
§ 102-31. Water quality.
A. Food shall not be prepared on any vending vehicle.
B. Food shall be prepared and wrapped in a food establishment licensed
for that purpose prior to transportation to a vending vehicle.
A. Public water supply or bottled water for human consumption or for
domestic use shall be from a source protected from pollution, treated
and maintained so as to be delivered safe and sanitary. Said delivered
water shall be free of bacterial, chemical or other contamination which
may be injurious to health. Public water supplies shall conform to the
United States Public Health Service Drinking Water Standards.
B. Springs and wells classified as public water supply for human
consumption or domestic uses shall conform to the same requirements
and standards described for all sources of public water supply.
C. Private water supply provided and maintained by the owner thereof
may be used as a public water supply, provided that said private water
supply conforms to the same requirements and standards described for
all sources of public water supply.
D. A new or repaired water supply system or any structure which may
have become contaminated accidentally or otherwise may be placed in
use after said system or structure has been effectively cleaned and
disinfected in accordance with prevailing practices and standards of
the American Water Works Association.
E. Cross-connections and interconnections between a potable water
supply and an unapproved auxiliary water supply or between a potable
water supply and any structure containing sewage, nonpotable water or
other substance which may be injurious to health, and any
backsiphonage, shall not be permitted.
F. Whenever, upon examination, it appears that water from a well or
spring or similar source classified as a public water supply is not
suitable for human consumption, use of said water shall be
discontinued and the well or spring shall be abandoned.
G. Abandoned wells shall be filled with clean earth or capped with
substantial, watertight slabs in order to prevent contamination of the
underground water supply.
§ 102-29 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 102-32
96:178
§ 102-32. Water samples. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5;
approved 12-3-2018]
A. Samples of water from any public water supply may be taken by the
Health Officer for laboratory examination as often as judged necessary
for the detection of pollution or unwholesomeness.
B. Samples of water from any private water supply may be taken by the
Health Officer for laboratory examination, provided that said private
water supply is adequately protected from surface contamination or
other source of contamination.
§ 102-32 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-32
96:179

ARTICLE IV
Specific Regulations
§ 102-33. Refrigeration of food.
§ 102-34. Wholesomeness of food.
A. Perishable food shall be maintained at a temperature lower than 40° F.
or above 140° F. at all times, except when being prepared or served.
Refrigerators shall be cleaned at frequent intervals of time and
maintained in a sanitary condition.
B. Stuffings, poultry, stuffed meats, stuffed poultry, pork and pork
products shall be thoroughly cooked to an internal temperature of 165°
F. with no interruption of the initial cooking process before being
served.
C. Frozen food shall be maintained at 0° F. or lower, except when being
thawed for preparation and use. Thawing shall be by one of the
following methods:
(1) At refrigerator temperature of 45° F. or below.
(2) Quick-thawed as a part of the cooking process.
D. Frozen foods, once thawed, shall not be refrozen.
E. Internal temperatures of perishable foods and potentially hazardous
food shall be maintained at or below the following temperatures
according to type of food:
Food
Temperature
(degrees Fahrenheit)
Frozen food 0
Meat and meat products 40
Cooked foods of animal origin 40
Milk and milk products 40
Other perishable food 40
Seafood and fresh poultry 32
A. All food shall be clean free of spoilage, free of adulteration and
maintained in such a manner that it is safe for human consumption. No
food prepared in a private home or processed in a place other than a
commercial food-processing establishment shall be offered for sale or
used in the preparation of food offered for sale or given away in a food
establishment unless such place of preparation or processing is
regulated by an official regulatory agency.
§ 102-33 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-34
96:181
B. Pasteurized milk and pasteurized milk products only shall be used in
the preparation of food or served or sold.
C. Unpasteurized milk or milk products shall not be offered for sale or
given away for human consumption.
D. Dry milk and dry milk products may be reconstituted in a food
establishment if used for cooking purposes only.
E. Milk and fluid milk products for drinking purposes shall be purchased
and served in original containers in which they were packed in a milk
plant or may be served from a bulk milk dispenser approved by the
Health Officer. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved
12-3-2018]
F. Cream, whipped cream and lesser mixes of cream to be consumed on
the premises may be served from original containers of not more than
one quart capacity or from a bulk dispenser approved by the Health
Officer. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved
12-3-2018]
G. For mixed milk drinks, milk may be poured from one-quart or two-quart
containers packaged in a milk plant.
H. Meat or meat products shall not be offered for sale, displayed, sold or
kept in any food establishment unless said products have first been
inspected and approved by an authorized agent of either the Bureau of
Animal Industry, United States Department of Agriculture, or the
Bureau of Animal Industry, Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture.
[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
I. All meat products offered for sale, displayed, sold or stored in any food
establishment shall be marked in a clear and legible manner with the
official meat inspection legend.
J. Slaughtering, meat canning, curing, smoking, salting, packing,
rendering or other similar establishment where meat or meat products
are prepared for sale in the municipality, regardless of where said
establishment is located, shall be subject to inspection by the Health
Officer. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved
12-3-2018]
K. Oysters, clams and mussels shall be supplied from approved sources.
Shellfish shall have a tag, label or other identification showing that the
shipper is certified by the state in which said shellfish have been grown
and packed and that interstate shipments are certified by the United
States Public Health Service.
L. Oysters, clams and mussels shall come from sources approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Health (or Environmental Resources).
When the source is outside the state, it shall be one which is certified by
the state of origin or the United States Public Health Service.
§ 102-34 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 102-34
96:182
M. Shell stock shall be identified by an official tag giving the name and
certificate number of the original shell stock shipper and the kind and
quantity of shell stock.
N. Tags and an accurate record of the source and quantity of each lot of
shellfish shall be retained for 60 days.
O. Fresh and frozen shucked oysters, clams and mussels shall be packed in
nonreturnable containers identified with the name and address of the
packer, repacker or distributor and the certificate number of the packer
or repacker preceded by the abbreviated name of the state of origin.
P. Shellfish, crabs and lobsters, if served in the shell, shall be served in the
original shell.
Q. Reuse of said shells as food containers in the preparation or serving of
food shall not be permitted.
R. Raw fruits and vegetables. Raw fruits and vegetables may be used as
food, provided that they are thoroughly washed before use.
S. Decomposed food. No food which is partially or completely decomposed
or so treated as to conceal its inferior quality, or which in its
manufacture, cooking, processing, preparation, handling or storage
fails to produce a safe, wholesome food product, shall be kept, sold or
given away for human consumption.
T. Potentially hazardous custards, cream fillings or similar products,
including imitation cream fillings, which are prepared by hot or cold
processes and which are used as puddings or pastry fillings shall be
kept at safe temperatures, either above 140° F. or below 40° F.
U. Pastry fillings shall be placed in shells, crust or other baked goods
either while hot (not less than 140° F.) or immediately following
preparation if a cold process is used.
V. Pastry fillings and puddings shall be refrigerated at 40° F. or below in
shallow pans immediately after cooking or preparation and held at that
temperature until combined into pastries or served.
W. Custard mix to be used in the manufacture of pastry shall be brought to
a temperature of 200° F. and held at that temperature continuously for
at least 10 minutes. Within an hour thereafter, said custard mix shall be
refrigerated at 40° F. or less until applied to pastry.
X. Unlabeled canned goods and cans showing rust, leakage or evidence or
internal pressure shall not be offered for sale or given away for human
consumption.
Y. No reuse of food. Food which has been previously served to any person
or returned from any counter or table shall not be used in the
preparation of food offered for sale or given away, except that wrapped
§ 102-34 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-34
96:183
§ 102-35. Serving and display of food.
§ 102-36. Storage and handling of food.
§ 102-37. Bactericidal treatment.
§ 102-38. Cleaning.
food which has not been unwrapped and which is wholesome may be
reserved.
A. Food shall be protected during display and serving from contamination
by dust, dirt, flies, insects, droplet infection from coughing, sneezing,
etc., overhead leakage, unnecessary handling or other potential vectors
of microorganism. Food shall be protected during display, and as far as
possible during serving, by maintaining adequate temperature controls
(hot and cold) until actual preparation and serving.
B. Food maintained or exposed for display shall be at least 24 inches above
the floor unless completely enclosed under glass or other approved
coverings or containers.
A. Food shall be stored in bins, boxes, on shelves, display cases and other
places under such conditions as to protect it from contamination. Food
shall be handled at all times and in such manner as to protect it from
contamination. All storage areas shall make allowances for efficient
cleaning of floors and walls.
B. Cold-storage facilities as necessary, shall be provided to store
perishable food at 40° F. or lower. Foods in cold storage shall be kept
covered. Frozen food facilities, as necessary, shall be provided to store
frozen food at 0° F. or lower. Heated-food facilities, as necessary, shall
be provided to hold food at 140° F. or higher. Heated foods shall be kept
covered.
A. All eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned, rinsed and
sanitized after each use.
B. All kitchenware and food-contact surfaces of equipment used in the
preparation or serving of food and all multi-use food storage utensils
shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. The exception is cooking
surfaces, which shall be cleaned at least once a day.
C. All utensils and food-contact surfaces of equipment used in the
preparation or storage of potentially hazardous food shall be thoroughly
cleaned, rinsed and sanitized prior to such use. The exception is that
food-contact surfaces of equipment or utensils which will be heated in
the baking or cooking process to above 140° F. need not be sanitized
prior to use.
D. Non-food-contact surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned as frequently
as necessary to assure their cleanliness.
§ 102-34 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 102-38
96:184
A. In every food establishment where washing of dishes and utensils is
required, manual dishwashing shall be accomplished in a threecompartment
sink in the manner described below. Thermometers shall
be in place to register washwater temperature and sanitizing
temperatures.
(1) In the first compartment, wash in clean water of at least 110° F. and
use an effective detergent.
(2) In the second compartment, rinse clean in hot water.
(3) In the third compartment, sanitize by using one of the following
batericides:
(a) Immersion for at least one minute at not less than 75° F. in a
solution containing at least 50 parts per million of available
chlorine.
(b) Immersion for at least one minute at not less than 75° F. in a
solution containing at least 12.5 parts per million of available
iodine and have a pH higher than 5.0.
(c) Immersion for at least two minutes in clean water at not less
than 180° F. This compartment shall be capable of maintaining
this temperature throughout the process.
(d) Immersion in any other sanitizing agent which has been
determined by the Board of Health to be effective and nontoxic
and for which a suitable field test is available.
B. In every food establishment where washing of dishes and utensils is
required and not having a three-compartment sink, plans shall be
submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer for an orderly transition to a
three-compartment sink. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5;
approved 12-3-2018]
C. Every food establishment where washing of dishes and utensils is
required shall provide and use at least a two-compartment sink of
adequate size for washing kitchenware and equipment which does not
require sanitization.
D. Every food establishment where washing is limited to spatulas, tongs
and similar devices shall provide and use at least a two-compartment
sink of adequate size.
E. In every food establishment needing to discard liquid waste, a slop sink
or device shall be provided, in addition to compartmental sink, for
disposal of said liquid waste. Liquid wastes shall not be emptied into
sinks used in the preparation of food or the cleaning and sanitizing of
utensils.
F. Mechanical dishwashing. Dishwashing machines, including prewash
units, shall be of such design and construction, installed, maintained
§ 102-38 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-38
96:185
§ 102-39. Handling and storage of equipment.
After cleaning and sanitizing, all utensils and equipment shall be stored
above the floor level in a clean, dry place, protected from flies, insects, dust
and other contaminants. No utensils or equipment used in the preparation
and serving of food shall be handled except in such manner as to prevent
contamination. Single-service utensils and articles shall be procured in
sanitary containers only and shall be stored therein in a clean, dry place
until used. Single-service utensils and articles shall be handled in such
manner as to prevent them from becoming contaminated before use.
§ 102-40. Equipment construction; new equipment.
and operated in such manner as to assure thorough washing, rinsing
and sanitizing as described for manual washing. One thermometer shall
be provided for registering temperature of washwater and another
thermometer shall be provided for registering temperature of the final
rinse water.
G. Every food establishment which does not have adequate and effective
facilities for cleaning and sanitizing utensils shall use single-service
articles only.
H. Every food establishment which uses equipment too large or which
equipment is impractical to wash and sanitize by means of manual
washing may be washed and sanitized by one of the following methods:
(1) Treating with live steam from a hose in the case of equipment in
which steam can be confined.
(2) Treating by rinsing with boiling water.
(3) Treating by spraying or swabbing with a chemical sanitizing
solution of at least twice the minimum strength of that required
under immersion sanitization.
I. Dispensing scoops, spoons and dippers shall be stored in an approved
running water dipper-well after each serving of ice cream or other
frozen desserts. These utensils shall be sterilized daily and kept dry
when not in use.
A. All utensils used in preparation and serving of food, all showcases or
windows, counters, shelves, tables, booths, sinks, refrigerating and
other equipment shall be of sanitary design and construction, kept
clean and in good repair.
B. Installations of new equipment in any food establishment for the
purpose of preparation, storing, handling or serving of food shall meet
the minimum standards set by the National Sanitation Foundation.
C. Equipment shall be spaced away from walls and corners so as to permit
access for cleaning. No cooking unit of any kind shall be located in a
§ 102-38 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 102-40
96:186
§ 102-41. Safety precautions.
§ 102-42. Floors.
bay window. All new installations of equipment shall be elevated from
the floor to facilitate cleaning or sealed tight to the floor with a cove
base or stainless steel removable kickplates.
D. Equipment having a closed bottom without air space shall be set on a
base with waterproof top.
E. Plates, cups, saucers, dishes, crockery or chinaware which are cracked,
chipped or broken shall not be used for preparation or serving of food.
F. Utensils containing or plated with cadmium, lead or zinc shall not be
used, except that solder which contains lead may be used for joints.
G. Enamelware shall not be used for handling, preparation or storage of
food.
H. Oilcloth, shelf paper, newspaper and similar materials shall not be used
on counters, tables or shelves where food is handled or stored.
I. Single-service articles and utensils shall be manufactured of nontoxic
materials and handled in a sanitary manner and be used only once.
J. Food-contact surfaces of equipment and utensils shall be made of
nontoxic, corrosive-resistant materials and be accessible for cleaning.
A. Every food establishment shall provide adequate first-aid protection,
protection against fire and poisonous products. That protection which is
adequate in each situation to the Health Officer shall be provided.
[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
B. No article, polish or other substance containing cyanide or other
poisonous material shall be used for cleaning, disinfecting or polishing
utensils or containers used in preparing or handling food.
C. No substance containing cyanide, fluoride, lindane or other poisonous
material shall be kept or used as an insecticide or exterminator in any
location where food is exposed during preparation, display, handling,
serving or offered for sale or any other manner as to contaminate said
food.
A. Floor surfaces of rooms in which food is prepared, stored or served or in
which utensils are cleaned shall be smooth, in good repair and kept
clean.
B. Floor surfaces in new or renovated construction in rooms in which food
is prepared, stored or served or in which utensils are cleaned shall be
constructed of materials impervious to water and shall have a sanitary
or cove base and with adequate drains for efficient cleaning.
§ 102-40 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-42
96:187
§ 102-43. Walls and ceilings.
§ 102-44. Doors and windows.
Doors shall be self-closing and preferably open outward. Windows shall
be operable. During the season when flies and other flying insects are
prevalent, doors and windows shall be effectively screened with No.
16-mesh wire or otherwise screened. Doors and windows shall be kept clean
inside and outside.
§ 102-45. Toilet facilities.
C. Linoleum or similar floor covering shall not be used in kitchens and
food-preparation rooms.
A. Walls and ceilings of rooms in which food is prepared, served or stored
or in which utensils are cleaned or stored shall be kept clean and in a
sanitary condition. Such walls shall have smooth, washable, lightcolored
surfaces. Paper or oilcloth coverings shall not be used on
kitchen walls and on walls of food-preparation rooms. In new or
renovated establishments, rooms in which food is prepared or served or
in which utensils are cleaned shall have a ceiling height of at least
seven feet.
B. Kitchens in which food is prepared shall be of adequate size and
construction to facilitate kitchen operations and thorough cleaning.
A. Each food establishment shall be provided with adequate, conveniently
located toilet facilities for its employees and patrons. When approved
by the Health Officer, food establishments may receive written
authorization to use toilet facilities not located directly within such
establishments. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5;
approved 12-3-2018]
B. All food establishments shall provide toilet facilities separate for males
and females, which shall be located so as not to require the patrons to
pass through any area where food is handled or prepared. In situations
where food is not consumed within an eating and drinking place or
when only carry-out food is provided, the Health Officer may, after
review of the situation, require one toilet facility for the employees.
Permission for one toilet facility shall be in writing. [Amended
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
C. An intervening vestibule of at least three feet square must separate
rooms in which food or drink is prepared or handled from toilet rooms.
D. In every new food establishment and renovated food establishment,
floors of toilet rooms shall be constructed of impervious material and
shall have a sanitary or cove base.
E. Doors of toilet rooms and intervening vestibules shall be self-closing.
§ 102-42 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 102-45
96:188
§ 102-46. Handwashing facilities.
§ 102-47. Lighting.
F. Every toilet room shall be well-lighted, properly ventilated by exterior
windows or mechanical means, kept clean and in good repair. Walls and
ceilings of toilet rooms shall have smooth, washable and light-colored
surfaces.
G. Toilet rooms shall provide:
(1) Toilet fixtures of sanitary design and readily cleanable.
(2) Toilet facilities in good repair and kept clean.
(3) Toilet tissue.
(4) Paper towels or other means of drying hands, etc.
(5) Receptacle for sanitary napkins in women's toilet rooms. These
receptacles shall be provided with covers and be easily cleanable
and kept clean.
(6) Other receptacles separate from above for paper towels and other
waste material. Receptacles shall be kept clean.
(7) Hot and cold running water.
A. Every food establishment shall provide handwashing facilities for
employees and patrons. These facilities shall provide hot and cold
running water, clean towels or other means of drying hands and soap.
These facilities shall be in the toilet rooms or immediately adjacent
thereto.
B. Handwashing shall not be performed in sinks used for the preparation
of food.
C. Handwashing signs shall be posted in each toilet room urging
employees to wash hands thoroughly.
D. No employees shall return to work of handling food after use of toilet
facilities, smoking or in any other manner of contamination without first
washing his or her hands thoroughly with soap and warm water.
E. In every new food establishment or renovated food establishment,
handwashing facilities shall be located within the area, or adjacent
thereto, where food is prepared. These facilities shall provide hot and
cold running water, soap and clean towels for thorough washing of
hands.
F. Lavatories shall be adequate in size and number and be so located as to
permit convenient and expeditious use by all employees.
§ 102-45 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-47
96:189
§ 102-48. Ventilation and heating.
§ 102-49. Insect control.
A. All areas in which food is prepared or in which utensils are washed shall
be well-lighted with natural or artificial light sufficient to produce not
less than seventy-foot candle light intensity on surfaces 30 inches above
the floor.
B. All areas where food is stored, in locker rooms, toilet rooms, in
handwashing areas, storage areas (including storage of garbage and
rubbish) shall be lighted to produce not less than thirty-foot candle light
intensity on surfaces 30 inches above the floor.
C. Light fixtures suspended over exposed food and over other equipment
shall be of the safety type, so constructed as to protect food and
equipment from damage by breakage of the said fixtures.
A. All areas in which food is prepared or served or in which utensils are
washed, dressing rooms or locker rooms, toilet rooms and garbage and
rubbish storage areas shall be well ventilated.
B. Window and door openings shall be not less than 5% of the floor area.
C. The use of mechanical ventilation in food-preparation areas shall
provide not less than eight air changes per hour. No recirculation of air
shall be permitted in food-preparation areas.
D. The use of mechanical ventilation in areas where food is served shall
provide not less than five air changes per hour. Air recirculation up to
50% is permissible in serving areas.
E. Temperature control in food establishments shall be maintained for
working comfort and for protection of health of employees and patrons.
F. Cooking units (except coffee urns and toasters) shall be hooded and
vented to the outside by forced draft. Said vents shall be carried above
the highest window of the food establishment or adjacent building.
G. Mechanical ventilation shall be provided, as needed, to prevent
condensation or accumulation of offensive gases, moisture, excessive
heat, steam, dust, smoke, grease and other vapors.
A. Every food establishment shall prevent the premises from becoming
infested with flies and other flying insects by employing good
sanitation. Openings to the outer air shall be effectively protected
against insects by having self-closing doors, screening for doors and
windows, having controlled air currents or other effective means
throughout the season when insects are prevalent (generally April 1 to
December 1).
B. Food establishments shall report infestation by insects, cockroaches,
etc., to the Health Officer. Professional exterminators shall be utilized
§ 102-47 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 102-49
96:190
§ 102-50. Rodent control.
§ 102-51. Health of personnel.
§ 102-52. Personnel regulations.
to eradicate infestation, and food establishments shall keep records of
exterminator service showing dates and the nature of the exterminator
service. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved
12-3-2018]
A. Every food establishment shall prevent the premises from becoming
infested with rodents by employing good sanitation. Buildings, garbage
containers and storage areas shall be made ratproof. New food
establishments and renovated food establishments shall be of ratproof
construction.
B. Food establishments shall report rodent infestation to the Health
Officer for instruction in combating this health hazard. [Amended
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
A. Every food handler shall have a preemployment physical examination
by a medical or osteopathic physician for his or her first foodhandler's
job in Delaware County. The physical examination shall include
screening for signs of any transmissible disease, a tuberculin skin test
and any other signs of health problems within 10 days after
employment.38
A. Every food handler shall wear clean outer garments, keep hands and
fingernails clean at all times and abide by good hygiene practices while
on duty.
B. Every food handler shall wash his or her hands thoroughly with warm
water and soap in a handwashing facility before starting work and as
often as may be necessary to remove foreign material and
contamination.
C. No employee shall resume work after using toilet facilities, smoking
tobacco or otherwise causing contamination (coughing or sneezing into
hands or handkerchief, etc.) without first washing hands thoroughly
with warm water and soap.
D. Employees (male and female) shall wear hair coverings (nets, caps)
while engaged in preparation and service of food or while washing
utensils and equipment in order to keep hair and accompanying
microorganisms from food and food-contact surfaces of utensils.
38.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding food handler registration, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5,
approved 12-3-2018.
§ 102-49 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-52
96:191
§ 102-53. Water supply.
§ 102-54. Waste disposal.
E. No employee (including proprietor) shall use tobacco in any form while
preparing or serving food or while washing utensils and equipment or
while present in these areas.
F. Designated locations shall be established in which employees may use
tobacco, provided that every employee who thus uses tobacco washes
his or her hands thoroughly with warm water and soap prior to
resuming food-handling duties.
G. Suitable tools shall be used by employees who handle food to minimize
body contact with food. Tongs, forks, spoons, picks, spatulas, scoops
and similar tools suitable to this technique shall be provided and used
by employees in handling food.
H. Similar tools shall be provided and used by patrons in self-service
establishments.
A. Water used in the operation of food establishments shall be supplied
from a public water system approved by the Health Officer. [Amended
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
B. Water supply shall be adequate in quantity and pressure and shall be
protected from pollution, free of bacterial, chemical or other
contamination which may be injurious to health.
C. Unapproved water supplies shall be made inaccessible for public
consumption in a manner approved by the Health Officer. [Amended
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
A. Liquid waste resulting from cleansing and rinsing of utensils and floors
and from flush toilets and lavatories shall be discharged into a public
sewer.
B. In the absence of a public sewer, said liquid wastes shall be disposed of
by a method approved by the Health Officer. [Amended 12-3-2018 by
Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
C. Garbage and similar waste materials shall be stored in nonleaking
containers with tight-fitting lids or in a garbage-storage room approved
by the Health Officer. Said garbage shall be covered at all times.
[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
D. Garbage and similar waste materials shall be removed from the
premises as often as necessary to minimize a potential health hazard
and not become a nuisance.
E. Receptacles for waste materials shall be washed thoroughly when
emptied and treated with an approved disinfectant, if necessary, to
§ 102-52 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 102-54
96:192
§ 102-55. Refuse.
§ 102-56. Grounds and site.
§ 102-57. Capacity.
§ 102-58. Operation and maintenance.
meet minimum requirements of the Health Officer. [Amended
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
A. Refuse in the form of rubbish, trash, junk and similar materials shall be
stored in metal containers with tight-fitting lids or otherwise gathered
in designated areas approved by the Health Officer. [Amended
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
B. Refuse shall be removed from the premises at frequent intervals so as
not to become harborage for rodents, insects and other undesirable
pests and to reduce the hazard of physical accidents.
A. Whenever there are grounds around a food establishment, said grounds
shall be covered with concrete, asphalt, gravel or similar material. If
gravel or similar material is used, it shall be effectively treated to
minimize dust.
B. Wherever there are grounds around a food establishment, said grounds
shall be effectively drained to be free of stagnant pools of water and to
facilitate sanitary maintenance.
C. The exterior of food establishments shall be maintained clean kept free
of refuse and similar waste materials by frequent removal of said waste
materials from the premises.
A. Capacity of every food establishment shall be adequate in the foodpreparation
and serving areas to minimize overcrowding of employees
as well as patrons.
B. Capacity in toilet facilities shall be adequate to minimize overcrowding
by employees as well as of patrons.
A. Every food establishment shall be so constructed and maintained as to
provide adequate enclosure and protection of food and of the handling
of food contained therein.
B. Every food establishment shall be operated and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of these regulations and any additional
regulations prescribed by the Health Officer. Said regulations include,
but are not limited to reasonable requirements relative to inspection
factors as follows: [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5;
approved 12-3-2018]
(1) Food.
§ 102-54 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-58
96:193
(a) Refrigeration.
(b) Wholesomeness.
(c) Serving and display.
(d) Storage and handling.
(2) Equipment.
(a) Bactericidal treatment.
(b) Cleaning.
(c) Handling and storage.
(d) Construction.
(3) Safety of buildings.
(a) Floors.
(b) Walls and ceilings.
(c) Doors and windows.
(4) Toilet facilities.
(5) Handwashing facilities.
(6) Lighting.
(7) Ventilation and heating.
(8) Insect control.
(9) Rodent control.
(10) Personnel health.
(11) Personnel service.
(12)Water supply.
(13)Waste disposal.
(14) Refuse.
(15) Grounds and site.
(16) Capacity.
(17) Operations and maintenance.
§ 102-58 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 102-58
96:194
ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 102-59. Failure to secure licenses. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord.
No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
Failure to secure a license when required or operating a food establishment
after suspension or revocation of a license issued by the Health Officer shall
constitute a violation of this chapter. When official notice of a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter has been served upon any person, such
violation shall be discontinued immediately.
§ 102-60. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person, firm or corporation which violates any provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable for each violation to a fine of up to
the maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
§ 102-59 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-60
96:195
Chapter 106
GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 73.
Littering — See Ch. 121.
Solid waste — See Ch. 172.
§ 102-60 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 102-60
106:196
ARTICLE I
Collection Procedures
[Adopted 4-4-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-6, approved 4-4-1983]
§ 106-1. Adherence to provisions.
It shall be unlawful for any persons or person within the limits of the
Borough of Marcus Hook to dispose of garbage, rubbish or ashes in any
manner otherwise than as provided for in this article.
§ 106-2. Placement for collection. [Amended 8-4-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-3, approved 8-4-2003]
§ 106-3. Containers for garbage.
§ 106-4. Arrangements for collection.
The proper authorities of the Borough of Marcus Hook shall make the
necessary arrangements and provisions for the collection of all garbage,
rubbish and ashes that may be deposited as set forth herein by the
householders and other persons in said Borough and so that the same
A. All garbage, rubbish or ashes generated in the Borough of Marcus Hook
from single-family dwelling units, individually owned townhouses and
condominiums, or a building or group of buildings under common
ownership and comprising multiple-family dwelling units not exceeding
four units per building or group of buildings, provided that all residents
of such single-family dwelling units, townhouses, condominiums,
building or group of buildings utilize individual refuse containers not
requiring the use of container handling devices on collection vehicles,
said refuse containers with their contents shall be placed at curbside or
at a place so designated for collection and at the times during the week
as specified by Borough Council.
B. No garbage, rubbish or trash of any kind or nature may be placed in the
front yard, on the front porch or at the curbline of any property except
on the day designated for the pickup of garbage, rubbish and trash for
such property or for the period commencing at 6:00 p.m. on the day
preceding the day designated for the pickup of garbage, rubbish and
trash for such property. Whenever possible, refuse containers, when not
placed at the curb for collection, should be stored so that they are not
visible from the street.
A. All the garbage, rubbish and ashes are to be placed in containers of
metal or plastic with lids and will be collected at one and the same time.
B. Containers shall be standard garbage cans not to exceed a thirty-gallon
capacity. Containers shall not be overfilled so that they cannot be
moved without spilling. [Added 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-3,
approved 8-4-2003]
§ 106-1 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH § 106-4
106:197
will be collected and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
§ 106-5. Time for placement and removal of containers.
Garbage, rubbish and ashes are not to be placed out for collection before
6:00 p.m. on the evening before the day of collection. Collection days of
the Borough shall be Tuesdays and Fridays of each week unless otherwise
changed by Borough Council and advertised as to change. All garbage,
rubbish and ashes shall be placed in alleys in the rear of homes, when such
alleys are passable for hauling by vehicles or otherwise in front of homes by
the curbs in accordance with the terms of this article. Containers must be
removed by darkness on the days of collection.
§ 106-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
§ 106-4 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 106-6
106:198
ARTICLE II
Recycling of Printed Material
[Adopted 4-1-1985 by Ord. No. O-85-3, approved 4-1-1985]
§ 106-7. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them by this section:
PRINTED MATERIAL — Any printed matter, including but not limited to
newspapers, magazines, catalogs, etc.
RECYCLABLES — Material having an economic value in the secondary
materials market. The following materials have such economic value:
aluminum cans and articles, bimetal cans, glass containers, corrugated
paper (cardboard and paper boxes), magazines, computer printout paper,
computer tab cards, office paper, steel cans, newspapers, paper products
not chemically coated.
§ 106-8. Program established.
There is hereby established a recycling program for the mandatory
separating of recyclables from garbage and rubbish in the Borough of
Marcus Hook.
§ 106-9. Separation of printed material; placement for collection.
Printed material shall be kept separate from other refuse and shall be
collected by the Borough or under subcontract by its designated agent.
Individual household units shall separate and prepare for collection these
materials in the following manner: Printed material shall be tied both across
and lengthwise in easy-to-manage bundles or placed in paper bags and kept
dry. These materials shall be either placed at the curbside to be collected at
times designated by the Borough or placed in recycling shelters at any time.
§ 106-10. Collection by unauthorized persons.
A. From the time of placement of recyclables at the curb or in recycling
shelters for collection in accordance with the terms hereof, items shall
be and become the property of the Borough of Marcus Hook or its
authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this article for any person
unauthorized by the Borough to collect or pick up or cause to be
collected or picked up any such items. Any and each such collection in
violation hereof from one or more locations shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense, punishable as hereinafter provided.
B. It shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of solid
waste which contains printed material combined with other forms of
solid waste.
§ 106-7 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH § 106-10
106:199
§ 106-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or any regulation
pursuant thereto shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for each
offense by a fine of up to the maximum amount provided from time to time
by state statute.
§ 106-12. Additional methods of disposal.
Any resident may donate or sell used printed material to any person,
partnership or corporation, whether operating for profit or not for profit.
Said person, partnership or corporation may not, however, under any
circumstances pick up said used newspapers from the curbside in the
Borough of Marcus Hook.
C. The Borough Council or its agent is empowered to designate the day(s)
of the month on which recyclables shall be collected, removed and
disposed of from a particular area.
§ 106-10 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 106-12
106:200
Chapter 111
HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers and junkyards — See Ch. 116. Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 165.
§ 106-12 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH § 106-12
106:201

ARTICLE I
Canvassing and Soliciting
§ 111-1. Definitions.
§ 111-2. Issuance of license; display.
Every person/applicant desiring to engage in canvassing or soliciting in
the Borough of Marcus Hook shall register with the Borough. Registration
shall be on a form approved by the Borough Council and available from the
Borough Manager/Secretary. When the Manager/Secretary has approved
the issuance of a solicitor's or canvasser's license, the applicant shall be
issued a license. The license shall contain the information required on the
application and the expiration date, and one of the photographs which
was submitted with the application shall be attached. The license shall be
carried by each solicitor or canvasser at all times when engaged in such
activity and shall be exhibited for inspection to any person approached for
purposes of solicitation or canvass.
§ 111-3. License terms and fees.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSER — Any person engaging in the activity of questioning
persons for the purpose of obtaining information, data or opinions from
such persons contacted for any reason whatever, including political,
religious or educational reasons, within the municipality, and whether
on foot or from within a structure or by use of vehicle or by use of
telephone or in any other manner.
SOLICITOR — Any person engaging in the solicitation of money as a
donation or for tickets and coupon books or similar material, with or
without the distribution by such solicitor of literature, samples, free
gifts or other materials, within the municipality, and whether on foot
or from within a structure or by use of vehicle or by use of telephone
or in any other manner. Included within the definition are all persons
engaged in such activities as members of religious organizations or
charitable groups.
B. Exclusions. Neither of the foregoing definitions shall be deemed to
include any of the following activities:
(1) Political campaigning, either in person, in public or by telephone or
by mail.
(2) The solicitation of donations by mail.
(3) Either the soliciting of money or canvassing as otherwise defined
herein from personal acquaintances of the person engaging in the
activity.
§ 111-1 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH § 111-3
106:203
§ 111-4. Limitations and restrictions.
The license for soliciting and canvassing shall be valid within the Borough
of Marcus Hook, subject to the following limitations for certain days and
activities:
A. The term of each soliciting or canvassing license shall be specified on
the license which is issued and shall not exceed one month from the
date of issuance.
B. Each applicant shall pay a registration fee of $20 for the term specified
on the license. The fees for a solicitor's or canvasser's license may be
amended from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.39 No
fee shall be charged for solicitors or canvassers who represent
organizations which are charitable, religious or educational. Exemption
from taxation by the United States Treasury Department to such
organizations shall be sufficient for the exemption from payment of fees
set forth in this section. However, tax-exempt determination is not
necessary if such organization, in fact, meets the criteria set forth
herein. Candidates for political office or their workers also are exempt
from the payment of license fees.
A. Days of the week.
(1) Sundays. Soliciting and canvassing shall be permitted between the
hours 1:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(2) Mondays through Saturdays. Soliciting and canvassing shall be
permitted in all residential districts and residential buildings and
commercial districts between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(3) No solicitations or canvassing shall be conducted during legal
holidays.
B. Special requirements.
(1) There shall be no physical contact by the solicitor or canvasser with
anyone being solicited or canvassed without the person's consent.
This shall be deemed to include not only physical force or restraint
but also the act of placing objects on the person or clothing of the
one solicited.
(2) Solicitors and canvassers shall not occupy a fixed location on any
public sidewalk or street. There shall be no interference with or
blocking of movement of any pedestrian or vehicle by any solicitor
or canvasser.
(3) A solicitor or canvasser shall not be permitted to make or cause to
be made any loud noise to attract attention or for any other
purpose. Such noises may include but shall not be limited to
39.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 111-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 111-4
106:204
shouting, use of loudspeakers, horns, drums, musical instruments
or other sound devices.
(4) A solicitor or canvasser shall not place or deposit any refuse on any
street, public place or property within the Borough.
(5) A solicitor or canvasser who is conducting such activity on private
property which is not open to the public shall immediately leave
such premises on request of any lawful occupant thereof.
C. Exceptions. Excepted from the provisions of this article are public or
charitable activities in which the Borough of Marcus Hook is a
participant, such activities being conducted for the enjoyment and wellbeing
of the community.
D. Fraudulent and deceptive practices.
(1) No person who engages in canvassing or soliciting shall use any
plan, scheme, ruse or make any statement which indicates or
implies that the purpose of such personal visit is other than to
obtain orders for or to make sales of goods or services.
(2) No person who engages in solicitation shall misrepresent the right
to a buyer to rescind or cancel a sale under the provisions of
applicable law, and such persons shall provide the buyer with all
information as required by state and federal regulations.
§ 111-4 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH § 111-4
106:205

ARTICLE II
Foot Peddlers, Vehicle Peddlers and Door-to-Door Salespersons
§ 111-5. Definitions.
§ 111-6. Issuance of license; display.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOOR-TO-DOOR SALESPERSON — Any person engaging in the
peddling, selling, soliciting or taking of orders, either by sample or
otherwise, of any personal property or services in the municipality
when the activity involves the movement of the salesperson from
building to building, whether by vehicle or on foot, and the sales activity
is proposed to any occupant of such building.
FOOT PEDDLER — Any person engaged in the peddling, selling or
taking of orders, whether by sample or otherwise, of any personal
property or services within the municipality, with or without the use of
a pushcart or carried display tray, while standing, walking or otherwise
on foot.
VEHICLE PEDDLER — Any person engaging in the peddling, selling
or taking of orders, either by sample or otherwise, of any personal
property or services in the municipality, using a vehicle either in a
stationary position on private or public property or in a moving position
on the public streets.
B. The foregoing definitions apply equally to all persons, whether a
resident or nonresident of the Borough, whether such person is
engaged in another business or not.
C. Exceptions. None of the foregoing definitions shall be deemed to
include either of the following activities:
(1) Any sale or the solicitation thereof or the taking of orders for
personal property or services at a prearranged appointment with
the potential customer.
(2) The collection of money for payment for previously sold property or
services by a salesperson, with or without a prearranged
appointment.
(3) Public or charitable activities in which the Borough is a participant,
such activities being conducted for the enjoyment and well-being of
the community.
(4) The seeking of or taking orders by any manufacturer or producer
for the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat products
or milk and milk products.
§ 111-5 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH § 111-6
106:207
§ 111-7. License terms and fees.
A. Every person/applicant desiring to engage in peddling or door-to-door
sales in the Borough of Marcus Hook shall register with the Borough.
Registration will be on a form approved by the Borough Council and
available from the Borough Manager/Secretary. When the Manager/
Secretary has approved the issuance of a peddler's or door-to-door
salesperson's license, the applicant shall be issued a license. The
license shall contain the information required on the application and
the expiration date, and one of the photographs which was submitted
with the application shall be attached. The license shall be carried by
each peddler or door-to-door salesperson at all times when engaged in
such activity and shall be exhibited for inspection to any person
approached for purposes of peddling or selling.
B. Group applications.
(1) The Manager/Secretary shall have the right to permit a group
application for a peddler's or door-to-door salesperson's license
under the following conditions:
(a) The applicant is an organization exempt from the payment of
license fees.
(b) The organization has a permanent location or address within
the Borough.
(c) The peddling or sales will be conducted during a period of time
not to exceed one month.
(d) Each individual participating in such peddling or sales is a
resident of the Borough.
(2) Examples may be Girl Scout cookie sales and similar types of
activity. In such cases, an application shall be made on behalf of the
organization and the peddlers or salespersons indicated by general
description.
A. The term of each peddler's or door-to-door salesperson's license shall
be specified on the license.
B. Each applicant shall pay a registration fee for the term specified on the
license. The fee for a peddler's and door-to-door salesperson's license
may be amended from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council. Every applicant shall pay a fee of $20 per day, $60 per month
or $100 per year. No fee shall be charged for a peddler's or door-to-door
salesperson's license when such peddler or door-to-door salesperson is
a charitable, religious or educational organization. Exemption from
taxation by the United States Treasury Department to such businesses
shall be sufficient to establish exemption from payment of fees set forth
in this section.40
§ 111-6 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 111-8
106:208
§ 111-8. Limitations and restrictions.
The license for peddling or door-to-door sales shall be valid within the
Borough, subject to the following limitations for certain days and activities:
A. Days of the week.
(1) Sundays. Foot peddling, vehicle peddling and door-to-door sales
shall be permitted on Sundays between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and
9:00 p.m. [Amended 6-7-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-1, approved
6-7-2010]
(2) Mondays through Saturdays. Foot peddling, vehicle peddling and
door-to-door sales shall be permitted in all residential districts and
residential buildings and commercial districts between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(3) The hours for foot peddling and vehicle peddling may be extended
for Borough-sponsored or Borough-approved special events.
B. Special requirements.
(1) There shall be no physical contact by the foot peddler, vehicle
peddler or door-to-door salesperson with anyone being approached
for sales purposes without the person's consent. This shall be
deemed to include not only physical force or restraint but also the
act of placing objects on the person or the person's clothing.
(2) Foot peddlers, vehicle peddlers or door-to-door salespersons shall
not occupy a fixed location on any public sidewalk or street. There
shall be no interference with or blocking of movement of any
pedestrians or vehicles by the foot peddler, vehicle peddler or doorto-
door salesperson.
(3) If a pushcart is used by any foot peddler, vehicle peddler or door-todoor
salesperson, it shall not be permitted to remain in a fixed
(nonmoving) location on any public sidewalk or street at any time
except when an actual sales is taking place.
(4) Foot peddlers, vehicle peddlers or door-to-door salespersons shall
not place or deposit any refuse on any street, public place or
property within the Borough.
(5) Foot peddlers, vehicle peddlers or door-to-door salespersons
licensed under this article shall not be permitted to make or cause
to be made any loud noise to attract attention or for any other
purpose. Such noises may include but shall not be limited to
shouting, use of loudspeakers, horns, drums, musical instruments
or other sound devices.
40.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 111-8 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH § 111-8
106:209
(6) Vehicle peddling from a fixed location in any residential district of
the Borough is prohibited at all times.
§ 111-8 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 111-8
106:210
ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Sales
§ 111-9. Issuance of license; display.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, transient merchant,
church, club, charitable institution, hawker or peddler to vend, sell or
dispose of or offer to vend, sell, dispose of or display, any goods, wares,
merchandise, produce or vegetables on any public walk, street, alley or
anywhere within the Borough without first registering with the Borough.
Registration shall be on a form approved by the Borough Council and
available from the Borough Manager/Secretary. When the Manager/
Secretary has approved the issuance of a sidewalk sales license, the
applicant shall be issued a license. The license shall contain the information
required on the application and the expiration date, and one of the
photographs which was submitted with the application shall be attached.
The license shall be carried by the applicant at all times when engaged
in sidewalk sales and shall be exhibited for inspection to any person
approached for purposes of sidewalk sales.
§ 111-10. License term and fees.
§ 111-11. Limitations and restrictions.
A. The term of each sidewalk sale license shall be specified on the license
which is issued and shall not exceed one week.
B. The license fee to be charged is $10 per day. No fee shall be charged to
applicants who represent organizations which are charitable, religious
or educational. Exemption from taxation by the United States Treasury
Department to such organizations shall be sufficient for the exemption
from payment of fees set forth in the section. However, tax-exempt
determination is not necessary if such organization, in fact, meets the
criteria set forth herein. Candidates for political office or their workers
also are exempt from the payment of license fees.
A. Day of the week.
(1) Sundays. Sidewalk sales shall be permitted between the hours of
1:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. in commercial districts.
(2) Mondays through Saturdays. Sidewalk sales shall be permitted in
commercial districts between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
B. Special requirements.
(1) No street or alley shall be blocked by any merchandise offered for
sale.
(2) A four-foot passageway for pedestrians shall be left open, and
merchandise shall be secured and adequately placed so that it will
not endanger passersby or fall or extrude into any street or alley.
§ 111-9 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH § 111-11
106:211
(3) Sales shall not be operated in any manner which would cause a
nuisance or create a fire hazard.
(4) Litter shall be minimized during sales and removed in its entirety
following the sidewalk sale.
§ 111-11 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 111-11
106:212
ARTICLE IV
Temporary Retail Businesses
§ 111-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — When used as being a temporary retail dealer, includes a
person, corporation, partnership or any other form of organization.
TEMPORARY RETAIL BUSINESS — The engaging on a temporary basis
in the sale of personal property, consumer goods or services from a fixed
location on private property in the municipality, whether such personal
property or services are offered in a special going-out-of-business sale
(when the sale is conducted by someone other than the owner of the
business) or such activity involves the offering for sale of personal property
or services brought into the location specifically for the purpose of sales to
the public. The solicitation of sales by telephone from a location within the
Borough shall be included regardless of whether the personal property or
services are actually located within the Borough or not.
TEMPORARY RETAIL DEALER — Any person who shall engage in a
temporary retail business as defined above.
§ 111-13. Issuance of license; display.
Every person/applicant desiring to establish a temporary retail business in
the Borough of Marcus Hook shall register with the Borough. Registration
shall be on a form approved by the Borough Council and available from the
Borough Manager/Secretary. When the Manager/Secretary has approved
Yard sales, garage sales, public auctions or sales of a like nature shall
not be deemed to be the conduct of a temporary retail business so long
as no more than two such sales of not more than three days each per
year are conducted on any parcel or private property.
A.
The engaging in the sale of personal property, consumer goods or
services from a fixed location on private property in the municipality or
the offering for sale of personal property or services brought into the
location specifically for the purpose of sales to the public in a multiindividual
cooperative sales activity, frequently called a "fleamarket,"
shall be considered a temporary retail business. The property owner or
flea market operator shall procure one license covering all the persons
selling at the same fixed location during this activity.
B.
A retail business shall be considered to be temporary when such
business is not located within the Borough with the intent to remain in
business indefinitely. The lease or use of a location by such business for
any period of time less than six months shall create a presumption that
the retail business is temporary, but such presumption can be rebutted
by facts which establish an intent to remain in business indefinitely.
C.
§ 111-12 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH § 111-13
106:213
the issuance of a temporary retail dealer's license, the applicant shall
be issued a license, which shall contain the information required on the
application and shall be prominently displayed at the location of the
temporary retail business.
§ 111-14. License term and fees.
§ 111-15. Limitations and restrictions.
A temporary retail business may be conducted only as allowed in the
Marcus Hook Zoning Ordinance41 and shall be subject to the following
limitations:
A. The term of each temporary retail dealer's license shall be specified on
the license issued and shall not exceed six months.
B. Each applicant shall pay a registration fee of $20 per month for the
term specified on the license. The fee for a temporary retail business
may be amended from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council. No fee shall be charged for a temporary retail dealer's license
when the applicant is a charitable, religious or educational
organization. Exemption from taxation by the United States Treasury
Department to such organizations shall be sufficient to establish
exemption from payment of fees set forth in this section.
A. Days of the week; hours.
(1) Monday through Sunday, sales shall be permitted between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(2) No telephone solicitation shall be conducted on Sundays.
Telephone solicitation is permitted on other days between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
B. Activities.
(1) All temporary retail businesses shall be located on private property
which is not exempt from real estate taxation. However, if the
temporary retail business is exempt from the payment of fees
because of its being charitable, religious or educational as set forth
herein, its location may be on private property which is exempt
from real estate taxation.
(2) Temporary retail business operations shall not be conducted in the
setback area of any building or lot.
(3) Temporary retail dealers and all individuals participating therein
shall not be permitted to make or cause to be made any loud noise
to attract attention or for any other purpose. Such noises may
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. 196, Zoning.
§ 111-13 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 111-15
106:214
include but shall not be limited to shouting, use of loudspeakers,
horns, drums, musical instruments or other loud devices.
§ 111-15 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH § 111-15
106:215

ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 111-16. Violations and penalties.
A. Fines and penalties for failure to observe this chapter as it applies to
Articles I, II, III and IV shall pertain to a person who:
(1) Makes a false or untrue statement on his application.
(2) Fails to display his license upon request.
(3) Fails to obtain a license.
(4) Fails to cease operation after the expiration date of the license
period.
B. Any such person shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay up to the maximum fine as permitted by law for each
and every offense, and in default of payment of such fine or fines, to be
imprisoned in Delaware County Jail for a period not to exceed 30 days
for each offense.
C. Suspension; revocation. Any license issued may be suspended or
revoked at any time by the Borough Manager/Secretary upon proof
being furnished that the application for registration contained false
information or that the registrant has violated any of the provisions of
this chapter.
D. Transfer of license is prohibited.
E. No license under the provisions of this chapter shall be used at any time
by any person other than the one to whom it was issued.
§ 111-16 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH § 111-16
106:217
Chapter 116
JUNK DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hawkers, peddlers and solicitors — See Ch.
111.
§ 116-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 116-2. Closing of existing junkyard.
There shall be no new junkyards permitted in the Borough of Marcus Hook
upon the closing of any existing junkyard.
§ 116-3. Prohibited use of streets and certain tracts.
No person shall park or locate any junk or vehicle not visibly complying with
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code or allow it to stand upon any street, alley
or other public place or upon any public or private tract of land, occupied or
unoccupied, within the Borough of Marcus Hook, except as provided in this
chapter.
A. Definitions. The following words and terms, as used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section,
unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
JUNK — Any discarded material or article such as not ordinarily
disposed of as rubbish or refuse, and shall include, but not be limited
to, scrap metal and scrapped motor vehicles, any stored vehicle not
visibly in compliance with the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, trucks,
trailers and machinery, but shall not include any garbage or other
organic waste or any paper, rubbish, rags or other flammable article or
material.
JUNK DEALER — Any person, as hereinafter defined, who shall engage
in the business of storing, selling, buying and dealing in junk. It shall
also include any persons involved in the scrapping or salvaging of motor
vehicles.
JUNKYARD — Any lot, parcel or tract of land maintained and intended
for the purpose of supplying a location for keeping, storing, parking,
altering or otherwise using and dealing in junk.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or the like.
B. Word usage. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 111-16 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 116-4
116:218
§ 116-4. Compliance required.
No person shall operate or occupy any junkyard within the Borough except
as provided in this chapter.
§ 116-5. Permit required.
No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer or shall establish or
operate any junkyard within the Borough until a permit shall have been
secured from the Borough Council of the Borough.
§ 116-6. Annual application for permit; fee.
§ 116-7. Investigation of premises.
Following receipt of the application for a permit as provided above, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall cause an investigation to be made of the
premises to which such application relates, and within 30 days of the
receipt of the application, the results of such investigation shall be referred
to Borough Council, or a committee of three members of Borough Council to
be appointed by the President of Council, to determine that all requirements
of this chapter are conformed to before said permit shall be issued. In
connection with such investigation, the Code Enforcement Officer, the
Health Officer, the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief and any other Borough
officer or employee requested to do so by the Council shall visit the
premises in order to determine whether the requirements as to which they
have particular knowledge and understanding are adhered to.
A. Any person operating as a junk dealer or operating any junkyard shall
make annual application for a permit to the Code Enforcement Officer
of the Borough. With every annual application there shall be submitted
a plan of such junkyard or proposed junkyard showing the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner or owners.
(3) The location of the premises from which such business shall be
conducted and the extent and area to be used for junkyard
purposes.
(4) The location of all roadways and driveways.
B. Such annual application shall be accompanied by a fee of $100 to cover
the costs of the services of the Borough officers and employees in
making the necessary studies and investigations in connection with
such application. [Amended 7-2-1990 by Ord. No. O-90-1,
approved 7-2-1990]
C. Such application must be submitted by December 1 for operation for
the succeeding calendar year, except for the first year of this chapter.
§ 116-4 JUNK DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS § 116-8
116:219
§ 116-8. Prerequisites for issuance of permit.
The Borough Council shall be required to grant an annual permit under the
terms of this chapter, after the investigation set forth above only in such
instances where such premises shall be planned, arranged and operated so
as to prevent the escape of smoke, gases and odors and to minimize the
danger of fire or explosion and to protect the health and safety of all persons
in the Borough. Such permission, when granted, may be conditioned on
the adherence by the person to whom the permit may be issued to any
and all conditions prescribed by Borough Council in order to meet the
above-mentioned standards of health and safety to the public. Every person
receiving such permission shall constantly conform to such conditions.
§ 116-9. Issuance of permit; suspension.
Immediately following the investigation required under § 116-7, when the
Council shall be satisfied that all the applicable requirements of this chapter
have been adhered to or are to be adhered to according to the plans for an
existing junkyard, the Council shall issue a permit to operate such junkyard
for the following calendar year. Such annual permit shall be subject to
suspension by Council whenever the holder thereof violates any provision of
this chapter. A suspended permit may be reinstated by the Council for the
balance of the year for which it was issued upon compliance by the holder
thereof with all the provisions of this chapter. No person shall operate a
junkyard in the Borough during the time when the permit therefor shall
have been suspended.
§ 116-10. Contents of permit; posting.
Such permit shall state the name of the person to whom such permit is
issued and the premises from which such business is to be conducted. Such
permit shall be posted conspicuously upon the premises permitted to be
used thereunder.
§ 116-11. Application for renewal of permit; fee. [Amended
1-5-1981 by Ord. No. O-81-3, approved 1-5-1981]
Thirty days prior to the expiration date of any permit, the holder thereof
may apply to the Code Enforcement Officer for a renewal thereof, such
application to be accompanied by a fee of $100. Following an investigation
as provided for in § 116-7 to ascertain whether all the requirements of the
chapter continue to be adhered to, the Council shall renew such permit for
a further period of one year.
§ 116-12. Only one place of business authorized by permit.
No person having a permit under this chapter shall, by virtue of one permit,
keep more than one place of business within the Borough of Marcus Hook
for the purpose of buying, selling, storing and dealing in junk, nor shall any
such person, or any other person, operate upon any of the streets in the
§ 116-8 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 116-12
116:220
Borough, whether from a vehicle or upon foot, as a scavenger or an itinerant
buyer, seller, storer or dealer of junk.
§ 116-13. Approval required for permit transfer.
No permit issued under the chapter shall be transferable from one person
to another person without approval of Council.
§ 116-14. Record of purchases.
Every junk dealer shall provide and shall constantly keep a book in which
shall be legibly written in the English language at the time of the receipt
of any junk a description of every article or material purchased or received
by him, the date and hour of such purchase or receipt and the person from
whom such article or material was purchased or received. Such book and
all junk purchased, received or handled by any junk dealer shall at all times
be subject to the inspection of Borough Council or its designee.
§ 116-15. Retention of purchases articles for 48 hours.
Every junk dealer having a permit under this chapter shall keep and retain
upon the permitted premises for a period of 48 hours after the purchase
or receipt thereof all junk received or purchased by him, and he shall not
disturb or reduce the same or alter the original form, shape or condition
until such period of 48 hours shall have elapsed.
§ 116-16. Maintenance of licensed premises.
Every junk dealer having a permit under this chapter shall constantly
maintain the licensed premises in the manner prescribed by this section, as
follows:
A. Such premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute a
nuisance or a menace to the health of the community or of residents
nearby or a place for the breeding of rodents and vermin.
B. No garbage or other organic waste and no paper, rubbish, rags or other
flammable articles or materials shall be stored on such premises.
C. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received in such premises as junk,
all gasoline and oil shall be drained and removed therefrom and none
shall be permitted to remain upon the premises.
D. The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage
facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water upon the premises and to facilitate access for firefighting
purposes.
E. Such premises shall not be open for business nor shall any work be
done therein in connection with the storage, processing and
transporting or removal of junk at any time on the first day of the week,
§ 116-12 JUNK DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS § 116-16
116:221
§ 116-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-5-1981 by Ord. No.
O-81-3, approved 1-5-1981; 9-6-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-5, approved
9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
§ 116-18. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this chapter shall be by the Police Department and/or other
applicable Borough officials.
Chapter 121
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage and rubbish — See Ch. 106.
§ 121-1. Legislative findings.
It is hereby declared and found that litter carelessly deposited in the
Borough is the cause of civic disgrace; that litter is a health, fire and safety
hazard and a pollutant; that an all-out litter control campaign can result
in substantial savings to taxpayers of the Borough; and that litter is a
matter affecting the public interest and consequently should be subject to
supervision and administrative control for the purpose of safeguarding the
health, safety and general welfare of the people of the Borough.
§ 121-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
commonly called "Sunday," or on any other day of the week before 7:00
a.m. or after 6:00 p.m.
F. Such premises shall be completely enclosed by a fence at least eight
feet in height, with all access gates locked when the business is not in
operation.
G. Such premises shall be obscured from public view by an acceptable
method as approved by the Borough Council permit under this chapter,
and no licensee shall extend the area of any junkyard nor add a new
facility or structure. [Amended 7-2-1990 by Ord. No. O-90-1,
approved 7-2-1990]
§ 116-16 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 121-2
121:222
COMMERCIAL PLACE — Any store or group thereof, including shopping
centers, shopping plazas and other similar places wherein mercantile
activities and services are offered to the public, and further including all
parking areas thereat.
GARBAGE — Putrescible and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular,
leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copy of any matter of literature which:
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other
waste material which if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends
to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare or creates
unsightliness.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by law;
any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United
States in accordance with federal statute or regulation; and any newspaper
filed and recorded with any recording officer, as provided by law. In addition
thereto, "newspaper" shall mean and include any periodial or current
magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year and
sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper,
booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies
of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of
"handbill" and "newspaper."
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the Borough, owned or used by the Borough and
devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any house, building or other structure designed
or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes, whether
A. Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing.
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales.
B.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged
for the purpose of private gain or profit.
C.
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
§ 121-2 LITTERING § 121-2
121:223
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, including
any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestible or mailbox
belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, shopping carts and solid market and industrial
wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 121-3. Litter in public places.
No person shall deposit or throw litter in or upon any street, sidewalk
or other public place within the Borough, except in public or private
receptacles for collection.
§ 121-4. Placing litter in receptacles to prevent scattering.
Persons placing litter in public or private receptacles shall do so in such a
manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements
upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
§ 121-5. Litter in gutters.
No person shall sweep or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place
within the Borough the accumulation of litter from any building or litter
from any public sidewalk or driveway.
§ 121-6. Litter from vehicles.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or public place within the Borough or upon private
property.
§ 121-7. Trucks causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Borough
unless such vehicle is so operated, constructed and loaded as to prevent
any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street,
alley or other public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or
truck within the Borough, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit
§ 121-2 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 121-7
121:224
in any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter
or foreign matter of any kind.
§ 121-8. Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the Borough
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere, as
provided herein.
§ 121-9. Litter in public waters.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any river, fountain, pond, lake,
stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the
Borough.
§ 121-10. Handbills in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbills in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
Borough.
§ 121-11. Placement of handbills on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful, in any public place, for a person to hand out or distribute, without
charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 121-12. Handbills on vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which is temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
§ 121-13. Handbills on private premises.
A. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are
inhabited except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly
to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such
private premises.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail
by the United States nor to newspapers, as defined herein, except that
newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to
§ 121-7 LITTERING § 121-13
121:225
§ 121-14. Handbills on utility poles and trees.
No person shall affix any handbills, posters, signs, etc., to any utility pole
or tree either on public or private property within the Borough of Marcus
Hook.
§ 121-15. Litter on private and commercial premises.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private property or
commercial place within the Borough whether owned by such person or
not, except that the owner or person in control of such private property
or commercial place may maintain authorized private receptacles for
collection in such manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street or other public place or upon any
private property.
§ 121-16. Owners to maintain commercial premises free of litter.
Each owner or person in control of any commercial place, including
shopping centers and delivery and parking areas thereat, shall keep said
places, parking fields, parking areas, delivery areas and other open areas
which are a part of such commercial place free of litter.
§ 121-17. Owners to maintain private premises free of litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 121-18. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Borough whether owned by such person or not.
§ 121-19. Notice to remove.
The Borough Council or its designated representative is hereby authorized
and empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property
or commercial place within the Borough, or the agent of such owner, to
properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is a
nuisance or dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall
be by certified mail, addressed to said owner at his last known address.
prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street or other public place or upon private property.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of
Borough newsletters or other Borough information materials.
§ 121-13 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 121-20
121:226
§ 121-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
Chapter 124
LOITERING
§ 124-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location, and includes the
concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and shall
also include the colloquial expression "hanging around."
§ 124-2. Loitering prohibited.
§ 124-3. Authority of police officers.
Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing any
of the conditions enumerated in § 124-2, any police officer may order that
person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being
ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
§ 124-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
A. No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
(1) Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
(2) Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
(3) Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
(4) Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place.
B. This section shall include the making of unsolicited remarks of an
offensive, disgusting, or insulting nature or which are calculated to
annoy or disturb the person to, or in whose hearing, they are made.
§ 121-20 LOITERING § 124-4
124:227
Chapter 129
MASSAGE PARLORS
§ 129-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions of terms shall
apply:
MASSAGE — The act or art of treating the body by rubbing, kneading or the
like to stimulate circulation and/or to increase suppleness or for any other
purpose.
MASSEUR — A man who provides massage.
MASSEUSE — A woman who provides massage.
§ 129-2. Premises license.
No person shall operate any premises used in the massage business unless
he has obtained a premises license for each establishment from the
Department of Public Health of the Borough of Marcus Hook.
§ 129-3. Operator's license.
No person shall engage in the business of or be employed as a masseur or
masseuse unless he or she has first obtained an operator's license from the
Department of Public Health of the Borough of Marcus Hook.
§ 129-4. Applications for licenses.
A. Each application for a premises license or an operator's license shall set
forth on forms provided by the Department of Public Health the
following information:
(1) Premises license.
(a) A definition of service to be provided.
(b) The address where it is proposed to conduct the business for
which application is made.
(c) The name, local and permanent addresses and local telephone
number of each applicant.
(d) If the applicant is a corporation, the state of corporation, the
names and residence addresses of each of the officers and
directors of the corporation and of each stockholder owning
more than 10% of the stock of the corporation, and the address
of the corporation itself if different from the address of the
massage establishment.
(e) If the applicant is a partnership, the names and residence
addresses of each of the partners, including limited partners,
§ 124-4 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 129-4
129:228
and the address of the partnership itself if different from the
address of the massage establishment.
(f) A photograph, at least two by two inches in size, showing the
head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and
distinguishing manner.
(g) A description, including height, weight, age, date of birth,
color of hair and eyes and other distinguishing physical
characteristics, of the applicant.
(h) A statement indicating whether the applicant has ever been
licensed to practice or carry on the same business and, if so,
when and where it was last practiced or carried on.
(i) A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of any
crime, motor vehicle laws excepted, or convicted of violation of
any municipal code or ordinance. If so convicted, the nature of
the offense and the punishment or penalty imposed.
(j) The number of rooms to be occupied by the business, together
with a drawing of the interior arrangement and a list of the
proposed equipment with a brief description of each piece of
proposed equipment.
(k) The name and address of each massager who is or will be
employed in the establishment, together with a statement of
his or her individual qualifications and the name and address of
the last place of business where each individual worked.
(2) Operator's license.
(a) Name, home address and telephone number.
(b) A photograph, at least two by two inches in size, showing the
head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and
distinguishing manner.
(c) A description, including height, weight, age, date of birth,
color of hair and eyes and other distinguishing physical
characteristics, of the applicant.
(d) A statement indicating whether the applicant has ever been
licensed to practice or carry on the same business and, if so,
when and where it was last practiced or carried on.
(e) A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of any
crime, motor vehicle laws excepted, or convicted of violation of
any municipal code or ordinance. If so convicted, the nature of
the offense and the punishment or penalty imposed.
(f) The names and addresses of previous employers for a period of
three years preceding the date of application.
§ 129-4 MASSAGE PARLORS § 129-4
129:229
§ 129-5. Tattoo parlors.
§ 129-6. License fees.
The applicant for a premises license shall pay an annual fee of $250. The
applicant for an operator's license shall pay an annual license fee of $100.
§ 129-7. Prohibition.
§ 129-8. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to massage treatments given:
§ 129-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
B. The aforesaid requirements concerning the submission of information
by an applicant shall be deemed to be continuing so as to require a
licensee to update the information contained in the licensee's
application within 10 days of the occurrence of an event which would
alter the facts submitted by the licensee in the application.
A. No person shall engage in the business of or be employed as one who
applied tattoos or the like to any other person.
B. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as
provided in § 129-9 and, in addition to any such penalty, it shall be the
duty of the Director of the Department of Public Health to revoke any
premises license of the establishment which may have been issued with
regard to the other provisions of this chapter.
A. No person employed or engaged in the business of a masseur or
masseuse shall treat a person of the opposite sex.
B. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as
provided in § 129-9 and, in addition to such penalty, it shall be the duty
of the Director of the Department of Public Health to revoke the
premises license of the establishment wherein the provisions of this
section have been violated.
A. In the office of a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or a
physical therapist.
B. In a regularly established medical center, hospital, sanatorium, nursing
home or convalescent center.
C. In a residence of a person under a licensed physician's care by the
direction of the licensed physician.
§ 129-4 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 129-9
129:230
Chapter 132
MECHANICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 96.
Plumbing — See Ch. 154.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 157.
§ 132-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Manager/Secretary of the Borough of Marcus Hook, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, being marked and designated as the "BOCA National
Mechanical Code, Eighth Edition, 1993," published by the Building Officials
and Code Administrators International, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as
the Mechanical Code of the Borough of Marcus Hook, Delaware County,
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the control of buildings and
structures as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National
Mechanical Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as
if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions and changes
prescribed in § 132-3 of this chapter.
§ 132-2. Repealer.
By this chapter, Chapter 132, entitled "Mechanical Standards," of the
Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Marcus Hook, Pennsylvania, 1990, as
supplemented and amended, and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances
in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.42
§ 132-3. Amendments.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. In Section M-101.1 (page 1, second line) insert: "the Borough of Marcus
Hook, Delaware County, Pennsylvania."
B. In Section M-105.1, Code official, insert: "For the purpose of this
chapter the term 'code official' shall be synonymous with 'Code
Enforcement Officer' wherever it may appear."
C. In Section M-109.2, Suspension of permit (page 3, third line), substitute
"90 days" for "six months."
D. In Section M-113.2, Periodic inspections (page 4, third line), insert:
"Fees as determined by resolution of Borough Council, which may be
42.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 132 consisted of Ord. No. O-83-16, adopted 12-5-1983, approved
12-5-1983, as amended.
§ 129-9 MECHANICAL STANDARDS § 132-3
132:231
§ 132-4. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Mechanical Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any lawsuit or proceeding impending in any court or
any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 132-2 of this chapter, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 135
MULTIPLE DWELLINGS; ROOMING HOUSES; RENTAL UNITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 96.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 157.
Zoning — See Ch. 196.
amended from time to time and listed on the Building Permit Fee
Schedule."
E. In Section M-113.3, Fee schedule (page 4, third line), insert: "Fees as
determined by resolution of Borough Council, which may be amended
from time to time and listed on the Building Permit Fee Schedule."
F. In Section M-116.4, Violation penalties, seventh line, insert "summary
offense" and, in the eighth line, insert "the maximum amount provided
from time to time by state statute." Delete remainder of section.
G. In Section M-117.2, Unlawful continuance, in the next-to-last line
following "shall be liable to a fine of," delete remainder of section and
insert "up to the maximum amount provided from time to time by state
statute."
H. In Section M-121.1, Application for appeal, delete the first sentence and
add: "Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code
official to the Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook." Delete the third
sentence and add: "An application for a special hearing may be made in
writing to the Manager/Secretary's office within 20 days of the time
that the notice was served."
I. In Section M-121.2, Membership of board, replace with: "For the
purpose of this chapter, the word 'Board,' wherever it may appear in
this code, will be defined as meaning the Council of the Borough of
Marcus Hook."
J. Sections M-121.1 through M-121.2.6 are hereby deleted.
K. In Section M-121.5, Postponed hearing, change the words "When five
members" to the words "When any four Council members."
§ 132-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 132-4
132:232
§ 135-1. Purpose. [Added 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-3, approved
12-1-200843]
§ 135-1.1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING UNIT — A structure or that part of a structure which is used or
intended to be used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one or more
persons maintaining a common household to the exclusion of all others.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any building or structure or singly owned part
thereof containing two or more dwelling units.
OWNER-OCCUPIED DWELLING UNIT — Designation given to property
used as the owner's residence.[Added 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-3,
approved 12-1-2008]
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling not occupied by
the owner, as determined by the most current deed, or his immediate
family (spouse, father, mother and children), regardless of length of stay or
the absence of a rental charge.[Added 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-3,
approved 12-1-2008]
ROOMING HOUSE — Any building or structure or part thereof containing
one or more rooming units.
A. It is the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the Council of the
Borough of Marcus Hook, in order to protect and promote the public
health, safety and welfare of its citizens, to establish obligations of
owners and occupants relating to rental of certain residential rental
units in the Borough of Marcus Hook. The Council of the Borough of
Marcus Hook has recognized the need to:
(1) Preserve the quality of life for residents of the Borough living in
rental dwelling units;
(2) Identify, reduce and eliminate the potential adverse secondary
effects from blighted deteriorating housing stock; and
(3) Ensure the rehabilitation of housing that does not comply with
state and local building and housing laws and with maintenance
standards.
B. As a means to those ends, this chapter provides for a system of
inspections and issuance and renewal of operating licenses, and sets
penalties for violations.
43.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 135-1,
Definitions, as § 135-1.1
§ 132-4 MECHANICAL STANDARDS § 135-2
132:233
§ 135-2. Adoption of plans of inspection by Code Enforcement
Officer.
§ 135-3. Powers and duties of Code Enforcement Officer.
A. The Code Enforcement Office of the Borough is hereby authorized and
directed to develop and adopt plans for the inspection of dwelling units
subject to the provisions of this chapter, including:
(1) A plan for the periodic inspection of multiple dwellings, rooming
houses and rental dwelling units subject to the provisions of this
chapter governing the licensing and operation of such dwellings.
[Amended 11-7-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-11, approved
11-7-1983]
(2) A plan for the systematic inspection of dwelling units contained in
such contiguous areas within the Borough of Marcus Hook as may
from time to time be designated by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Before making inspections and pursuant to a plan authorized in
Subsection A(2), the Code Enforcement Officer shall advise the
property owners and other residents of the intent to inspect.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter and is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections
pursuant to one or more of the plans for inspection authorized by
§ 135-2A or in response to a complaint that an alleged violation of the
provisions of this chapter or of applicable rules or regulations pursuant
thereto may exist or when the Code Enforcement Officer has valid
reason to believe that a violation of this chapter or of any rules and
regulations pursuant thereto has been or is being committed.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to enter and inspect
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. all dwellings, dwelling
units, rooming houses, rooming units, dormitories and dormitory rooms
subject to the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of determining
whether there is compliance with its provisions.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to inspect the
premises surrounding dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses,
rooming units, dormitories and dormitory rooms subject to this chapter
for the purpose of determining whether there is compliance with its
provisions.
D. The Code Enforcement Officer and the owner, occupant or other person
in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, rooming house,
dormitory or dormitory room subject to this chapter may agree to an
inspection by appointment at a time other than the hours provided in
Subsection B.
E. The owner, occupant or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming unit, rooming house, dormitory or dormitory room, upon
§ 135-2 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 135-3
132:234
§ 135-4. Licensing of operation of certain dwellings.
presentation of proper identification by the Code Enforcement Officer,
a copy of any relevant plan of inspection pursuant to which entry
is sought and a schedule of the specific areas and facilities to be
inspected, shall give the Code Enforcement Officer entry and free
access to every part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit,
dormitory or dormitory room and to the premises surrounding any of
these.
F. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep confidential all evidence
which it may discover or obtain in the course of an inspection made
pursuant to this section, and such evidence shall be considered
privileged.
G. If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit or of a multiple dwelling, rental dwelling unit or
rooming house subject to licensing under § 135-4 fails or refuses to
permit free access and entry to the structure or premises under his
control, or any part thereof, with respect to which an inspection
authorized by this chapter is sought to be made, the Code Enforcement
Officer may, upon a showing that probable cause exists for the
inspection and for the issuance of an order directing compliance with
the inspection requirements of this section with respect to such
dwelling, dwelling units, rooming unit, multiple dwelling, rooming
house or rental dwelling unit, petition and obtain such order from a
court of competent jurisdiction. [Amended 11-7-1983 by Ord. No.
O-83-11, approved 11-7-1983]
(1) When required, the Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain a
warrant to inspect.
(2) Any person who refuses to comply with an order issued pursuant to
this section shall be subject to such penalties as may be authorized
by law for violation of a court order.
A. No person shall operate a multiple dwelling, rooming house or rental
dwelling unit unless he holds a current unrevoked operating license
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer in his name for the specific
named multiple dwelling, rooming house or rental dwelling unit.
[Amended 11-7-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-11, approved 11-7-1983]
B. Every operating license shall be issued for a period of one year from its
date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, and may be renewed for
successive periods of not to exceed one year.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized, upon application
therefor, to issue a new operating license and renewals thereof in the
names of applicant owners or operators of multiple dwellings, rooming
houses or rental dwelling units. No such licenses shall be issued unless
the multiple dwelling, rooming house or rental dwelling unit in
§ 135-3 MECHANICAL STANDARDS § 135-4
132:235
connection with which the license is sought is found, after inspection,
to meet all requirements of this chapter and of applicable rules and
regulations pursuant thereto. [Amended 11-7-1983 by Ord. No.
O-83-11, approved 11-7-1983]
D. No operating license shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant
owner or operator has first made application therefor on an application
form provided by the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall develop such forms and make them available to the public.
E. No operating license shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant
owner or operator agrees in his application to such inspections
pursuant to §§ 135-2A and 135-3A as the Code Enforcement Officer may
require to determine whether the multiple dwelling, rooming house or
rental dwelling unit in connection with which such license is sought is
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with applicable
rules and regulations pursuant thereto. [Amended 11-7-1983 by Ord.
No. O-83-11, approved 11-7-1983]
F. Rental units (residential). [Amended 3-4-1985 by Ord. No. O-85-2,
approved 3-4-1985; 11-2-1987 by Res. No. R-87-13, approved
11-2-1987; 1-3-1994 by Res. No. R-94-1, approved 1-3-1994;
11-4-2002 by Res. No. R-02-14, approved 11-4-2002]
(1) No residential rental operating license shall be issued or renewed
unless the completed application form is accompanied by a fee of
$100 per year, per unit, from the date of issuance.
(2) Said fee covers the annual inspection and licensing of multiplefamily
dwelling units, rooming house units and rental dwelling
units.
G. Borough Council may, from time to time, by resolution, change the
amount of fees required to be paid under the provisions of this
chapter.44 [Added 3-4-1985 by Ord. No. O-85-2, approved
3-4-1985]
H. No operating license shall be issued or renewed for a nonresident
applicant unless such applicant designates in writing to the Code
Enforcement Officer the name of his agent for the receipt of service of
notice that there is a violation of the provisions of this chapter and for
service of process pursuant to this chapter.
I. No operating license shall be issued or renewed for a resident applicant
unless such applicant has first designated an agent for the receipt of
service of notice of violations of the provisions of this chapter and for
service of process pursuant to this chapter when said applicant is
absent from the Borough of Marcus Hook for 30 days or more. Such a
designation shall be made in writing and shall accompany each
44.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 135-4 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 135-4
132:236
application form. The applicant may designate any person resident in
the Borough of Marcus Hook as his agent for this purpose.
J. No operating license shall be renewed unless an application therefor
has been made within 60 days prior to the expiration of the present
operating license.
K. Each license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the
common ways of the multiple dwelling; rooming house or rental
dwelling units. No license shall be transferable to another person or to
another multiple dwelling, rooming house or rental dwelling unit. Every
person holding an operating license shall give notice in writing to the
Code Enforcement Officer within 24 hours after having transferred or
otherwise disposed of the legal control of any licensed multiple
dwelling, rooming house or rental dwelling unit. Such notice shall
include the name and address of the person or persons succeeding to
the ownership or control of such multiple dwellings, rooming house or
rental dwelling unit. [Amended 11-7-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-11,
approved 11-7-1983]
L. Every owner or operator of a licensed multiple dwelling, rooming house
or rental dwelling unit shall keep or cause to be kept an accurate record
of all repairs, alterations and equipment changes related to the
provisions of this chapter or to any rules and regulations pertaining
thereto, and of all corrections made as the result of inspections by the
Code Enforcement Officer. Such record shall be made available to the
Code Enforcement Officer by the owner or operator when requested.
Every owner or operator subject to this section shall be notified that
such record may be used in administrative or judicial proceedings
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The administrative authority
shall, upon issuance of a license as required in Subsection A, advise the
licensee of the necessity for such record and the manner in which such
record shall be kept. [Amended 11-7-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-11,
approved 11-7-1983]
M. Whenever, upon inspection of the licensed multiple dwelling, rooming
house or rental dwelling unit or of the records required to be kept by
Subsection L, the Code Enforcement Officer finds that conditions or
practices exist which are in violation of the provisions of this chapter or
of any applicable rules and regulations pursuant thereto, he shall serve
the owner or operator with notice of such violation in the manner
hereinafter provided. Such notice shall state that unless the violations
cited are corrected within a reasonable time, the operating license may
be suspended. [Amended 11-7-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-11,
approved 11-7-1983]
N. At the end of the time he has allowed for correction of any violation
cited, the Code Enforcement Officer shall reinspect the multiple
dwelling, rooming house or rental dwelling unit, and if he determines
that such conditions have not been corrected, he may issue an order
§ 135-4 MECHANICAL STANDARDS § 135-4
132:237
§ 135-5. Notice of violation.
suspending the operating license. [Amended 11-7-1983 by Ord. No.
O-83-11, approved 11-7-1983]
O. Any person whose license to operate a multiple dwelling, rooming
house or rental dwelling unit has been suspended shall be entitled to a
reconsideration of the order or a formal hearing in the manner
hereinafter provided by this chapter. If no request for reconsideration
or petition for hearing reaches the Code Enforcement Officer within 21
days following the issuance of the order of suspension, the license shall
be revoked, except that prior to revocation any person whose license
has been suspended may request reinspection upon a showing that the
violation or violations cited in the notice have been corrected.
[Amended 11-7-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-11, approved 11-7-1983]
P. If, upon reinspection, the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the
multiple dwelling, rooming house or rental dwelling unit in connection
with which the notice was issued is now in compliance with this chapter
and with applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto, he
shall reinstate the license. A request for reinspection shall not extend
the suspension period unless the Code Enforcement Officer grants such
request. [Amended 11-7-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-11, approved
11-7-1983]
A. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that any dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit or the premises surrounding any of these
fails to meet the requirements set forth in this chapter or in applicable
rules and regulations issued pursuant hereto, he shall issue a notice
setting forth the alleged failures and advising the owner, occupant,
operator or agent that such failures must be corrected. This notice
shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Set forth the alleged violations of this chapter or of applicable rules
and regulations issued pursuant thereto.
(3) Describe the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit where the
violations are alleged to exist or to have been committed.
(4) Provide a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days, for the correction
of any violation alleged.
(5) Be served upon the owner, occupant, operator or agent of the
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit personally or by registered
mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known place
of residence of the owner, occupant, operator or agent. If one or
more persons to whom such notice is addressed cannot be found
after diligent efforts to do so, service may be made upon such
person or persons by posting a notice in or about the dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit described in the notice or by causing
§ 135-4 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 135-5
132:238
§ 135-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 5-6-1988]
Any owner, occupant, operator or agent of a multiple dwelling, rooming
house or rental dwelling unit who has received the second order or notice
of a violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of up to the
maximum amount as provided from time to time by state statute for each
day each violation continues after expiration of the specified reasonable
such notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation
for a period of three consecutive days; or
(6) Be served upon a resident agent for the receipt of such service of
notice designated pursuant to § 135-4I.
B. At the end of the period of time allowed for the correction of any
violation alleged, the Code Enforcement Officer shall reinspect the
multiple dwelling, rooming house or rental dwelling unit described in
the notice. [Amended 11-7-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-11, approved
11-7-1983]
C. If upon reinspection the violations alleged are determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer not to have been corrected, he shall issue a second
notice of violation, which shall constitute an order requiring that the
then-existing failures to meet the requirements of this chapter or of
applicable existing rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto shall be
corrected within a reasonable time allowed if the person served with
such notice does not request a reconsideration or petition for a hearing
on the matter in the manner hereinafter provided.
D. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause a copy of the second notice to
be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the multiple dwelling,
rooming house or rental dwelling unit where the violations are alleged
to exist and shall serve it in the manner provided in Subsection A(1)
through (6).
E. The Code Enforcement Officer, after the expiration of time granted the
person served with such second notice to seek reconsideration or a
hearing in the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter, or after a
final decision adverse to such person served has been rendered by a
court of competent jurisdiction to which an appeal has been taken, shall
cause the second notice to be recorded in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Delaware County.
F. All subsequent transferees of the multiple dwelling, rooming house or
rental dwelling unit in connection with which a second notice has been
so recorded shall be deemed to have notice of the continuing existence
of the violations alleged and shall be liable to all penalties and
procedures provided by this chapter and by applicable rules and
regulations issued pursuant thereto to the same degree as was their
transferor.
§ 135-5 MECHANICAL STANDARDS § 135-6
132:239
consideration period, provided that no such penalty shall be applicable
while a hearing or appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction is pending in
the matter.
§ 135-7. Appeals. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5;
approved 12-3-2018]
§ 135-8. Conflict of ordinances.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code of
the Borough of Marcus Hook existing on the effective date of this chapter,45
the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case
where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision
of any other ordinance or code of the Borough of Marcus Hook existing
on the effective date of this chapter which establishes a lower standard
for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people,
A. All appeals under this chapter shall be held by and before the Borough
Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook. Any person affected by any
notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any
provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter
before the Borough Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook, provided
that such person shall file in the office of the Code Enforcement Officer
a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief
statement of the grounds therefor within 14 days after the day the
notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition the Borough Council
shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner
written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be
modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than
10 days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided that
upon application of the petitioner, the Code Enforcement Officer may
postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such tenday
period if in his judgment the petitioner has submitted sufficient
reason for such postponement.
B. After the hearing, the Borough Council may sustain, modify or
withdraw the notice of the violation on the basis of the findings of the
hearing and shall give petitioner written notice thereof. Such
proceedings shall be summarized in writing and shall become a matter
of public record in the office of the Code Enforcement Officer. Such
record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in
connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Borough Council may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent
jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 76, Building Construction; Ch. 96, Fire Prevention; Ch. 157,
Property Maintenance; Ch. 196, Zoning.
§ 135-6 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 135-8
132:240
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and such other
ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that
they may be found in conflict with this chapter.
Chapter 142
NUMBERING SYSTEM: PROPERTIES AND PREMISES
§ 142-1. Adoption of provisions.
The Borough Council hereby adopts the following provisions with respect to
house numbering in the Borough of Marcus Hook.
§ 142-2. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to require the clear display of authorized
and assigned house or building numbers on every building fronting on any
street in the Borough of Marcus Hook in order to assist the general public
and emergency services, public and private, in identifying any property in
case of emergency or otherwise.
§ 142-3. Applicability.
All residential, commercial, industrial or other structures erected or to be
erected within the Borough of Marcus Hook shall display identification
numbers as provided herein and in accordance with specifications provided
herein.
§ 142-4. Compliance required.
The owner, occupant or lessee of each and every structure which now fronts
or which may hereafter front upon any public or private street within the
Borough of Marcus Hook who has been assigned a house number prior to
the effective date of this chapter shall, at his own expense, within 60 days
after the effective date of this chapter, cause the authorized and assigned
number of such structure to be permanently and conspicuously placed in
accordance with the specifications set forth herein. Any owner who has not
been assigned a number prior to the effective date of this chapter shall,
within 60 days after notice of assignment of such number, comply with the
requirements of this section.
§ 142-5. Numbering specifications.
House or building numbers shall be:
A. In Arabic numerals.
B. A minimum height of three inches for residential properties and a
minimum height of six inches for commercial and industrial properties.
§ 135-8 NUMBERING SYSTEM: PROPERTIES AND § 142-5
142:241
§ 142-6. Alternative locations for numbers.
If numbers affixed to the front of the building would not be visible from the
street, regulations may be satisfied if the owner, occupant or lessee shall
provide the Arabic numbers, as required by these regulations, upon a post,
rod or other type of fixture of substantial nature or a mailbox at or near
the frontage with the same number affixed thereon and so located upon
the same that the number may be conspicuous and visible from the street
upon which the building fronts. When the provisions of this section have
been complied with, the owner, occupant or lessee of the house or building
shall not be otherwise obligated to affix Arabic numbers to said house or
building and shall be permitted, at his option, to utilize cursive numbers or
no numbers at all upon the house or building.
§ 142-7. Garden apartment and townhouse condominium
complexes.
Garden apartment and townhouse condominium complexes shall provide
such building and apartment numbers as are provided for in the regulations.
§ 142-8. Authority to renumber and to number. [Added 6-3-1996 by
Ord. No. O-96-1, approved 6-3-199646]
The Code Enforcement Officer and Borough Secretary, or either of them,
in consultation with the Borough Engineer and the United States Postal
Service, are hereby authorized to require the numbering and renumbering
of any house, building or other structure in accordance with this chapter.
The Code Enforcement Officer and Borough Secretary, or either of them,
in consultation with the Borough Engineer and the United States Postal
Service, shall have the full right and authority to designate any number or
numbers on any Borough street or public highway which may be laid out
and opened after the passage of this chapter and shall have like authority
to designate such number or numbers due to additions, omissions or
corrections found necessary on the schedule or system adopted.
C. Mounted in a secure fashion to the front wall or porch of the building so
as to be clearly visible from the street.
D. Sufficiently legible as to contrasting background, arrangement, spacing
and uniformity so as to be clearly visible from the street.
E. At least 30 inches above ground level and so placed that trees, shrubs
and other obstructions do not block the line of sight of the numbers
from the street upon which the building fronts.
46.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 142-8,
Violations and penalties, as § 142-9.
§ 142-5 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 142-9
142:242
§ 142-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
Chapter 145
PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Carnivals — See Ch. 80. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 175.
§ 145-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Parade Ordinance of
the Borough of Marcus Hook."
§ 145-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Marcus Hook.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Borough of Marcus Hook.
PARADE — Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or
procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or
other public place in the Borough.
PARADE PERMIT — A permit as required by this chapter.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
§ 145-3. Permit required; exceptions.
A. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade
unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the Chief of
Police or other appropriate official as designated by Borough Council.
B. Exception. This chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Funeral processions.
(2) Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school
authorities.
(3) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
§ 142-9 PARADES § 145-4
145:243
§ 145-4. Application for permit.
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with
the Chief of Police on forms provided by such officer.
A. Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the
Chief of Police not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days before the
date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
B. Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade.
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and
responsible heads of such organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct.
(4) The date when the parade is to be conducted.
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
(6) The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals and
description of the vehicles.
(7) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
(8) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed.
(9) The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade.
(10) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area or areas.
(11) The interval of space to be maintained between units of such
parade.
(12) If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any
person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall
file with the Chief of Police a communication in writing from the
person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to
apply for the permit on his behalf.
(13) Any additional information which the Chief of Police shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit
should issue.
§ 145-4 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 145-4
145:244
§ 145-5. Standards for issuance of permit.
The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when,
from a consideration of the application and from such other information as
may otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
§ 145-6. Notice of rejection of application.
The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for a parade permit
within 10 days after the filing thereof. If the Chief of Police disapproves the
application, he shall mail to the applicant within 15 days after the date upon
which the application was filed a notice of his action, stating the reasons for
his denial of the permit.
C. Late applications. The Chief of Police, where good cause is shown
therefor shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder
which is filed less than 30 days before the date such parade is proposed
to be conducted.
D. Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade
permit a fee of $25.
A. The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.
B. The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the Borough to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the Borough.
C. The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the Borough other than that to be occupied by the proposed
line of march and areas contiguous thereto.
D. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of or ambulance service to areas contiguous to such
assembly areas.
E. The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting
equipment enroute to a fire.
F. The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to
persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a
disturbance.
G. The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays enroute.
H. The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods or event and is not designed to be held purely for private
profit.
§ 145-4 PARADES § 145-7
145:245
§ 145-7. Appeal procedure.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit to the Borough Council. The appeal shall be taken within five days
after notice. The Borough Council shall act upon the appeal within five days
after its receipt.
§ 145-8. Alternative permit.
The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall
be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time
or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant
desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice
of the action of the Chief of Police, file a written notice of acceptance
with the Chief of Police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the
requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under, this
chapter.
§ 145-9. Notice to officials.
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the Chief of Police shall
send a copy thereof to the following:
§ 145-10. Contents of permit.
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
A. The Mayor.
B. The President of Borough Council.
C. The Borough Manager.
D. The Borough Attorney.
E. The Fire Chief.
F. The Postmaster.
G. The general manager or responsible head of each public transportation
utility, the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route
of the proposed parade.
A. Starting time.
B. Minimum speed.
C. Maximum speed.
D. Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade.
E. The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the
parade.
§ 145-7 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 145-10
145:246
§ 145-11. Duties of permittee.
§ 145-12. Public conduct during parades.
§ 145-13. Revocation of permit.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as herein set
forth.
§ 145-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
F. The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof.
G. Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find necessary to the
enforcement of this chapter.
A. A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
B. Possession of permit. The parade chairman or other person heading or
leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person
during the conduct of the parade.
A. Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede
or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person,
vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade.
B. Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle, streetcar or trackless
trolley shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade
when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously
designated as a parade.
C. Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police shall have the authority,
when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route
of a parade. The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle
in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street
unposted in violation of this chapter.
§ 145-10 PARADES § 145-14
145:247
Chapter 148
PARKING LOTS, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicle and traffic — See Ch. 191.
§ 148-1. Adherence to established rules.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any municipal parking lot in
violation of any ordinance, or to so park contrary to the rules established by
the Borough Council for the use of municipal parking lots or in any place
or manner other than that designated by the Borough. No commercial or
freight-carrying vehicle or trailer shall be parked in any municipal parking
lot except as permitted or designated by Borough Council.
§ 148-1.1. Parking of commercial and recreation vehicles. [Added
6-5-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-5, approved 6-5-2006]
Any resident of the Borough of Marcus Hook may apply for a special permit
to park a commercial or recreation vehicle or any other vehicle of a similar
character (defined as being self-propelled) in a municipal parking lot. This
special permit shall be limited to a commercial or recreation vehicle or
any other vehicle of a similar character with a registered gross vehicle
weight of no more than 10,000 pounds. The fee for the initial permit and
any renewals shall be set by resolution of Borough Council. A special permit
does not exempt its holder from the observance of all other traffic and
parking regulations.
§ 148-2. Parking cars beyond permitted time.
It shall be unlawful to park any car in any municipal parking lot for a period
of longer than 24 hours unless specifically authorized by Borough Council.
§ 148-3. Metered lots.
In any municipal parking lot where meters are installed, it shall be unlawful
to park any car without first inserting a coin in the meter controlling the
parking place used during metered hours or to park for a longer period
than that covered by such coin. It shall be unlawful to park in any municipal
parking lot where a fee is provided by ordinance without paying such fee.
§ 148-3.1. Mary M. Campbell Library parking lot. [Added 5-4-2009
by Ord. No. O-09-2, approved 5-4-2009]
Parking of vehicles in the Mary M. Campbell Library parking lot, located
next to the Marcus Hook Municipal Building, is restricted to library staff
and patrons, municipal and staff vehicles, and persons with business at
§ 145-14 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 148-3.1
145:248
the Municipal Building. Borough resident vehicles displaying a residential
parking permit may park in this parking lot during the hours when the
library is closed to the public.
§ 148-4. Borough policy.
It is the policy of Borough Council to provide municipal parking lots for the
convenience of Borough residents. Off-street parking, wherever feasible, is
preferred to on-street parking.
§ 148-5. Damaging property.
No person shall deface, injure or damage any property while it is located on
a municipal parking lot.
§ 148-6. Trailers, boats and similar vehicles excluded.
Parking of utility trailers, house or vacation trailers, boats or other similar
vehicles shall be prohibited in municipal parking lots except as specifically
permitted or designated by Borough Council.
§ 148-7. Repairing vehicles in municipal parking lots. [Added
9-3-2019 by Ord. No. O-19-3,47 approved 9-3-2019]
No person shall, at any hour of the day or night, make mechanical repairs
of any nature or description whatsoever to any motor vehicle or leave
unattended any motor vehicle on a vehicle lifting or support device (i.e.,
jacks, ramps, blocks) while said motor vehicle is parked or standing on any
Borough municipal parking lot. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to
remove or direct to remove any vehicle found leaking gasoline or engine
fluids (where no other alternative is available) while said motor vehicle is
parked or standing on any Borough municipal parking lot.
§ 148-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
Chapter 151
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 191.
47.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 148-7 as § 148-8.
§ 148-3.1 PARADES § 148-8
145:249
§ 151-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARKS — Includes all lands and waters under the control of the Borough of
Marcus Hook or that may come under the control while these regulations
are in force.
§ 151-2. Purpose.
Inasmuch as the parks of the community are for the benefit and pleasure of
the whole public, the rules and regulations as set forth in this chapter are
for the express purpose of providing for the general welfare of the public
using the parks.
§ 151-3. Rules of personal conduct.
The following rules of personal conduct shall apply in Borough parks:
§ 151-4. Prohibited activities.
No person shall commit any of the following acts within the parks or
playgrounds without the previously obtained consent of the Borough:
A. No person shall commit any disorderly, destructive or immoral act.
B. No person shall be intoxicated or have in his possession alcoholic
beverages while in the parks.
C. Gambling, soliciting or selling of any kind is prohibited, except for
concessions authorized by the Borough.
D. It is unlawful to cast upon any roadway or park areas paper, bottles,
cans or debris of any nature, or otherwise litter premises.
E. All persons using the parks, including any bathing areas, must have
their bodies concealed by suitable covering.
F. Foot traffic in unlighted areas after darkness is prohibited.
G. No person shall remove any bench, seat or table or change the location
thereof without permission of the Borough.
H. No person shall conduct himself so as to annoy any other person.
I. No person shall dispose of any waste or garbage except in receptacles
designated for the respective purposes. All persons shall dispose of all
waste and garbage left by them in such proper receptacles.
A. Play any music except personal radios at reasonable volume.
§ 148-8 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 151-4
145:250
B. Deliver any public speech.
C. Hold any public meeting or engage in any marching or driving as
members of a military, political or other organization.
D. Post or display any sign, banner or advertisement.
E. Conduct any funeral procession or vehicle containing the body of a
deceased person.
F. Land or launch in any boat at a place not designated by the Borough for
that purpose, except in an emergency situation. [Amended 10-7-2002
by Ord. No. O-02-6, approved 10-7-2002]
G. Hold any picnic or build any fire at a place not designated for that
purpose unless with written permission.
H. Violate the regulations relating to the use of any building or place.
I. Injure any notice posted by order of the Borough.
J. Digging of any kind.
K. Use bow and arrows except where designated.
L. Trap or remove any wild animal from any park.
M. Allow any animal to enter any park area. [Amended 12-2-1991 by
Ord. No. O-91-7; approved 12-2-1991]
N. Remove, cut or damage any flowers, plants or trees from any park.
O. Fly any gasoline-driven model airplane except where designated.
P. Ride any bicycle within any park area.
Q. Strike golf balls. [Added 12-2-1991 by Ord. No. O-91-7; approved
12-2-1991]
R. Riding of skateboards, roller skating, roller blading or use of scooters
(manual or motorized). [Added 12-2-1991 by Ord. No. O-91-7;
approved 12-2-1991; amended 10-7-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-6,
approved 10-7-2002]
S. Play ball in Market Square Memorial Park. [Added 12-2-1991 by Ord.
No. O-91-7; approved 12-2-1991]
T. Feed or provide food for any wildlife at any time during the year.
[Added 9-3-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-4, approved 9-3-1996;
amended 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 0-11-5, approved 8-1-2011]
U. Use charcoal, propane or electric grill for cooking unless with written
permission. [Added 10-7-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-6, approved
10-7-2002]
§ 151-4 PARADES § 151-4
145:251
§ 151-5. Vehicular traffic.
§ 151-6. General regulations.
V. Swim in the Delaware River and Marcus Hook Creek. [Added
10-7-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-6, approved 10-7-2002]
W. The use of any tobacco product in any form in all Borough parks,
playgrounds and recreational fields. [Added 8-3-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-2, approved 8-3-2015]
A. Only those roadways especially designated and constructed for
vehicular traffic shall be used for such.
B. The legal speed limit shall be 15 miles per hour on all park roadways.
This shall not apply to fire or police vehicles, ambulances nor vehicles
used by physicians when actually engaged in responding to emergency
calls.
C. Automobiles shall park only where space has been provided for that
purpose and where posted as such. Parking on grass or on shoulder of
roadways is prohibited.
D. Minibikes and other two-or-more-wheel motorized conveyances are
prohibited.
E. Trucks are forbidden in all parks except for deliveries. No trucks
weighing over 10,000 pounds shall be permitted.
F. Road-testing of all vehicles or driver instruction shall be forbidden in
any park.
G. Shining of spotlight or any flashlight into any vehicle or at any person
from any moving vehicle or fixed position shall be forbidden except by
duly authorized personnel.
H. Washing, repairing or otherwise servicing of automobiles is prohibited
in the parks.
A. General regulations for parks are as follows:
(1) The parks are closed from 11:00 p.m. until sunrise, or as otherwise
posted, and all persons found lounging between these hours may
be arrested for trespassing. [Amended 9-3-1996 by Ord. No.
O-96-4, approved 9-3-1996]
(2) Children under the age of 18 years not accompanied by a parent or
guardian will not be permitted in any park after 9:00 p.m.
(3) The Borough Police Department shall be recognized as the agency
to enforce the foregoing rules and regulations and to maintain
general law.
§ 151-4 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 151-6
145:252
§ 151-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
Chapter 154
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 96.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 132.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 157.
§ 154-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Manager/Secretary of the Borough of Marcus Hook, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, being marked and designated as the "BOCA National
Plumbing Code, Ninth Edition, 1993," published by the Building Officials
and Code Administrators International, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as
the Plumbing Code of the Borough of Marcus Hook, Delaware County, in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the control of buildings and structures
as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National Plumbing Code are
hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions and changes as prescribed by other
sections of this chapter.
§ 154-2. Repealer.
By this chapter, Chapter 154, entitled "Plumbing," of the Codified
Ordinances of the Borough of Marcus Hook, Pennsylvania, 1990, as
supplemented and amended, and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances
in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.48
(4) Any group or organization over four individuals must possess an
agreement or permit or have obtained authorization from the
Recreation and Park Board to assemble in any park or playground.
B. The Borough may, at its discretion, levy charges on nonresidents or
residents, or both, for the use of park facilities. Charges shall be
determined by the Recreation and Park Board and approved by
Borough Council.
48.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 154 consisted of Ord. No. O-83-13, adopted 12-5-1983, approved
12-5-1983, as amended.
§ 151-6 PLUMBING § 154-3
154:253
§ 154-3. Amendments.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. In Section P-101.1, second line, insert "the Borough of Marcus Hook,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania."
B. In Section P-105.1, Code official, insert, "For the purpose of this
chapter, the term 'code official' shall be synonymous with 'Plumbing
Inspector' wherever it may appear."
C. In Section P-109.2, Suspension of permit, substitute "90 days" for "six
months" in line two.
D. Section P-113.2, Fee schedule, shall be changed to read as follows:
"Fees for registrations and permits required by this code shall be
calculated using the fee schedule adopted by resolution by the Council
of the Borough of Marcus Hook. Where permit fees are calculated from
the total job cost, a bona fide copy of the contract for said job shall be
provided as part of the permit application documents."
E. In Section P-116.4, Violation penalties, seventh line, insert "summary
offense" and, in the sixth line, insert "the maximum amount provided
from time to time by state statute." Delete remainder of section.
F. In Section P-117.2, Unlawful continuance, fifth line, following "shall be
liable to a fine of," insert "up to the maximum amount provided from
time to time by state statute." Delete remainder of section.
G. In Section P-121.1, Application for appeal, change to read: "Any person
shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Plumbing Inspector to
the Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook. An application for a special
hearing may be made in writing to the Manager/Secretary's office
within 20 days after the notice was served."
H. In Section P-121.2, Membership of Board, replace with: "For the
purposes of this chapter, the word 'board', wherever it may appear in
this code, will be defined as meaning the Council of the Borough of
Marcus Hook."
I. Sections P-121.2.1 through P-121.2.6 are hereby deleted.
J. In Section P-121.5, Postponed hearing, change the words "When five
members" to the words "When any four Council members."
K. In Section P-304.3, Public systems available, third line, insert "200
feet."
L. In Section P-309.4, Freezing, second line, insert "three feet and zero
inches."
M. In Section P-309.5, Sewer depth, insert "three feet and zero inches" in
both locations.
§ 154-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 154-3
154:254
§ 154-4. Licenses, certificates and registration.
N. Add the following section:
P-803.3 Existing drainage nuisances: Any surface or roof drainage
which creates a structural or health hazard or any other nuisance
to the owners or occupants of adjacent premises or to the public
by reason of discharge into, onto or across any adjacent building,
premises or public thoroughfare shall be abated by the owners of the
improperly drained area.
A. Purpose. The Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook finds it to be in
the best interest of the residents of the Borough of Marcus Hook that
any person, persons, firm or corporation who or which engages in or
works at the business of plumbing or home drainage must be or have in
his or its employ an accredited master plumber or journey person
plumber and, furthermore, that each aforementioned master or journey
person plumber will be required to register with the Borough Plumbing
Inspector's office and obtain a license from said office for such purpose,
to the end that only responsible and qualified persons shall be
permitted to engage in such business in the Borough.
B. Master and journey person plumbers required to be licensed and
registered. In order to qualify for such certificate or license and to be
registered as aforesaid, it shall be necessary that said person, persons,
firm or corporation shall have had a master plumber's and/or journey
person plumber's license and have been registered as a master plumber
or a journey person plumber in the Borough of Marcus Hook prior to the
passage of this chapter or shall satisfactorily pass an examination as
hereinafter provided for. The applicant shall register his or her name
and address on a form supplied by the Borough of Marcus Hook and
shall pay a registration fee for each calendar year or part thereof. A
certificate of insurance, in an amount not less than $100,000, must be
submitted with the application of registration. A person performing any
work covered by this code on his own home shall not be required to be
registered, but must demonstrate to the code official qualifications to
perform the work to be done and must obtain a plumbing permit for the
work to be done.
C. Qualifications of master plumber and journey person plumber.
(1) Master plumber: service as a registered apprentice plumber for at
least 48 months and a licensed journey person plumber for at least
12 months or have been a licensed journey person plumber for at
least 60 months.
(2) Journey person plumber: service as a registered apprentice
plumber for at least 48 months.
D. Examination.
§ 154-3 PLUMBING § 154-4
154:255
§ 154-5. Water conservation.
No water shall be provided for internal or external use to any residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, governmental or public
building or structure of any kind which is constructed or remodeled and
in which plumbing, water piping or water fixtures are to be installed,
extended or altered in any way and for which construction a permit is
required to be obtained from the Borough of Marcus Hook (or would be
required but for an exemption from a permit requirement for public or
(1) The Borough of Marcus Hook will recognize examinations for
master plumbers and journey person plumbers administered by a
regional examination board in which the Borough would participate
by separate agreement. Applicants for examination shall be
transmitted to the examining board upon the payment of
examination fees, to be established by the regional examination
board.
(2) The regional examination board shall issue appropriate certificates
of satisfactory completion of the examination for a master
plumber's or journey person plumber's license to the successful
applicants for such licenses. Said certification of qualification and
examination may then be taken by the applicant to the Plumbing
Inspector for the Borough of Marcus Hook, who shall issue the
appropriate license upon the applicant meeting the prerequisite
requirements of the Borough of Marcus Hook. The certificate of
successful examination shall be valid for the issuance of the license
certified for a period of not more than five years from the date of its
issuance. Any certificate on which no license has been issued by
any one of the participating municipalities within a period of five
years from the date of issuance shall thereupon be invalid.
E. Surrendering of licenses and/or certificates. Any person, persons, firm
or corporation having been registered and licensed under the
provisions of this chapter, upon his, her or its retirement or in the event
that he, she or it ceases to engage in any way in the business of
plumbing or house or building drainage, shall within 10 days surrender
his, her or its license/certificate of registry to the office of the Plumbing
Inspector.
F. Plumbing Inspector to keep registry.
(1) A register of all such applicants and the license/certificate issued
shall be recorded in a register and kept in the office of the
Plumbing Inspector.
(2) Each person, persons, firm or corporation, in registering or at any
time thereafter, on the request of the Plumbing Inspector, shall
provide the full name or names of the person, persons or firm or
officers' names of the corporation and the names of all apprentices
in his or its employ.
§ 154-4 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 154-5
154:256
governmental agencies) unless the new, extended or altered plumbing,
water piping and other water-using fixtures therein conform to the water
conservation requirements and standards of this chapter.
§ 154-6. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Plumbing Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any lawsuit or proceeding impending in any court or
any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 154-2 of this chapter, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 154-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons who shall do any plumbing work without complying
with the provisions of this chapter regarding the procurement of a license
or certificate to engage in or carry on the business of plumbing or house
A. Water closets and associated flushing mechanisms. The water
consumption of water closets shall not exceed an average of one and 1.6
gallons per flush cycle over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80
pounds per square inch (psi). The figure shall perform in accordance
with the test requirements of ANSI A112.19.2M and ANSI A112.19.6M.
B. Urinals and associated flushing mechanisms. Urinal water consumption
shall not exceed an average of 1.5 gallons per flush cycle over a range
of test pressures from 20 to 80 psi. The fixture shall perform in
accordance with the test requirement of ANSI A112.19.2M and ANSI
A112.19.6M.
C. Showerheads. Showerhead discharge rates shall not exceed 3.0 gallons
of water per minute over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80 psi.
The fixture shall perform in accordance with the test requirements of
ANSI A112.18.1M.
D. Faucets. Sink and lavatory faucet discharge rates shall not exceed 3.0
gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80
psi. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the test requirements
of ANSI A112.18.1M.
E. Special purpose equipment. The water conservation performance
standards shall not apply to fixtures and fittings such as emergency
showers, aspirator faucets and blowout fixtures that, in order to
perform a specialized function, cannot meet the specified standards.
F. Exemptions. Any person(s) may apply to the Borough of Marcus Hook
for an exemption to the term of the water conservation performance
standards, which may be granted by the Borough Council, upon proof
that some other device, system or procedure will save as much or more
water as those set forth herein or that those set forth herein cannot be
complied with without undue hardship.
§ 154-5 PLUMBING § 154-7
154:257
drainage, or without a permit, shall upon conviction before any District
Justice, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the maximum
amount provided from time to time by state statute.
Chapter 157
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 84.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 96.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 99.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 132.
Plumbing — See Ch. 154.
Vector control — See Ch. 185.
§ 154-7 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 154-7
154:258
ARTICLE I
Sanitary Conditions
[Adopted 4-4-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-7, approved 4-4-1983]
§ 157-1. Definitions and usage.
§ 157-2. Offensive animals.
No person shall possess, have custody of or maintain in or upon any
building, lot or premises any animal or animals which cause, produce,
result in or emit odors, fumes, smells, noises or disturbances which are
offensive or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the public or of
the peaceful enjoyment by the public of their homes or premises and the
streets of the Borough, and the same shall be declared a nuisance.
§ 157-3. Insect infestation.
No person shall permit any building, lot or premises to become infested
with roaches, bugs, insects of any nature or vermin which may tend to or
do spread to other premises or which are offensive or detrimental to the
health, safety or welfare of the public or of the peaceful enjoyment of their
homes or premises or of the streets of the Borough, and the same shall be
declared a nuisance.
§ 157-4. Stagnant waters; odors and fumes.
No person shall permit any body of water that has or may become stagnant
to remain on premises owned or occupied by him, nor shall be permit to
remain therein or thereon any material or materials which cause, produce
or result in odors, fumes, smells or other conditions which are offensive or
detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the public or of the peaceful
enjoyment by the public of their homes or premises or the streets of the
Borough, and the same shall be declared a nuisance.
§ 157-5. Improper sewage disposal.
No person shall run, cast or deposit, either by means of a drain or
otherwise, upon any premises or upon any street or alley in the Borough
any sewage, kitchen slops, washwater, soapsuds or any other nauseous or
offensive liquid or substance, and the same shall be declared a nuisance.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation, including the owner, tenant, agent of the owner, possessor
or any person in charge of or in custody of a building, lot or premises.
B. Usage. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 157-1 PLUMBING § 157-6
154:259
§ 157-6. Enforcement. [Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5;
approved 12-3-2018]
Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Code
Enforcement Officer or Police Department, acting in their official capacities,
and they shall act as prosecutor in all cases of violation of this article and of
the rules and regulations relating thereto and adopted by resolution.
§ 157-7. Abatement of nuisances.
No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any property or
premises owned or occupied by him any condition declared to be a nuisance
hereunder, and, upon receipt of notice from the Health Officer that such
condition exists, it shall be the duty of that person to abate the nuisance
within the time limit specified in said notice.
§ 157-8. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
[Amended 9-8-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-6, approved 9-6-1988]
B. Each day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
C. Such fine and costs may be in addition to the costs and expenses of
abatement of any nuisance created or maintained as a result of such
violation, and any penalty authorized to be charged in addition to such
costs and expenses, in cases where abatement thereof is done by the
Code Enforcement Officer or Police Department. [Amended
12-3-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
§ 157-6 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 157-8
154:260
ARTICLE II
Adoption of International Code
[Adopted 7-5-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-3, approved 7-5-200449]
§ 157-9. Adoption of standards. [Amended 7-6-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-2, approved 7-6-2010]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Manager/Secretary of the Borough of Marcus Hook, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, being marked and designated as the "International Property
Maintenance Code, 2009 Edition," as published by the International Code
Council, and utilized by the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code be
and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of
Marcus Hook, Delaware County, in the State of Pennsylvania, for regulating
and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and
structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures
are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation
of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the
demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property
Maintenance Code on file in the office of the Borough of Marcus Hook are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 157-10 of this article.
§ 157-10. Insertions and changes.
The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code,
2003, are hereby revised as follows:
A. Section 101.1. Insert: "The Borough of Marcus Hook, Delaware
County, Pennsylvania."
B. Section 103.5. Fees. Replace with: "Fees for activities and services
performed under this code shall be established from time to time by
resolution."
C. Section 111.1. Application for appeal. Delete the first sentence and
add: "Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code
official to the Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook. An application
for a special hearing may be made in writing to the Manager/
Secretary's office within 20 days of the time the notice was served."
D. Section 111.2. Membership of the Board. Replace with: "For the
purpose of this article, the word 'Board,' wherever it may appear in this
49.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, General provisions, adopted
9-7-1994 by Ord. No. O-94-4, approved 9-7-1994.
§ 157-9 PLUMBING § 157-10
154:261
§ 157-11. Additions.
§ 157-12. (Reserved)
§ 157-13. (Reserved)
code, will be defined as meaning the Council of the Borough of Marcus
Hook."
E. Section 111.2.1 through 111.2.5 are hereby deleted.
F. Section 111.3. Notice of meeting. Change the word "Chairman" to
the words "President of Council."
G. Section 111.5. Postponed hearing. Delete.
H. Section 302.4. Insert: "six inches."
I. Section 304.14. Insert: "April through September."
J. Section 602.3. Insert: "October through April."
K. Section 602.4. Insert: "October through April."
A. The following provisions are hereby added to the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2003. In Chapter 3, entitled "General
Requirements," Section 309 is added to read as follows:
Section 309.1. Caretaker. In every multiple dwelling in which the
owner does not reside there shall be a responsible person, designated
by the owner, residing on the premises, whose duties include
maintaining the commonly used parts of the premises, or there shall
be provided in a noticeable location a placard in good condition and
enclosed in plastic or glass stating the name of the management and
a phone number or numbers where the responsible person or persons
can be reached at all hours. Such placard shall be placed adjacent to
elevators and exitways. The intent of this section may also be served if
each tenant is provided in written legible form this same information.
§ 157-10 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 157-13
154:262
ARTICLE III
Boarding of Windows, Doors and Portals
[Adopted 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. O-91-3; approved 3-4-1991]
§ 157-14. Boarding required; permission.
§ 157-15. Adoption of standards.
Windows, doors and portals are to be sealed or closed, to prevent
unauthorized entry, in the following manner:
A. In order to preserve, protect and maintain the Borough's health, safety,
general welfare and ambience and, further, in order to prevent blight,
buildings damaged by an act of God or fire which has damaged
windows, doors or other portals must immediately be protected by
boarding for a period of time not in excess of 30 calendar days, upon
approval of the Code Enforcement Officer. At the expiration of said
period of time, the window, door or other portal must be completely
restored with an appropriate functioning door or window.
B. In all other instances where windows, doors or other portals have been
subject to damage or destruction, immediate temporary covering or
boarding will only be permitted for a period of time not in excess of five
working days, upon approval of the Code Enforcement Officer. At the
expiration of said period of time, the window, door or other portal shall
be restored with an appropriate functioning door or window.
C. In no event shall windows, doors and portals be boarded on any
property without first obtaining permission from the Code Enforcement
Officer.
D. The Code Enforcement Officer in his discretion may extend the
permitted period of time where it can be determined that
uncontrollable circumstances warrant said extension.
E. The owner of a vacated building, regardless of why the building is
vacated, shall take such steps and perform such acts as may be
required of him from time to time to ensure that the building and its
adjoining yards remain safe and secure and do not present a hazard to
adjoining property or to the public.
A. Every opening with the exception of the entry door shall be sealed with
five-eighths-inch plywood overlapping the casing of the exterior.
B. Each piece of plywood shall have two two-by-fours nailed on each side
with tenpenny clinched nailing and fastened to the building with two
five-eighths-inch or four three-eighths-inch carriage bolts fastened
through two-by-fours overlapping the casing on the interior.
C. The entrance door shall be sealed in the same manner, except that the
door must have attached to it a hasp with padlock for which the key
§ 157-14 PLUMBING § 157-15
154:263
§ 157-16. Failure to comply; lien.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to seal a building, the Code
Enforcement Officer may cause such building to be sealed, and all costs that
are incurred by this action will be placed as a municipal lien against the real
property upon which such costs were incurred.
§ 157-17. Violations and penalties.
shall be available to all appropriate Borough officials for inspection
purposes.
D. Each opening shall be painted with two coats of exterior paint of a color
to match a blend with the existing exterior color of the building.
A. Any person or other entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this
article or any order promulgated hereunder shall, after summons
issued under the terms hereof, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation
and be punished by a fine of up to the maximum amount provided from
time to time by state statute.
B. Each violation of any of the provisions of this article and each day that
such violation shall continue shall be deemed to be a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 157-15 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 157-17
154:264
ARTICLE IV
Abandoned Real Property
[Adopted 1-4-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-1, approved 1-4-2016]
§ 157-18. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of the Borough is to establish a process to address
the deterioration and blight of Borough neighborhoods caused by an
increasing amount of abandoned, foreclosed or distressed real property
located within the Borough, and to identify, regulate, limit and reduce
the number of abandoned properties located within the Borough. It is the
Borough's further intent to establish a registration program as a mechanism
to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted due to the lack of
adequate maintenance and security of abandoned or foreclosed properties.
§ 157-19. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY — Any real property located in the
Borough, whether vacant or occupied, that is in default on a mortgage,
has had a lis pendens filed against it by the lender holding a mortgage on
the property, is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by the lender, is
subject to an application for a tax deed or pending tax assessors lien sale, or
has been transferred to the lender under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. The
designation of a property as "abandoned" shall remain in place until such
time as the property is sold or transferred to a new owner, the foreclosure
action has been dismissed, and any default on the mortgage has been cured.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY/STRUCTURE — A property that is accessible
through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc., or a structure that
is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior
space by unauthorized persons.
BLIGHTED PROPERTY —
Properties that have broken or severely damaged windows, doors,
walls, or roofs which create hazardous conditions and encourage
trespassing; or
A.
Properties whose maintenance is not in conformance with the
maintenance of other neighboring properties causing a decrease in
value of the neighboring properties; or
B.
C. Properties cited for a public nuisance pursuant to the Borough Code; or
Properties that endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare because
the properties or improvements thereon are dilapidated, deteriorated,
or violate minimum health and safety standards or lack maintenance as
required by the Borough Zoning Codes.
D.
§ 157-18 PLUMBING § 157-19
154:265
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any law enforcement officer, building official,
Zoning Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, fire inspector or building
inspector, or other person authorized by the Borough to enforce the
applicable code(s).
OWNER — Any person, legal entity or other party having any ownership
interest whether legal or equitable, in real property. This term shall also
apply to any person, legal entity or agent responsible for the construction,
maintenance or operation of the property involved.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — A local property manager,
property maintenance company or similar entity responsible for the
maintenance of abandoned real property.
VACANT — Any building or structure that is not legally occupied.
§ 157-20. Applicability.
These sections shall be considered and not superseding or subject to any
other law or provision for same, but rather be an additional remedy
available to the Borough above and beyond any other state, county or local
provisions for same.
§ 157-21. Establishment of registry.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 157-22, the Borough or designee shall
establish a registry cataloging each abandoned property within the
Borough, containing the information required by this article.
§ 157-22. Registration of abandoned real property.
A. Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within
the Borough shall perform an inspection of the property to determine
vacancy or occupancy, upon default by the mortgagor. The mortgagee
shall, within 10 days of the inspection, register the property with the
Code Enforcement Department, or designee, on forms or website
access provided by the Borough, and indicate whether the property is
vacant or occupied. A separate registration is required for each
property, whether it is found to be vacant or occupied.
B. If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be inspected
by the mortgagee or his designee monthly until (1) the mortgagor or
other party remedies the default, or (2) it is found to be vacant or shows
evidence of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned, and the
mortgagee shall, within 10 days of that inspection, update the property
registration to a vacancy status on forms provided by the Borough.
C. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of the
mortgagee and the server, the direct mailing address of the mortgagee
and the server, a direct contact name and telephone number for both
parties, facsimile number and e-mail address for both parties, the folio
or tax number, and the name and twenty-four-hour contact phone
§ 157-19 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 157-22
154:266
§ 157-23. Maintenance requirements.
number of the property management company responsible for the
security and maintenance of the property.
D. All registration fees must be paid directly from the mortgagee, servicer,
trustee, or owner. Third-party registration fees are not allowed without
the consent of the Borough and/or its authorized designee.
E. This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of
a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a
mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred
under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.
F. Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual
registration requirement, and the inspection, security and maintenance
standards of this section as long as they remain vacant or in default.
G. Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this
section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within 10 days of the change.
H. Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly register or to modify
the registration form from time to time to reflect a change of
circumstances as required by this article is a violation of the article and
shall be subject to enforcement.
I. Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and determination
that any property is in violation of this article, the Borough may take the
necessary action to insure compliance with and place a lien on the
property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the property and
bring it into compliance.
A. Properties subject to this chapter shall be kept free of weeds,
overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building
materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices,
except those required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal
items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small
appliances, printed material or any other items that give the
appearance that the property is abandoned.
B. The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by
removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the
color of the exterior structure.
C. Front, side, and rear yards, including landscaping, shall be maintained
in accordance with the applicable code(s) at the time registration was
required.
D. Yard maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground
covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or
bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential
§ 157-22 PLUMBING § 157-23
154:267
§ 157-24. Security requirements.
§ 157-25. Public nuisance.
All abandoned real property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the
abatement of which pursuant to the police power is hereby declared to be
necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Borough.
§ 157-26. Inspections for violations.
Adherence to this article does not relieve any person, legal entity or agent
from any other obligations set forth in any applicable code(s), which may
apply to the property. Upon offer for sale or transfer of title to the property,
installation. Acceptable maintenance of yards and/or landscape shall
not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material.
E. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation,
cutting and mowing of required ground cover or landscape or removal
of all trimmings.
F. Pools and spas shall be maintained so the water remains free and clear
of pollutants and debris and shall comply with the regulations set forth
in the applicable code(s).
G. Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly maintain the
property may result in a violation of the applicable code(s) and issuance
of a citation or notice of violation in accordance with the applicable
code of the Borough. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the
Borough's Code Enforcement Officer, Magistrate or a court of
competent jurisdiction, the Borough may take the necessary action to
insure compliance with this section.
H. In addition to the above, the property is required to be maintained in
accordance with the applicable code(s) of the Borough.
A. Properties subject to these sections shall be maintained in a secure
manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
B. A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and
locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that
may allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure.
Broken windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may
allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure must be
repaired. Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing of the window.
C. If a mortgage on a property is in default, and the property has become
vacant or abandoned, a property manager shall be designated by the
mortgagee to perform the work necessary to bring the property into
compliance with the applicable code(s), and the property manager must
perform regular inspections to verify compliance with the requirements
of this article, and any other applicable laws.
§ 157-23 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 157-26
154:268
the owner shall be responsible to apply to the Borough's Code Enforcement
Department for a pre-sales inspection.
§ 157-27. Additional authority.
§ 157-28. Opposing or obstructing enforcement officer; penalty.
Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists any enforcement officer or any other
person authorized by the enforcement office in the discharge of duties as
provided in this article shall be punishable as provided in the applicable
code(s) or a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 157-29. Immunity of enforcement officer.
Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the Borough to enforce
the sections here within shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal,
for reasonable, good faith entry upon real property while in the discharge
of duties imposed by this article.
§ 157-30. Fees; violations and penalties.
A. If the enforcement officer has reason to believe that a property subject
to the provisions of this article is posing a serious threat to the public
health, safety and welfare, the Code Enforcement Officer may
temporarily secure the property at the expense of the mortgagee and/or
owner and may bring the violations before the magistrate as soon as
possible to address the conditions of the property.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer or magistrate shall have the authority to
require the mortgagee and/or owner of record of any property affected
by this section, to implement additional maintenance and/or security
measures including, but not limited to, securing any and all doors,
windows or other openings, employment of an on-site security guard or
other measures as may be reasonably required to help prevent further
decline of the property.
C. If there is a finding that the condition of the property is posing a serious
threat to the public health, safety and welfare, then the Code
Enforcement Officer or magistrate may direct the Borough to abate the
violations and charge the mortgagee with the cost of the abatement.
D. If the mortgagee does not reimburse the Borough for the cost of
temporarily securing the property, or of any abatement directed by the
Code Enforcement Officer or magistrate, within 30 days of the Borough
sending the mortgagee the invoice then the Borough may lien the
property with such cost, along with an administrative fee as determined
by the Borough's fee schedule resolution to recover the cost of the
administrative personnel services.
A. A nonrefundable annual registration fee in the amount of $200 per
property shall accompany the registration form.
§ 157-26 PLUMBING § 157-30
154:269
B. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article may be cited
and fined. The following table shows violations of these sections, as may
be amended from time to time, which may be enforced pursuant to the
provisions of this article; and the dollar amount of civil penalty for the
violation of these sections as it may be amended. The descriptions of
violations below are for informational purposes only and are not meant
to limit or define the nature of the violations or the subject matter of the
Borough code sections, except to the extent that different types of
violations of the Code section may carry different civil penalties. For
each Code section listed in the schedule of civil penalties, the entirety
of the section may be enforced by the mechanism provided in this
section, regardless of whether all activities prescribed or required are
described in the "Description of Violation" column. To determine
whether a particular activity is prescribed or required by this Code, the
relevant Borough Code sections(s) shall be examined.
Description of Violation Civil Penalty
Failure to register abandoned real property on an
annual basis and/or any violation of the sections
stated within
$500
§ 157-30 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 157-30
154:270
ARTICLE V
Graffiti
[Adopted 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-1; approved 4-2-2018]
§ 157-31. Purpose.
The Borough finds that the presence of graffiti on public and private
property within the Borough can result in the aesthetic deterioration of
neighborhoods and commercial areas, creates blight and, if not properly
abated, may lead to further placement of graffiti. The purpose of this article
is to establish rules and procedures for graffiti removal and to address the
cost of such removal.
§ 157-32. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrase, when used in this article, shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
GRAFFITI —
§ 157-33. Prohibition against graffiti.
No person may apply or attempt to apply graffiti on any property, real
or personal, where it will be visible by the public. All persons directly
or indirectly involved in applying, attempting to apply, or assisting in the
application of graffiti shall be equally responsible along with the individual
or individuals who personally applied or attempted to apply the graffiti. A
person assists in the application of graffiti if he or she knowingly provides
or makes available the tools, writing materials, or ladders used to apply the
graffiti or acts as a lookout during the application.
Any inscription, word, symbol, figure, marking or design, that is
marked, etched, scrawled, stained, drawn or painted and stuck on
or adhered to any surface on public or private property without the
express permission of the owner or owner's agent of such property,
including but not limited to: any wall, underpass, overpass, trestle, tree,
sign, pole, playground apparatus, utility box, building, structure, fixture
or other improvements whether permanent or temporary, regardless
of the content or nature of the material that has been applied, and
which is visible from any public property or the public right-of-way, or
from any private property other than the property on which the graffiti
exists.
A.
Graffiti shall not be construed to apply to easily removable chalk
markings on the public sidewalks and streets used in connection with
traditional children's games.
B.
§ 157-31 PLUMBING § 157-34
154:271
§ 157-34. Sale or transfer of spray paint containers, indelible
markers and other materials used for graffiti purposes.
No person shall knowingly sell or otherwise transfer any spray paint
container, indelible marker, or other materials used for graffiti purposes, to
any person for the purpose of having said spray paint container or indelible
marker or other materials used in violation of any of the provisions of this
article.
§ 157-35. Prohibition against allowing graffiti to remain.
No property owner, occupant, lessee, lessor, renter, tenant or person
otherwise in charge or control of any property within the Borough shall
permit any graffiti to accumulate or otherwise remain on any real or
personal property so as to be visible to the public and shall be required to
either restore the defaced surface by removing the graffiti or by repainting
the defaced surface.
§ 157-36. Removal of graffiti from private property.
A. It is the duty of every property owner, occupant, lessee, lessor, renter,
tenant or person otherwise in charge or control of any property within
the Borough to promptly remove the graffiti from his or her real or
personal property, or to cover up the graffiti with a color that matches
and blends in with the existing surface. In the event property owner,
occupant, lessee, lessor, renter, tenant or person otherwise in charge or
control of any property in the Borough shall fail or refuse to remove
graffiti from his property, or to cover up the graffiti with a color that
matches and blends in with the existing surface, then the Borough's
Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designated agent, may cause
written notice to be served upon the property owner, occupant, lessee,
lessor, renter, tenant or person otherwise in charge or control of any
property requesting removal or covering up of the graffiti. Notice shall
be deemed received upon personal service, or 48 hours after being
deposited in the United States mail, first class, postage prepaid,
directed to the intended individual or upon posting the notice upon the
property.
B. If such property owner, occupant, lessee, lessor, renter, tenant or
person otherwise in charge or control of any property fails to remove
the graffiti within seven days after receipt of the notice requesting
removal of the graffiti, the graffiti may be removed by the Borough. All
costs of the removal or abatement work shall be billed to the owner of
the property and, if unpaid after 60 days, shall be forwarded to the
Borough Solicitor for the collection of the unpaid costs with interest
from the time of completion of the work needed to eliminate the graffiti.
Such collection action may be by a lien against the property, filed and
collected in the same manner as a municipal claim.
C. In the event the Borough determines to remove or abate the graffiti at
the Borough's expense, and the owner of the property consents to such
§ 157-34 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 157-36
154:272
§ 157-37. Parental civil liability.
In situations where graffiti is intentionally and knowingly caused by
individuals under the age of 18, the parent or legal guardian of said minor
shall be responsible for its removal or abatement or payment of the cost
thereof. The Borough may recover such costs in a civil action in addition to
any other remedies provided by law.
§ 157-38. Enforcement.
Except as otherwise specified in § 157-36A above, it shall be the duty of any
police officer of the Borough to enforce the provisions of this article against
any person found to be violating the same.
§ 157-39. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the maximum
amount provided from time to time by state statute, plus costs of
prosecution. Each day's failure to comply with any such provision shall
constitute a separate violation.
removal or abatement and executes the permission form/liability
waiver, the Borough or its contractor may remove the graffiti.
§ 157-36 PLUMBING § 157-39
154:273
Chapter 158
RADIO ANTENNAS AND ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 196. Cable television franchise — See Ch. A199.
§ 158-1. Electrical disturbances; enforcement; restrictions.
§ 158-2. Ham or CB radio antennas regulations.
No ham or CB radio antenna shall be erected, constructed, maintained or
operated except in conformance with the following regulations:
A. In the absence of adequate enforcement by the Federal
Communications Commission, the Borough will take all necessary and
appropriate steps to protect its residents from all electrical
disturbances caused by ham or citizen's band (CB) radio operators.
B. No person or business shall conduct or permit any use to be conducted
which causes electrical disturbances, except from domestic household
appliances, to adversely affect any equipment outside of the property
from which the disturbance is being caused.
A. In a commercial, single-family or multifamily residential zone subject to
the provisions contained herein, such antenna shall be located only in
the rear yard of any lot. The antenna shall be located within five feet
from the principal building.
B. The height of an antenna shall be restricted by the type and/or class of
license obtained by the resident of the subject property. Such height
restrictions are regulated by the Federal Communications Commission.
C. While the overall height of the antenna during the operation of the
radio system is regulated by the Federal Communications Commission
Preemption Order, the Borough will require that the antenna be
retracted to a height not to exceed 10 feet above the highest point of
the principal building.
D. To construct an antenna of any height, the resident or business
operator must provide proof of his or her license from the Federal
Communications Commission. Additional published documentation
from the Federal Communications Commission shall be provided to
verify the operator's license class and therefore his or her antenna
height request.
E. All antennas and the construction and installation thereof shall conform
to the manufacturer's installation instructions and the BOCA National
§ 157-39 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 158-2
158:274
§ 158-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person or business violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a fine not to exceed the amount provided by statute.
Each day during which this chapter is violated shall be considered a
separate offense.
Chapter 160
RECORDS
Building Code and shall obtain certification from Underwriters
Laboratories.
F. All antennas shall meet all manufacturer's specifications, shall be of
noncombustible and corrosive-resistant material and shall be erected in
a secure, wind-resistant manner.
G. Every antenna must be adequately grounded for protection against a
direct strike of lightning.
H. The right to install a ham or CB radio antenna shall run with the
licensed operator. Once the licensee no longer resides at the subject
property, any antenna shall be removed.
§ 158-2 RADIO ANTENNAS AND ELECTRICAL § 158-3
158:275

ARTICLE I
Public Access to Records
[Adopted 12-1-2008 by Res. No. R-08-16, approved 12-1-200850]
§ 160-1. Appointment of Open Records Officer; submission or
requests; duties.
§ 160-2. Requirements for submission of requests.
A. The Borough Secretary is hereby appointed to be the Open Records
Officer of the Borough of Marcus Hook, effective immediately, to serve
at the pleasure of the Council.
B. All requests for access to public records of the Borough shall be
directed to the Open Records Officer, Borough of Marcus Hook, 1015
Green Street, Marcus Hook, Delaware County, Pennsylvania 19061
(Telephone: 610-485-1341; Facsimile: 610-485-9767).
C. The Open Records Officer:
(1) Shall receive requests submitted to the Borough, direct requests to
other appropriate persons within the Borough or to appropriate
persons in another agency, track the Borough's progress in
responding to requests and issue interim and final responses under
the Act.51
(2) Shall, upon receiving a request for a public record:
(a) Note the date of receipt on the written request.
(b) Compute the day on which the five-day period will expire and
make a notation of that date on the written request.
(c) Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request,
including all documents submitted with the request, until the
request has been fulfilled. If the request is denied, the written
request shall be maintained for 30 days or, if an appeal is filed,
until a final determination is issued or the appeal is deemed
denied.
(d) Create a file for the retention of the original request, a copy of
the response, a record of written communications with the
requester and a copy of other communications.
(3) May designate certain employees to process public records
requests.
A. All requests for public records of the Borough, under this policy, shall
be specific in identifying and describing each and every public record
50.Editor's Note: This resolution also repealed former Art. I, Public Access to Records,
adopted 8-2-1994 by Res. No. R-94-10, approved 8-2-1994.
51.Editor's Note: Refers to the Right to Know Law, Act 3 of 2008. See 65 P.S. § 66.1 et seq.
§ 160-1 RADIO ANTENNAS AND ELECTRICAL § 160-2
158:277
§ 160-3. Response to requests.
requested. In no case shall the Borough be required to create a public
record which does not exist or to compile, maintain, format or organize
the public record.
B. All requests for public records shall be submitted in writing and shall
include the date of the request, the requestor's name, address and
telephone number, the signature of the requestor and, if duplication is
required, appropriate payment.
A. When a request is received for access to public records, the Open
Records Officer shall make a determination, within five business days of
receipt of the request, to grant or deny the request, or to partially grant
and partially deny the request. Alternatively, the Open Records Officer
may decide that additional time is required if, after receiving a request
for access to public records, the Open Records Officer determines that
any of the following circumstances exist:
(1) The request for access requires redaction of a public record;
(2) The request for access requires retrieval of a record stored in a
remote location;
(3) A timely response to the request for access cannot be accomplished
due to bona fide and specified staff limitations;
(4) A legal review of the request is necessary to determine whether the
record is a public record subject to access under the Act;52
(5) The person or entity requesting access to the public record has not
complied with the Borough's policies regarding access to public
records; or
(6) The person requesting access to the record refuses to pay
applicable fees as contained herein.
B. The person or entity requesting access to the public record shall be
informed in writing as to the specific reason that his or her request is
being reviewed within the original five-business-day period. The notice
shall include a statement notifying the requestor that the request is
being reviewed, the reason for review, a reasonable date that a
response is expected to be provided and an estimate of applicable fees
owed when the record becomes available. The review must be
completed, and a final determination made, within 30 days following
the date the request was made. If the date a response is expected to be
provided is in excess of 30 days, the request for access shall be deemed
denied unless the requestor has agreed in writing to an extension to the
date specified in the notice. If the requestor agrees to the extension, the
request shall be deemed denied on the day following the date specified
52.Editor's Note: Refers to the Right to Know Law, Act 3 of 2008. See 65 P.S. § 66.1 et seq.
§ 160-2 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 160-3
158:278
§ 160-4. Denial of requests; appeals.
If a request for access to public records is denied, the person or entity
requesting the information shall be notified in writing of the Open Records
Officer's decision within the applicable five-business-day or thirty-businessday
period. Denials must be in writing, accompanied by a description of
the record, the reason for denial including citation to the legal authority
and contact information for the Borough's Open Records Officer, date of
response and procedures for appeal. The denial must be signed by the Open
Records Officer. Appeals from a denial may be made within 15 days to the
Pennsylvania Office of Open Records, Commonwealth Keystone Building,
400 North Street, Plaza Level, Harrisburg, PA 17120-0225 (phone:
717-346-9903).
§ 160-5. Copying fees.
The Borough shall charge copying fees in accordance with the rates
approved by the Pennsylvania Office of Open Records.
§ 160-6. Use of certain forms.
The Borough shall use and accept the forms promulgated by the
Pennsylvania Office of Open Records.
§ 160-7. Public posting of information.
The Open Records Officer is hereby directed to post the following
information in a prominent location to which the public has access in the
Municipal Building and on the Borough's website:
§ 160-8. Prepayment of fees.
If the estimated cost of duplication of a public record is expected to exceed
$100, the Borough may require the person or entity requesting the record
to prepay the estimated fees authorized by this policy, prior to providing
access to the public record. Access to the records requested shall be
postponed until prepayment is received.
in the notice where the agency has not provided a response by that
date.
A. Identity of and contact information for the Open Records Officer.
B. Contact information for the Pennsylvania Office of Open Records or
other applicable appeals officer.
C. The identification of the forms which may be used to file a request and
where such forms may be obtained.
D. The Borough's regulations, policies and procedures.
§ 160-3 RADIO ANTENNAS AND ELECTRICAL § 160-8
158:279
Chapter 162
REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED
§ 162-1. Declaration of nuisance.
The keeping or storing of refrigerators, boxes or containers of any nature
whatsoever in places where children have access to the same without
the removal of the doors or covers therefrom is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and a menace to the health and lives of the children of the
Borough.
§ 162-2. Removal of doors required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to place, keep or store any
refrigerator, box or container of any nature whatsoever in any yard, field,
lot, street or lane of the Borough of Marcus Hook which cannot be opened
from the inside unless the door or cover to same has been completely
removed from such refrigerator, box or other container.
§ 162-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
Chapter 165
SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hawkers, peddlers and solicitors — See Ch.
111.
Junkyards — See Ch. 116.
§ 160-8 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 162-3
162:280
ARTICLE I
Title; Authority; Purpose
§ 165-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and referred to as the "Rules and Regulations
Governing Secondhand Dealers."
§ 165-2. Authority.
The Rules and Regulations Governing Secondhand Dealers is being enacted
pursuant to the authority granted a municipality to impose reasonable
requirements or regulations upon persons conducting business within the
Borough of Marcus Hook.
§ 165-3. Purpose.
The purpose of the Rules and Regulations Governing Secondhand Dealers
is to protect the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the
Borough of Marcus Hook, to establish reasonable and uniform regulations
to better regulate secondhand dealers, and to increase identification of
criminal activities through the timely collection and sharing of secondhand
dealer's transaction information.
§ 165-1 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 165-3
162:281

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 165-4. Definition of terms.
For application of the Rules and Regulations Governing Secondhand
Dealers, terms shall be defined and used herein as follows:
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — Either:
OWNER — A person who has a right of possession to an item of property
superior to that of the seller.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, joint venture, trust, association or any other legal entity, however
organized.
SECONDHAND BUSINESS — A business that purchases secondhand
regulated property.
SECONDHAND DEALER — A person engaged in the business of buying,
selling, trading, or accepting for sale on consignment secondhand regulated
property. The term "secondhand dealer" does not include a person whose
only business transactions with secondhand regulated property in the
Borough of Marcus Hook consist of a display space, booth, or table
maintained for displaying or selling regulated property at any trade show,
convention, festival, fair, circus, flea market, garage sale, yard sale, or swap
meet event for less than 12 days in any calendar year.
SECONDHAND REGULATED PROPERTY — Goods which have been
previously owned, worn or used by another, not new.
TRANSACTION — The purchase of regulated property.
TRANSACTION RECORD BOOK — A book or collection of documents
generated by point-of-sale software in which shall be recorded at the time
of purchase an accurate account and description of the regulated property
being purchased, including make, model, and serial number if applicable;
the time of the transaction; and a copy of the seller's acceptable
identification.
USED — Previously owned or put into service by a person other than the
manufacturer or the manufacturer's dealer or agency.
A current driver's license that includes the photograph, date of birth,
and address of the person offering the identification; or
A.
Two other pieces of current identification, at least one of which is
issued by a government agency or subdivision and includes the
photograph, date of birth, and address of the person offering the
identification.
B.
§ 165-4 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 165-4
162:283

ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 165-5. Permit required; display.
No person shall engage in a secondhand business within the Borough of
Marcus Hook without first obtaining a permit to operate the secondhand
business from the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Marcus
Hook. The permit shall be prominently displayed at the place of business.
A person engaged in a secondhand business on or before the effective date
of this chapter shall apply for a secondhand dealer permit within 30 days of
the effective date of this chapter and may continue to purchase regulated
property without a permit until such permit is issued or denied.
§ 165-6. Annual application for permit; fee.
Every person who engages in a secondhand business within the Borough
of Marcus Hook shall make annual application for a permit to the Code
Enforcement Officer of Marcus Hook. Each application shall include the full
name and place of residence of the applicant and the location where the
business will be conducted. If the applicant is a partnership, the application
shall state the full name and place of residence of each partner, and whether
such partner is a general partner or limited partner. If the applicant is a
corporation, the application shall state the full name and residence of each
officer, shareholder and director. The application shall be accompanied by
a fee established by resolution from the Borough Council, appropriately
prorated for initial permits.
§ 165-7. Expiration of permit.
The permit to operate a secondhand business within the Borough of Marcus
Hook shall continue in force to December 31 of the year in which the permit
is issued.
§ 165-5 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 165-7
162:285

ARTICLE IV
Specific Regulations
§ 165-8. Unauthorized sale of regulated property.
No person shall sell or attempt to sell regulated property to a secondhand
dealer without the consent of the owner of the property.
§ 165-9. Time limit for possession of articles before sale.
No dealer shall sell any article until the same has been in his possession for
at least 10 days.
§ 165-10. Posting of notice required.
A secondhand dealer shall post a notice outside each point of entry intended
for patron use that is substantially similar to that set forth herein:
NOTICE
Don't sell property without the consent of the property's owner. The sale or
attempted sale of property to a secondhand dealer without the consent of
the property owner is punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed $500 per
item plus costs of prosecution; and in default of payment thereof shall be
imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
§ 165-11. Purchase from certain persons prohibited.
No secondhand dealer or his employees or agents shall purchase or accept
on consignment any regulated property from any person under 18 years of
age, anyone intoxicated, any person known to be a thief or a receiver of
stolen property, or any person that he has reason to believe is a thief or a
receiver of stolen property.
§ 165-12. Transaction record book required.
Every secondhand dealer must create and maintain a transaction record
book as defined in § 165-4 above.
§ 165-13. Inspection of transaction record book; retention.
The transaction record book shall be preserved for a period of at least two
years from the date of the transaction and must at all reasonable times
be open to inspection by officers of the Borough of Marcus Hook Police
Department.
§ 165-8 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 165-13
162:287

ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 165-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of the Rules and Regulations
Governing Secondhand Dealers, upon conviction thereof, is punishable for
each offense by a fine of up to the maximum amount provided from time to
time by state statute.
§ 165-15. Revocation of permit.
Any person who violates any provisions of the Rules and Regulations
Governing Secondhand Dealers, in addition to the fine prescribed by
§ 165-14, shall have his permit revoked at the discretion of the Borough
Manager.
§ 165-14 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 165-15
162:289
Chapter 167
SEWERS
§ 165-15 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 165-15
162:290
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 12-19-1978 by Ord. No. 712]
§ 167-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Marcus
Hook Sewer Ordinance of 1978."
§ 167-1.1. Transfer of system. [Added 1-4-2011 by Ord. No. O-10-5,
approved 1-4-2011]
The Council President and Borough Secretary are authorized to execute
the agreement of sale and transfer of the Marcus Hook Sewage Collection
System to the Delaware County Regional Water Quality Control Authority
(DELCORA).
§ 167-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Marcus Hook, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, and the duly elected, qualified and acting Council members
thereof.
DELCORA — The Delaware County Regional Water Control Authority.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or
waterborne wastes or form of energy rejected or escaping from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct from
sanitary sewage.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities owned and operated by the Delaware
County Regional Water Quality Control Authority (DELCORA) for collecting
and transporting sanitary sewage.[Amended 1-4-2011 by Ord. No.
O-10-5, approved 1-4-2011]
WATER SUPPLIER — The Chester Municipal Authority of Chester,
Pennsylvania, and its successors and assigns.
§ 167-3. Connection to available public sewer required.
Every property in the Borough of Marcus Hook adjoining or abutting upon
any street or alley in which a public sewer is now or shall hereafter be
located shall be connected with such sewer in such manner and within
§ 167-1 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 167-3
162:291
such time as the Borough may order, for the purpose of the discharge of
all fecal matter, human excrement, kitchen and laundry waste and other
sewage from such premises. All such sewage shall, after such connection,
be conducted into such sewer. Every such property shall be connected
separately and independently with the sewer through the house connection
branch directly opposite the building or nearest in a downstream direction.
Grouping of buildings on one house sewer shall not be permitted except
under special circumstances and for good sanitary reasons, with special
permission granted by the Borough Council upon recommendation of the
Borough Engineer.
§ 167-4. Connection by Borough; cost.
If the owner of the property, after 45 days' notice from the Borough to
make connection of such property with a Borough sewer, shall fail to make
such connection, the Borough may make such connection and may collect
the cost thereof from such owner by a municipal claim or in an action of
assumpsit, as is provided by law.
§ 167-5. Prerequisites for sewer connections.
No person shall make or cause to be made any connection of his property
with any of the Borough sewers until he has fulfilled all of the following
conditions:
§ 167-6. Supervision of connections; specifications; property
owner's responsibility.
All work of making connections to any of the Borough sewers shall be done
under the personal supervision of the Borough Engineer or his authorized
agent and shall conform to the following requirements:
A. He shall notify the Borough Council of his desire and intention to make
such connection.
B. He shall pay a sewer connection fee and a sewer inspection fee, as
provided in § 167-10, which shall be payable to the Borough Secretary,
for the use of the Borough.
C. He shall have applied for and obtained a permit to excavate in the
street, in accordance with the Borough ordinance regulating the
same.53
D. He shall have given the Borough Secretary at least 24 hours' notice of
the time when such connection shall be made, in order that the Borough
Engineer or his authorized agent can be present to supervise the work
of connection.
A. All sewer connections shall be made at the place where the Y in the
Borough sewer is provided, but if no Y is provided in the Borough sewer,
53.Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. III, Excavations in Streets.
§ 167-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 167-6
162:292
§ 167-7. Excluded substances.
No person shall connect or cause to be connected with any of the public
sewers in the Borough, directly or indirectly, any steam exhaust, boiler
blowoff, sediment drip or any pipe carrying or constructed to carry hot
water or acid, germicide, grease, brewery mash, gasoline, naphtha,
benzine, oil or any other substance detrimental to the sewers or to the
operation of the sewerage system or the sewage disposal works of the
Borough.
§ 167-8. Privy vault connection prohibited.
No privy vault, cesspool or similar receptacle for human excrement shall at
any time, now or hereafter, be connected with any of the Borough sewers.
§ 167-9. Cleaning and filling privy vaults. [Amended 12-3-2018 by
Ord. No. O-18-5; approved 12-3-2018]
No privy vault, cesspool or similar receptacle for human excrement shall
hereafter be maintained upon any premises from which connection with
any of the Borough sewers shall have been made. Every such privy vault,
cesspool or other receptacle shall, within 30 days after final enactment of
this article in the case of premises now connected with a sewer, and within
30 days after connection with a sewer in the case of premises hereafter
so connected, be abandoned, cleansed and filled under the direction and
supervision of the Health Officer of the Borough. Any such privy vault,
cesspool or other receptacle not abandoned, cleansed and filled as required
by this section shall constitute a nuisance and such nuisance may be abated
on order of the Code Enforcement Officer as provided by law, at the expense
of the owner of such property.
§ 167-10. Imposition of connection charges.
There is hereby imposed upon each owner of property in the Borough
connecting to the sewer system after the effective date of this article, for
each single unit connected either directly or indirectly to the sewer system,
a connection charge of $100 for each connection to be made to a lateral of
then the property owner making such connection shall, at his expense,
put in the Y in making such connection.
B. All joints shall be sealed and made airtight and shall be made smooth
and clean inside, with all sewers in straight alignment and of proper
grade, so as to provide free flow of sewage matter without any
obstructions, and to be made in accordance with the Borough's
specification for its sanitary sewers.
C. All work pertaining to the connection with the Borough's sewers shall
be, financially and otherwise, the responsibility of the owner of the
property with which connection is made, subject to the right of
supervision hereby reserved by the Borough.
§ 167-6 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 167-10
162:293
the sewer system at the curbline or property line. A connection unit shall
be determined and classified according to the provisions of § 167-12 hereof.
There is further imposed upon each owner of property connecting to the
sewer system an inspection fee, for service of the Borough Engineer or
Plumbing Inspector, of $10 for each connection.
§ 167-11. Imposition of sewer rents or charges.
A. Policy and purpose. For the calendar year beginning January 1, 1979,
and each calendar year thereafter, there is hereby imposed an annual
service charge upon the owners of all property in the Borough served or
to be served by the Borough's facilities for the use of the wastewater
collection system, conveyance system and treatment plant and for the
use of extensions, replacements, improvements or renewals thereof
(collectively called the "Borough system").
B. The total amount of annual service charges fixed by the Borough each
year hereunder shall be sufficient to cover the said Borough user's
proportionate share of the following of the Borough's annual costs:
(1) Cost of administration;
(2) Cost of operating, maintaining, repairing and replacing the
Borough collection system;
(3) Cost of operating, maintaining, repairing and replacing the relative
portion of the conveyance system serving the Borough users;
(4) The charges made by DELCORA to the Borough for transmission
and treatment of sewage;
(5) Debt service on the Borough's outstanding bonds pertaining to the
system;
(6) Reasonable amounts to provide working capital and operating
reserves in the system; and
(7) An amount sufficient to establish a margin of safety of 10% of the
total items one through six inclusive above. In determining the total
amount of revenue required each year from all users of the
Borough system through service charges, the Borough shall reduce
the amounts actually anticipated to be needed to cover items (1),
(2), (3) and (4) above by the sum of the following:
(a) The amounts of any federal, state or private grants to be
received during or applicable to said year relating to any such
said costs; and
(b) Surcharges, penalties, fines, insurance proceeds and similar
payments from other sources.
C. In determining the total amount of costs to be used in determining the
annual rate for Borough users, the Borough will deduct from the total
§ 167-10 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 167-11
162:294
§ 167-12. Determination of service charges.
annual cost allocable to the Borough system, including areas of other
municipalities presently served by the Borough system under
agreements with such municipalities, the proportionate share of such
total costs which is chargeable to such other municipalities for their
shares of the said costs of the portions of the Borough system used by
other municipalities.
A. The annual service charge shall be on a unit basis, the annual amount
or rate per unit to be determined by dividing the total amount of costs
as determined under the provisions of § 167-11 hereby by the total
number of units in the Borough. The Borough shall annually adopt a
resolution which shall compute the total amount of service charges to
be collected, the total number of units in the Borough and the amount
or rate per unit to be charged for said year.54
B. The service charge for each unit connected directly or indirectly to the
Borough system shall be at the rate of one unit per year. For the
purpose of determining units, the following rules shall govern and be
controlling:
(1) A family unit is considered to be four persons.
(2) A single-family dwelling containing a single-family unit, whether
detached, semidetached or row, shall be considered one unit.
(3) Each additional family occupying a single-family dwelling shall be
classed as one unit.
(4) Each apartment in a multifamily dwelling shall be classed as one
unit.
(5) A hotel, apartment hotel, boardinghouse or other like building shall
be charged a basic unit plus an additional unit for every four
persons occupying the building on the yearly average.
(6) Boarding schools or colleges shall be charged one unit for every
four persons living or working therein on the yearly average.
(7) Day schools or colleges shall be charged one unit for every 12
students, teachers and operating personnel on a yearly average.
(8) Churches and parsonages shall each be considered to be one unit.
(9) Hospitals, nursing and convalescent homes shall be charged one
unit for every four patients and operating personnel on a yearly
average.
54.Editor's Note: The current resolution fixing the annual service charge to be imposed upon
all users of the sanitary sewer facilities in the Borough is on file in the Municipal Offices.
Res. No. R-88-18 adopted and approved December 5, 1988, fixed the rate for the calendar
year 1989 at $0 per unit.
§ 167-11 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 167-12
162:295
(10) Public buildings, buildings used for municipal purposes, libraries
and similar buildings shall be charged one unit for every 12 persons
using or occupying the building on a yearly average.
(11) Commercial users, except self-service laundries, shall be charged
one unit for each four employees or operating personnel on a yearly
average. Commercial establishments using water for other than
sanitary fixture purposes and discharging into the sanitary sewer
shall be charged an extra number of units for said extra discharge
based on 250 gallons per day constituting one unit; provided,
however, that if the strength of said discharge exceeds 300 parts
per million of BOD5 and/or 300 parts per million of suspended
solids, then the said establishment shall be subject to a surcharge
determined in accordance with the provisions relating to industrial
users.
(12) Self-service laundries or a laundry business using individual
washers of ordinary size shall be charged on the basis of one unit
for each two machines. Any odd number shall be charged as one
full unit. Any washing machines larger than the ordinary size
(approximately nine pounds) shall be charged one unit for each 18
pounds of capacity.
(13) Industrial users, except major industrial users, shall be charged for
their sanitary sewage on the basis of one unit for each four
employees or operating personnel. Industrial users, except major
industrial users, discharging industrial wastewater into the
sanitary sewer shall be charged for such industrial wastes on the
basis provided in § 167-13 hereof.
(14) Standard household mechanical grinding units which discharge
ground organic matter into the sanitary sewer where installed shall
be charged on the basis of one unit for every such grinder.
(15) In case a combination of two or more dwelling units, households,
flats, apartments, stores, shops, offices or business or industrial
units, or two or more families using separate cooking and/or
bathroom facilities in one dwelling, have the use of the sewer
system through one sewer lateral, each and every such dwelling
unit, household, flat, apartment, store, shop, office or business or
industrial unit or such family shall be considered a connection unit
and shall be charged the foregoing sanitary sewage charges the
same as if each such unit or family had a direct and separate
connection to the sewer system.
(16) Where these regulations provide for a number of persons, other
than dwelling groups, constituting one unit, four persons or less
shall constitute one unit or one additional unit. Connection to and
use of the sewer system for less than 1/2 year shall be charged as
and for 1/2 unit; connection and use for more than 1/2 year shall be
charged a full unit.
§ 167-12 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 167-12
162:296
§ 167-13. Rates for industrial users.
(17) Wherever a rate is based totally or partially upon the number of
pupils, patients or employees, including teachers and operating
personnel, a unit shall be computed and based upon the daily
average number of pupils, patients or employees for the full
calendar year immediately preceding the date of annual or partial
billing. The daily average number for new establishments shall be
estimated by the Borough and adjusted for the subsequent billing.
(18) Any establishment or property user may be classified by the
Borough on a comparative or equitable basis in all cases where the
classification overlaps or is not clearly applicable, and the user
shall be notified of his new or adjusted or determined classification.
(19) The minimum annual service charge for any property shall be not
less than the rate for one unit; provided, however, that any property
connected to the Borough system for less than 1/2 year shall be 1/2
unit while a property connected for more than 1/2 year shall be
charged for one unit.
(20) In any case in which the above rules are not exactly applicable, the
Borough shall fix applicable rates with the same force and effect as
if set forth herein.
C. On or before January 31 of each year, the owner of every hotel,
apartment hotel, boarding school or college, day school or college,
church, hospital, nursing home, public building, building used for
municipal purposes, library, self-service laundry, commercial user and
industrial user shall submit to the Borough, on forms supplied by the
Borough, setting forth the information required by the Borough to
determine the respective number of units to be charged, calculated in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection B hereof. If any such user
fails to provide such information by said date, the Borough will estimate
the number of units to be charged to said user and the decision of the
Borough will be final and binding for the current year.
A. The annual service charge for industrial users shall be based on water
use and the actual biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and suspended
solids (SS) concentration of the industrial discharge. The water use,
BOD and SS data shall be converted to equivalent units by the formula
presented in Subsection B.
B. The industrial units shall be calculated as follows:
§ 167-12 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 167-13
162:297
Where
IU = Industry's units.
AWU = Industry's annual water use (gallons).
A = Proportion of Borough's cost attributable to wastewater
flow.
B = Proportion of Borough's cost attributable to BOD
strength.
C = Proportion of Borough's cost attributable to SS strength.
* NOTE: Where these figures are less than 300 mg/l per liter in
BOD or SS, the value in parenthesis shall be equal to one.
C. The specific values for A, B and C shall be established annually by the
Borough based on actual expenses incurred by the Borough in
providing wastewater collection, conveyance and treatment service by
the Borough and DELCORA. For 1978 these values shall be established
as follows:
A = 0.7
B = 0.0
C = 0.3
D. Each industrial user shall furnish representative wastewater
characteristic reports conducted by a certified testing laboratory
acceptable to the Borough on a quarterly basis. The Borough shall
furnish the report form to the industry. The Borough shall request more
frequent reporting for specific industries which exhibit significant
variations in waste strength.
E. The Borough reserves the right to conduct independent wastewater
characteristics analyses to verify industry reports. The Borough shall
use its analyses results in cases where there are significant
discrepancies between industry reports and the Borough's analysis.
F. Annual water use data shall be obtained from the Chester Water
Authority records in cases where the industry uses Chester Water
Authority. If the industry uses self-supplied water, the industry shall
report its actual water use. In the event the water used by an industry
in any year, as shown by the Chester Water Authority or other records,
exceeds by a substantial amount the total water actually discharged by
§ 167-13 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 167-13
162:298
§ 167-14. Exonerations and exemptions.
§ 167-15. Billing and payment.
the industry into the sewer, the industry may request an adjustment in
the annual water use factor to properly reflect the actual annual flows
discharged to the sewer. In such cases, the industry may at its option
install a meter acceptable to the Borough to measure the wastewater
flows or may establish a fixed ratio to be applied to its water usage by
agreement with the Borough.
A. Upon the demolition of any building or structure connected to the
Borough system, the Borough will, upon application by the owner of the
property, exonerate said premises from payment of further service
charges commencing with January 1 of the year following the year
during which the demolition occurred and continuing as long as said
property remains undeveloped.
B. In the resolution to be adopted each year establishing the annual
service charges, the Borough may exempt from service charges for said
year such types of buildings as it deems just, reasonable and proper.
C. The Borough may, upon application of the owner, exonerate from
payment of service charges any building or structure which has been
vacant for a continuous period of at least six months and is not expected
to be occupied for at least one year during such vacancy. In granting
such exoneration, the Borough may require the owner to disconnect the
connection to the Borough system. Thereafter such building or
structure shall not be reoccupied or reconnected until the owner has
obtained a permit from the Borough or its nominee.
A. Bills for service charges to all Borough users discharging industrial
wastewater into the Borough's system will be submitted to all users
annually on or about the first day of February each year. The annual
bills shall be due and payable upon presentation. Service charges paid
on or before April 1 of the year due shall be subject to a discount of 2%.
Service charges paid after the first day of June of the year due shall be
subject to a penalty of 5%. All service charges not paid on or before
December 31 of the year due shall be deemed to be delinquent and shall
be filed with the Solicitor, who shall proceed to collect delinquent
service charges, together with interest at the rate of 6% per annum on
the amount of the service charge plus penalty and costs accrued
thereon, either by action at law or by filing a lien or liens for the same in
accordance with law.
B. When the annual service charge due from any user is delinquent, the
Borough Council is authorized to request and require the Chester Water
Authority or any other public utility supplier to shut off the water supply
to said premises for neglect or failure to pay said service charges and to
continue said shutoff until said bill has been paid. Prior to requesting
said Chester Water Authority or other public utility supplying water to
§ 167-13 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 167-15
162:299
§ 167-16. Segregation of sewer revenues.
All funds received by the Borough from the collection of the sewer rentals
and charges and all penalties thereon, as herein provided for, shall be
segregated, earmarked and deposited in a separate fund to be designated
"Sewer Revenue Account." Said funds shall be used only for the purposes
specified in § 167-11A.
§ 167-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
the premises, the Borough shall comply with the provisions of the Act
of 1949, P.L. 482, as amended (53 P.S. § 2261 et seq.), relating to notice.
§ 167-15 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 167-17
162:300
ARTICLE II
Wastewater Treatment
[Adopted 2-3-1992 by Ord. No. O-92-1; approved 2-3-1992]
§ 167-18. Purpose; title.
§ 167-19. Adoption of standards by reference. [Amended 12-5-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-8, approved 12-5-2011]
The DELCORA Standards, Rules and Regulations of 2011, attached hereto
as Exhibit "A,"56 are hereby collectively adopted as the Wastewater
Treatment Regulations for the Borough of Marcus Hook.
§ 167-20. Violations.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook hereby ordains and
establishes that any person, firm or corporation who fails or refuses to
comply with the DELCORA Standards, Rules and Regulations embodied in
A. This article is adopted to promote and protect the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and other aspects of the general welfare. These
general goals include, among other things, the specific enforcement of
the Clean Water Act and the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law55 and the
various regulations promulgated by DELCORA, the United States
Environmental Protection Agency and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, and such other agencies which may succeed
the aforementioned agencies, and the implementation of the Delaware
County Wastewater Management Plan and the National Pretreatment
Standards, 40 C.F.R. § 401 et seq. [Amended 12-2-1996 by Ord. No.
O-96-9, approved 12-2-1996; 12-5-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-8,
approved 12-5-2011]
B. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Marcus Hook
Wastewater Treatment Ordinance."
A. It is intended that this article provide for the enforcement and
prosecution of the DELCORA Standards, Rules and Regulations and the
National Pretreatment Standards.
B. It is the specific intent of this article to provide a means of enforcement
of the National Pretreatment Standards promulgated by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency as set forth in 40 CFR 401 et
seq., 1983 and pursuant to the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.
C. The DELCORA Standards, Rules and Regulations shall be minimum
standards and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of user within
the Borough of Marcus Hook.
55.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
56.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 167-18 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 167-20
162:301
DELCORA Resolution No. 91-03, adopted May 22, 1991, as the same may be
amended from time to time, which is incorporated herein by reference and
attached hereto as Appendix A,57 shall be subject to the penalties set forth
in this article.
§ 167-21. Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall be subject to pay a fine of up to $1,000 or the maximum legal
limit of the fining authority, whichever is greater, and/or, upon conviction
thereof, shall be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
90 days. Every day that each violation continues of this article and/or
DELCORA's Standards, Rules and Regulations, as amended, shall constitute
a separate offense.
§ 167-22. Prosecution.
§ 167-23. Local limitations. [Added 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-9,
approved 12-2-1996; amended 12-5-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-8,
approved 12-5-2011]
The DELCORA Local Limitations for the Eastern Service Area (the "Eastern
Limitations") and the DELCORA Local Limitations for the Western Service
Area (the "Western Limitations"), as set forth in DELCORA Resolution
2011-01, attached hereto as Exhibit "B,"58 is hereby adopted as the local
limitations for all discharges of wastewater in the Borough of Marcus
Hook. All such discharges of wastewater shall comply with the Western
Limitations.
A. The Borough of Marcus Hook hereby appoints DELCORA or its
designee as its agent having the power of the Borough of Marcus Hook
to institute proceedings in the name of the Borough of Marcus Hook
against any and all persons, firms or corporations who violate the
provisions of this article.
B. In cases involving the enforcement of this article, the Solicitor of
DELCORA or its designee may cause subpoenas to be issued for
witnesses for the prosecution and may conduct the hearing on behalf of
the Borough of Marcus Hook.
57.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
58.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 167-20 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 167-23
162:302
Chapter 172
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage and rubbish — See Ch. 106.
§ 172-1. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following meaning in this chapter:
ACT — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980, as
amended, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
COLLECTOR — Any person collecting or transporting municipal solid waste
for owners or occupants of property in the municipality, including the
municipality itself if it undertakes the collection of municipal solid waste
directly and any business or institution within the municipality which
generates municipal solid waste and uses its own employees and equipment
for the collection and transport of the waste.
CONTRACTOR — One or more contractors with whom the county or the
Delaware County Solid Waste Authority (hereinafter referred to as
"Authority") contracts for construction and operation of the proposed
resource recovery plant or plants or other solid waste facilities.
COUNTY — A reference collectively to the county, the Delaware County
Solid Waste Authority and/or the Authority's contractor.
COUNTY PLAN — The Delaware County Solid Waste Management Plan
of 1985, which was reviewed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources, revised and is dated December 1986.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Marcus Hook.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom
or office waste and other material, including solid and semisolid material,
generated in residential, municipal, commercial or institutional
establishments and from community activities, and other solid waste which
is within the definition of "municipal solid waste" as set forth in the Act and
which the county, Authority or contractor by its ordinance or regulations
is willing to accept at the plant, but excluding: any liquid waste or sludge;
all wastes which are defined by existing or future federal or state law
or regulations as hazardous waste or industrial residual waste; any waste
which may be marketable and which is intentionally segregated for
purposes of recycling; and materials specifically excluded under applicable
county ordinances.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or
governmental entity, with the exception of the county, Authority or
designated contractor.
§ 167-23 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 172-1
162:303
PLANT — The energy and/or material recovery facility or facilities, transfer
station or solid waste plants owned by the county or Authority or the
contractor, including all associated property and equipment.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Any site owned and operated by the county,
the Authority or its designated contractor for the purpose of transfer,
processing or disposal of municipal solid waste, including landfills, resource
recovery plants and transfer stations.
§ 172-2. Prohibitions.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person
to accumulate upon any property in this municipality any municipal solid
waste or to dispose of it except in accordance with this chapter and other
applicable laws, ordinances or regulations.
§ 172-3. Operation of plant; charges.
The municipality has been advised by the county that the solid waste plan
proposes to provide for a plant or plants which will be operated efficiently
and economically by the contractor and/or by the county and in accordance
with all applicable laws and regulations, and also that the contractor and/or
the county will impose reasonable charges, which will be uniform among all
classes of users of the plant or plants.
§ 172-4. Collections by licensed collectors.
Except as it pertains to municipal solid waste collected directly by this
municipality, all collectors of municipal solid waste generated within the
municipality shall be licensed by the municipality and shall be responsible
for collecting municipal solid waste from properties in the municipality
pursuant to a contract between them and the municipality and/or contracts
between them and the owners or occupants of properties.
§ 172-5. Disposal at designated site.
All collectors shall deliver and dispose of all municipal solid waste collected
within the municipality at the solid waste facility designated by the county,
subject to such reasonable regulations for the operation thereof as may be
established by the county and/or contractor. Delivery and disposal at any
other place shall be a violation of this chapter and cause for revocation of
the collector's license, except in special circumstances approved in advance
by the municipality and the county and/or contractor. All collectors shall
comply in their operation with all applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations pertaining to the collection and transportation of municipal
solid waste.
§ 172-6. Private dumps, transfer stations and landfills prohibited.
No person shall use or permit to be used any property owned or occupied
by him within the municipality as a public or private dump, transfer station
§ 172-1 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 172-6
162:304
or landfill for municipal solid waste, whether generated within the
municipality or elsewhere, without the express written approval of the
municipality.
§ 172-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
§ 172-8. Abatement of nuisance.
In addition to the remedies provided in § 172-7 herein, any continued
violation of this chapter or other applicable law which shall constitute a
nuisance in fact or which in the opinion of the governing body of this
municipality shall constitute a nuisance may be abated by proceeding for
relief against the violator in a court of equity.
§ 172-9. Regulations authorized.
The collection of municipal solid waste in the municipality and the disposal
thereof shall be subject to such further reasonable rules and regulations
as may from time to time be promulgated by the governing body of the
municipality, including but without limitation regulations as to the form of
license application, the amount of fee to be charged for said licenses and the
terms of the licenses and license issuance procedures; provided, however,
that no such rules and regulations shall be contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, the county solid waste plan or applicable law.
§ 172-10. Amendments; contract.
The municipality reserves the right to amend this chapter or repeal it at any
time; provided, however, that the requirements for use of the designated
solid waste facility for disposal of municipal solid waste from the
municipality shall not be amended or repealed without the prior express
written approval of the county during the term of the contract between
the county (or Authority) and contractor providing for the construction
and operation of the plant, which contract shall have a term of 25 years.
For the purposes of securing the contractor's financing, such requirement
shall be deemed to be a contract between the county, the contractor and
the municipality, which the municipality (subject to the terms of the Joint
Cooperation Agreement set forth below) agrees to enforce so that the
municipal solid waste from the municipality will be available to provide a
source of energy for the plant. If the municipality is not now a collector but
in the future it becomes a collector, it agrees to deliver all municipal solid
waste so collected to the plant.
§ 172-11. Joint Cooperation Agreement.
§ 172-6 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 172-11
162:305
§ 172-12. Adoption of Solid Waste Management Plan.
A. The municipality agrees to deliver or cause to be delivered during the
term of this agreement all municipal solid waste, as defined herein,
generated within the municipality for disposal at a facility designated
by the county.
B. The county agrees to accept for disposal all such municipal solid waste
described in Subsection A above upon completion and commencement
of operation of the plant in accordance with a contract, containing
terms satisfactory to the county, with the contractor providing for
construction and operation of the plant.
C. The term of this agreement shall be for a period of 25 years, and said
term shall commence on January 1, 2017. The municipality, at its
option, may terminate this agreement with 30 days' written notice to
the county in the event that the municipality will incur substantial costs
over and above the costs generally accepted by the other municipalities
in delivering municipal solid waste to the county during the term of this
agreement, provided that the municipality has first obtained final
approval from the Department of Environmental Resources for its own
plan under the Act or an approval from the Department for a
modification that brings the municipality under another plan that has
already obtained final approval. It is understood, however, that upon
any such termination of this agreement by the municipality, the county,
the Authority and/or the county's contractor shall be relieved of any
responsibility to accept and dispose of municipal solid waste generated
within the municipality. It is further understood that any such
termination of this agreement by the municipality shall constitute a
repeal, whether express or implied, of § 172-12. [Amended 4-4-2016
by Ord. No. O-16-2, approved 4-4-2016]
D. The county shall hold harmless and defend the municipality from any
suit, claim or action challenging the legality of this chapter against the
municipality. In the event that any such suit, claim or action is brought
against the municipality, the municipality shall authorize the county,
through its designated legal counsel, to defend against the same, and
the municipality shall cooperate with the county in said defense and
shall give the County Solicitor notice of any such suit, claim or action
within five days of the municipality's receiving notice thereof.
A. The Department of Environmental Resources has recommended that
the requirements of the Solid Waste Management Act can best be
accomplished on a county-wide basis.
B. The municipality, by formal resolution dated April 2, 1984, authorized
the county to prepare the Solid Waste Management Plan on the
municipality's behalf.
C. The county, through the staff of its Public Works Department, its
Planning Commission and Charles M. Harris and Associates, Inc.,
§ 172-11 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 172-12
162:306
Chapter 174
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 99.
Sewers — See Ch. 167.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
178.
Zoning — See Ch. 196.
Consulting Engineers, prepared a ten-year plan for Solid Waste
Management.
D. The appropriate municipal officials of this municipality have reviewed
the findings and recommendations of the plan as it affects this
municipality, have found the plan acceptable and have recommended
that the plan be adopted.
E. The municipality, accordingly, hereby accepts and adopts the solid
waste management study prepared by the county as the ten-year plan
for solid waste management required by the Act.
F. The county is hereby authorized to submit the plan to the Department
of Environmental Resources for final approval on behalf of the
municipality.
§ 172-12 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 172-12
162:307

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 174-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Marcus Hook Borough Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
§ 174-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities, reduces infiltration, and
threatens public health and safety.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development throughout a watershed can also harm surface
water resources by changing the natural hydrologic patterns,
accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion of
streambeds and stream banks, thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat, and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy
metals, and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted
through loss of recharge.
C. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
minimization of impacts of development, redevelopment, and activities
causing accelerated erosion and loss of natural infiltration, is
fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and the protection of
the people of the municipality and all of the people of the
commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
D. Stormwater can be an important water resource by providing
infiltration for water supplies and baseflow of streams, which also
protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Impacts from stormwater runoff can be minimized by using project
designs that maintain the natural hydrologic regime and sustain high
water quality, infiltration, stream baseflow, and aquatic ecosystems.
The most cost-effective and environmentally advantageous way to
manage stormwater runoff is through nonstructural project design that
minimizes impervious surfaces and sprawl, avoids sensitive areas (i.e.,
stream buffers, floodplains, steep slopes), and considers topography
and soils to maintain the natural hydrologic regime.
§ 174-1 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-2
162:309
§ 174-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare within the municipality by maintaining the natural hydrologic
regime and minimizing the impacts described in § 174-2 of this chapter
through provisions designed to:
F. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
G. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
H. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the
municipality.
A. Promote alternative project designs and layouts that minimize the
impacts on surface and groundwater.
B. Promote nonstructural best management practices (BMPs).
C. Minimize increases in runoff stormwater volume.
D. Minimize impervious surfaces.
E. Manage accelerated stormwater runoff and erosion and sedimentation
problems and stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities that cause these problems.
F. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
G. Utilize and preserve existing natural drainage systems as much as
possible.
H. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, requiring a
minimum of structures and relying on natural processes.
I. Focus on infiltration of stormwater to maintain base flow, to prevent
degradation of surface and groundwater quality, and to otherwise
protect water resources.
J. Protect base flows and quality of streams and watercourses, where
possible.
K. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 93.4a requiring
protection and maintenance of "existing uses" and maintenance of the
level of water quality to support those uses in all streams, and the
§ 174-2 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-3
162:310
§ 174-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered or required to regulate land use activities
that affect runoff and surface and groundwater quality and quantity by the
authority of:
§ 174-5. Applicability; regulated activities.
protection and maintenance of water quality in "special protection"
streams.
L. Address the quality and quantity of stormwater discharges from the
development site.
M. Provide standards to meet certain NPDES MS4 permit requirements.
N. Implement an illicit discharge detection and elimination program that
addresses nonstormwater discharges into the municipality's separate
storm sewer system (MS4).
O. Preserve the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
P. Prevent accelerated scour, erosion and sedimentation of stream
channels.
Q. Provide performance standards and design criteria based on
watershed-wide stormwater management planning.
R. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management facilities and BMPs that are implemented
within the municipality.
A. Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as
amended, the "Storm Water Management Act" (hereinafter referred to
as "the Act");
B. Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 46201 et seq.; and
C. Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.59
A. All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater
runoff, including but not limited to land development, redevelopment,
and earth disturbance activity located within the municipality, are
subject to regulation by this chapter.
B. This chapter contains the stormwater management performance
standards and design criteria that are necessary from a watershed-wide
perspective. Local stormwater management design criteria (e.g., inlet
spacing, inlet type, collection system design and details, outlet
59.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 174-3 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-5
162:311
§ 174-6. Exemptions.
An exemption shall not relieve the applicant from implementing the
requirements of the municipal ordinance or from implementing such
measures as are necessary to protect public health, safety, and property. An
exemption shall not relieve the applicant from complying with the special
requirements for watersheds draining to identified high-quality (HQ) or
exceptional-value (EV) waters or any other current or future state or
municipal water quality protection requirements. If a drainage problem
is documented or known to exist downstream of, or is expected from the
proposed activity, then the municipality may withdraw exemptions listed in
Table 174-6 and require the applicant to comply with all requirements of
this chapter. Even though the applicant is exempt, he is not relieved from
complying with other municipal ordinances or regulations.
structure design, etc.) shall continue to be regulated by the applicable
municipal ordinances and applicable state regulations.
A. General exemptions.
(1) Table 174-6 summarizes the exemptions from certain provisions of
this chapter. Exemptions are for the items noted in Table 174-6
only, and shall not relieve the applicant from other applicable
sections of this chapter.
(2) Any regulated activity that is exempt from some provisions of the
chapter is exempt only from those provisions. If development is to
take place in phases, the developer is responsible for implementing
the requirements of the chapter as the impervious cover/earth
disturbance threshold is met. The date of the municipal ordinance
adoption shall be the starting point from which to consider tracts as
"parent tracts" in which future subdivisions and respective
impervious area and earth disturbance computations shall be
cumulatively considered. Exemption shall not relieve the applicant
from implementing such measures as are necessary to protect
health, safety, and property. For example:
(a) If a property owner proposes a one-hundred-fifty-square-foot
shed after adoption of the municipal stormwater management
ordinance, that property owner would be exempted from water
quality and quantity requirements of the chapter as noted in
Table 174-6 of the chapter. If, at a later date, the property
owner proposes to construct a four-hundred-ninety-ninesquare-
foot room addition, the applicant would be required to
comply with the requirements for the Simplified Method for
the full 649 square feet of impervious cover created since
adoption of the municipal ordinance. If an additional sevenhundred-
square-foot swimming pool/patio is proposed later,
the property owner would be required to implement the full
stormwater quantity and quality control submission
requirements of this chapter for the total 1,349 square feet of
§ 174-5 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-6
162:312
additional impervious surface added to the original property
since adoption of the municipal ordinance.
Table 174-6
Exemptions
Proposed Impervious
Surface Earth Disturbance
Chapter
Article or
Section
Type of
Project
0 to
499
square
feet
500 to 999
square
feet
1,000+
square
feet
0 to
4,999
square
feet
Disturbance
5,000
square
feet -
Less
Than 1
Acre
Greater
Than or
Equal to
1 Acre
Article IV,
SWM Site
Plan
Requirements
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Not exempt
Simplified
approach
Not
exempt
Exempt Modified1Not
exempt
§ 174-13,
Nonstructural
project
design
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Not exempt
Simplified
approach
Not
exempt
Exempt Not
exempt
Not
exempt
§ 174-14,
Infiltration
volume
requirements
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Not exempt
Simplified
approach
Not
exempt
Exempt Exempt Not
exempt
§ 174-15,
Water
quality
requirements
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Not exempt
Simplified
approach
Not
exempt
Modified2 Modified2Not
exempt
§ 174-16,
Stream
bank
erosion
requirements
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Not exempt
Simplified
approach
Not
exempt
Exempt Exempt Not
exempt
§ 174-17,
Stormwater
peak rate
control
and
management
districts
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Exempt Not
exempt
Exempt Not
exempt
Not
exempt
§ 174-6 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-6
162:313
Table 174-6
Exemptions
Proposed Impervious
Surface Earth Disturbance
Chapter
Article or
Section
Type of
Project
0 to
499
square
feet
500 to 999
square
feet
1,000+
square
feet
0 to
4,999
square
feet
Disturbance
5,000
square
feet -
Less
Than 1
Acre
Greater
Than or
Equal to
1 Acre
Erosion
and
sediment
pollution
control
requirements
Must comply with Title 25, Chapter 102 of the Pa. Code and
other applicable state and municipal codes, including the
Clean Streams Law.
Not
exempt
Legend:
"Proposed Impervious Surface" in Table 174-6 includes new, additional, or
replacement impervious surface/cover as part of development or redevelopment.
Exempt: Exempt from required section provision only; SWM site plan submission may
still be required if other section provisions are applicable.
Modified1: Modified SWM site plan need only consist of items in § 402A(2) and (4);
B(7), (8), (11) and (22); and D(1) and (3) and related supportive material needed to
determine compliance with §§ 174-13 and 174-17. Modified SWM site plan is required
that includes all elements of § 174-13, as applicable.
Modified2: Modified SWM site plan need only consist of items and related material
needed to determine compliance with § 174-15C.
Simplified Approach: Must comply with provisions of Appendix B of the chapter.
Redevelopment: See § 174-17I for alternate stormwater peak rate control criteria.
B. Exemptions for specific activities.
(1) Use of land for gardening or home consumption.
(2) Agriculture when operated in accordance with a conservation plan,
nutrient management plan, or erosion and sedimentation control
plan approved by the County Conservation District, including
activities such as growing crops, rotating crops, tilling soil, and
grazing animals. For agriculture with an approved conservation
plan, installation of new or expansion of existing farmsteads,
animal housing, waste storage, and production areas having
impervious surfaces that result in a net increase in impervious
surface of between 500 square feet and 999 square feet shall apply
the simplified approach, and net increases in impervious surface of
§ 174-6 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-6
162:314
§ 174-7. Compatibility with other ordinances or legal requirements.
greater than or equal to 1,000 square feet shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
(3) Forest management operations which are following the
Department of Environmental Protection's (PADEP) management
practices contained in its publication "Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Guidelines for Forestry," are operating
under an approved erosion and sedimentation plan, and must
comply with the stream buffer requirements in § 174-15D.
(4) Repaving without reconstruction.
(5) Emergency exemption: emergency maintenance work performed
for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare. A written
description of the scope and extent of any emergency work
performed shall be submitted to the municipality within two
calendar days of the commencement of the activity. If the
municipality finds that the work is not an emergency, then the work
shall cease immediately, until a stormwater site plan in accordance
with this chapter is submitted and approved by the municipality.
(6) Maintenance exemption: any maintenance to an existing
stormwater management system made in accordance with plans
and specifications approved by the municipal engineer or
municipality.
A. Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
B. To the extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous or stringent
requirements for stormwater management, the specific requirements
contained in this chapter shall be followed.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the
municipality's requirements regarding stormwater matters that do not
conflict with the provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). Conflicting
provisions in other municipal ordinances or regulations shall be
construed to retain. The requirements of this chapter shall supersede
any conflicting requirements in other municipal ordinance or
regulations.
§ 174-6 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-7
162:315

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 174-8. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 174-9. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes of a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural processes alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — The work of producing crops and raising
livestock including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, pasturing, nursery
and sod operations, excluding greenhouse structures, and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is
not considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner or other person who has filed an application to
the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated activity defined in
§ 174-5 of this chapter.
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS — Engineering or site drawings maintained by the
contractor as he constructs the project and upon which he documents the
actual locations of the building components and changes to the original
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, unit of
government, or any other similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied, or maintained."
§ 174-8 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-9
162:317
contract documents. These documents, or a copy of same, are turned over
to the municipal engineer at the completion of the project.
BANKFULL — The channel at the top-of-bank or point from where water
begins to overflow onto a floodplain.
BASEFLOW — Portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater; the
sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from water
diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other human activities.
BIORETENTION — A stormwater retention area that utilizes woody and
herbaceous plants and soils to remove pollutants before infiltration occurs.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
infiltration, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter. Stormwater
BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories or measures:
"structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or
measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices that
attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
BUFFER — See "riparian buffer."
CHANNEL — An open drainage feature through which stormwater flows.
Channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made
drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly
full.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, or headward cutting of
channels and waterways caused by stormwater runoff or bankfull flows.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Delaware County Conservation District.
CONVEYANCE — A facility or structure used for the transportation or
transmission of something from one place to another.
CULVERT — A structure with its appurtenant works, which carries water
under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — A man-made barrier, together with its appurtenant works
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid. A dam may include a refuse bank, fill, or structure for
highway, railroad, or other purposes which impounds or may impound water
or another fluid or semifluid.
§ 174-9 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-9
162:318
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNEE — The agent of the Delaware County Planning Department,
Delaware County Conservation District, and/or agent of the governing body
involved with the administration, review, or enforcement of any provisions
of this chapter by contract or memorandum of understanding.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL (QUALIFIED) — A Pennsylvania registered
professional engineer, registered landscape architect, registered
professional land surveyor trained to develop SWM site plans, or any person
licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of State or qualified by law to
perform the work required by the chapter.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely soon
after a rainfall event and become dry until the next rainfall event.
DETENTION or TO DETAIN — The prevention of, or to prevent, the
discharge, directly or indirectly, of a given volume of stormwater runoff into
surface waters by temporary storage.
DEVELOPER — A person who seeks to undertake any regulated earth
disturbance activities at a project site in the municipality.
DEVELOPMENT, LAND — Any human-induced change to improved or
unimproved real estate, whether public or private, including, but not limited
to, land development, construction, installation, or expansion of a building
or other structure, land division, street construction, drilling, and site
alteration such as embankments, dredging, grubbing, grading, paving,
parking or storage facilities, excavation, filling, stockpiling, or clearing. As
used in this chapter, development encompasses both new development and
redevelopment.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract or parcel of land where any
regulated activity set forth in § 174-5 is planned, conducted, or maintained.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The outside bark diameter at
breast height which is defined as 4.5 feet (1.37 m) above the forest floor on
the uphill side of the tree.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE DISCHARGE — Drainage discharge that is not
confined to a single point location or channel, including sheet flow or
shallow concentrated flow.
DISCHARGE — 1. (verb) To release water from a project, site, aquifer,
drainage basin, or other point of interest; 2. (noun) The rate and volume
of flow of water such as in a stream, generally expressed in cubic feet per
second (see "peak discharge").
§ 174-9 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-9
162:319
DISCHARGE POINT — The point of discharge for a stormwater facility.
DISTURBED AREA — Unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
DITCH — A man-made waterway constructed for irrigation or stormwater
conveyance purposes.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of the
lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed, located such that overland or
pipe flow from the project site would be directed towards it by gravity.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transport stormwater runoff that includes channels, swales,
pipes, conduits, culverts, and storm sewers.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the municipality after the
stormwater management site plan has been approved.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance;
building construction; the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil,
rock, or earth materials.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A conveyance area that is used to pass peak
discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
stormwater facility.
ENCROACHMENT — A structure or activity that changes, expands, or
diminishes the course, current, or cross section of a watercourse, floodway,
or body of water.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including water/
stream channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan that is designed
to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation. Said plan must be
submitted to and approved by the appropriate Conservation District before
construction can begin.
EXCEPTIONAL-VALUE (EV) WATERS — Surface waters of high quality
which satisfy Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Environmental Protection,
Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to
antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to the
proposed alteration. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped land,
the land use shall be considered as "meadow" unless the natural land cover
is proven to generate a lower curve number or Rational "c" value, such as
forested lands.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
§ 174-9 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-9
162:320
FINANCIAL HARDSHIP — A situation where the greatest possible profit
cannot be fully realized from development/redevelopment on a given parcel
of land due to added costs or burdens associated with the design,
construction, and/or maintenance of stormwater structures, facilities,
buffers and/or setbacks.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land
areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of this
commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or as delineated by the applicable Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard
Boundary Map as being a special flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year-frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year-frequency floodway, it
is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from
the stream to 50 feet from the top-of-bank.
FLUVIAL GEOMORPHOLOGY — The study of landforms associated with
river channels and the processes that form them.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
associated activities necessary for the management of forest lands. These
include timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high-water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale, or diversion
berm. The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GRADE — 1. (noun) A slope, usually of a road, channel, or natural ground,
specified in percent and shown on plans as specified herein. 2. (verb) To
finish the surface of a roadbed, the top of an embankment, or the bottom of
an excavation.
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or man-made waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses used to convey surface
water.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies wells
and springs and is often between saturated soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies from rain or overland flow.
HEC-HMS — The United States Army Corps of Engineers Hydrologic
Engineering Center (HEC) - Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS). This
model was used to model the Darby-Cobbs and Crum Creek watersheds
§ 174-9 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-9
162:321
during the Act 167 plan development and was the basis for the standards
and criteria of this chapter.
HIGH-QUALITY (HQ) WATERS — Surface waters having quality which
exceeds levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and
wildlife and recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania Code
Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards,
§ 93.4b(a).
HOTSPOTS — Areas where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.
HYDROGRAPH — A graph representing the discharge of water versus time
for a selected point in the drainage system.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME — The hydrologic cycle or balance that sustains
quality and quantity of stormwater, baseflow, storage, and groundwater
supplies under natural conditions.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), formerly the Soil Conservation
Service (SCS), into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A
soils, which are very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which
are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of water
into the ground. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, streets,
sidewalks, pavements, driveway areas, or roofs. Any surface areas designed
to be gravel or crushed stone shall be regarded as impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILL — Development that occurs on smaller parcels that remain
undeveloped but are within or in very close proximity to urban or densely
developed areas. Infill development usually relies on existing infrastructure
and does not require an extension of water, sewer, or other public utilities.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the underground water (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, or seepage
trenches).
INFLOW — The flow entering the stormwater management facility and/or
BMP.
INLET — The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A stream that flows only part of the time.
Flow generally occurs for several weeks or months in response to seasonal
precipitation or groundwater discharge.
§ 174-9 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-9
162:322
INVERT — The lowest surface, the floor or bottom of a culvert, drain, sewer,
channel, basin, BMP, or orifice.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LIMITING ZONE — A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or
underlying strata that includes one of the following:
LOT — A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed, or built upon as a
unit.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance used as a reach in watershed-specific hydrologic models.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation
of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of
flow, and slope. "Open channels" may include closed conduits so long as the
flow is not under pressure.
MAXIMUM DESIGN STORM — The maximum (largest) design storm that is
controlled by the stormwater facility.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a
municipality, planning agency, or joint planning commission.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or
other features;
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with § 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
C.
A seasonal high water table, whether perched or regional, determined
by direct observation of the water table or indicated by soil mottling.
A.
A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of
loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to fill
the voids between the fragments.
B.
A rock formation, other stratum, or soil condition that is so slowly
permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of water.
C.
§ 174-9 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-9
162:323
MUNICIPALITY — Marcus Hook Borough, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
NATURAL CONDITION — Predevelopment condition.
NATURAL HYDROLOGIC REGIME — See "hydrologic regime."
NATURAL RECHARGE AREA — Undisturbed surface area or depression
where stormwater collects and a portion of which infiltrates and replenishes
the underground and groundwater.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a waterbody
from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible,
confined, or discrete conveyances.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Water flowing in stormwater
collection facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a
rainfall event or snowmelt.
NONSTRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMPs) — Methods
of controlling stormwater runoff quantity and quality, such as innovative
site planning, impervious area and grading reduction, protection of natural
depression areas, temporary ponding on site, and other techniques.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act,60
which is delegated to PADEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously SCS).
OPEN CHANNEL — A conveyance channel that is not enclosed.
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where
the municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the
commonwealth.
OUTFLOW — The flow exiting the stormwater management facility and/or
BMP.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal to a stream, river, lake, tidewater, or
artificial drain.
PARENT TRACT — The parcel of land from which a land development or
subdivision originates, determined from the date of municipal adoption of
this chapter.
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of parking areas as temporary
impoundments with controlled release rates during rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENNSYLVANIA STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
MANUAL (Document Number 363-0300-002) (December 2006) — The Best
Management Practices Manual published by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection. The manual is to supplement federal and
state regulations and the Department of Environmental Protection's
60.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 174-9 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-9
162:324
Comprehensive Stormwater Management Policy that emphasizes effective
site planning as the preferred method of managing runoff while also
providing numerous examples of BMPs that can be employed in
Pennsylvania to further avoid and minimize flooding and water resource
problems.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Marcus Hook
Borough.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pennsylvania Code § 92.1.61
POSTCONSTRUCTION — Period after construction during which disturbed
areas are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and functioning, and
all proposed improvements in the approved land development plan are
completed.
PRECONSTRUCTION — Prior to commencing construction activities.
PREDEVELOPMENT CONDITION — Undeveloped/natural condition.
PRETREATMENT — Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide
storage or filtering to trap coarse materials and other pollutants before they
enter the system, but not necessarily designed to meet the water quality
volume requirements of § 174-15.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — See "design professional (qualified)."
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak
flow.
REACH — Any stream segment or other runoff conveyance used in the
watershed-specific hydrologic models.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration
of rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated
wastewater.
RECONSTRUCTION — Demolition and subsequent rebuilding of impervious
surface.
RECORD DRAWINGS — Original documents revised to suit the as-built
conditions and subsequently provided by the engineer to the client. The
engineer reviews the contractor's as-builts against his/her own records
61.Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was reserved 10-8-2010,
effective 10-9-2010. It was replaced by Chapter 92a, National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
§ 174-9 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-9
162:325
for completeness, then either turns these over to the client or transfers
the information to a set of reproducibles, in both cases for the client's
permanent records.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any development that requires demolition or removal
of existing structures or impervious surfaces at a site and replacement
with new impervious surfaces. Maintenance activities such as top-layer
grinding and repaving are not considered to be redevelopment. Interior
remodeling projects and tenant improvements are also not considered to be
redevelopment.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbances activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that
may affect stormwater runoff, including redevelopment.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 92,62
Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.63
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of existing conditions' peak rate of runoff
from a site or subarea to which the proposed conditions' peak rate of runoff
must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
REPAVING — Resurfacing of the impervious surface that does not involve
reconstruction of an existing paved (impervious) surface.
REPLACEMENT PAVING — Reconstruction of and full replacement of an
existing paved (impervious) surface.
RETENTION BASIN — A structure in which stormwater is stored and
not released during the storm event. Retention basins are designed for
infiltration purposes and do not have an outlet.
RETENTION or TO RETAIN — The prevention of direct discharge of
stormwater runoff into receiving waters or water bodies by temporary or
permanent containment in a pond or depression; examples include systems
which discharge by percolation to groundwater, and/or evaporation
processes and which generally have residence times of less than three days.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the
twenty-five-year-return-period rainfall would be expected to recur on the
average of once every 25 years.
RIPARIAN — Pertaining to anything connected with or immediately adjacent
to the banks of a stream or other body of water.
RIPARIAN BUFFER — An area of land adjacent to a body of water and
managed to maintain the integrity of stream channels and shorelines to
reduce the impact of upland sources of pollution by trapping, filtering, and
62.Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was reserved 10-8-2010,
effective 10-9-2010. It was replaced by Chapter 92a, National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
63.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 174-9 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-9
162:326
converting sediments, nutrients, and other chemicals, and to supply food,
cover and thermal protection to fish and other wildlife.
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used
to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the existing
road cross section, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road
surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches, and
other similar activities.
ROOF DRAINS — A drainage conduit or pipe that collects water runoff from
a roof and leads it away from the structure.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — The temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces using controlled-flow roof
drains in building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SALDO — Subdivision and land development ordinance.
SEDIMENT — Soil or other materials transported by surface water as a
product of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water or air.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, or retention or detention basin located
and designed in such a way as to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other
material transported by water during construction.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge, or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar coarse material into which surface water is directed
for infiltration into the underground water.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains)
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHALLOW CONCENTRATED FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in
shallow, defined ruts prior to entering a defined channel or waterway.
SHEET FLOW — A flow process associated with broad, shallow water
movement on sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or
concentrated.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to
a runoff parameter called curve number (CN).
SOURCE WATER PROTECTION AREA (SWPA) — The zone through which
contaminants, if present, are likely to migrate and reach a drinking water
well or surface water intake.
§ 174-9 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-9
162:327
SPECIAL PROTECTION SUBWATERSHEDS — Watersheds that have been
designated by PADEP as EV or HQ waters.
SPILLWAY — A conveyance that is used to pass the peak discharge of the
maximum design storm that is controlled by the stormwater facility.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Pennsylvania
Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.64
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure based
on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the
change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and
depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years (see "return
period").
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that conveys
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation, snow, or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT — Those subareas of a
watershed in which some type of detention is required to meet the plan
requirements and the goals of Act 167.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff quality, rate, or quantity. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention
and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The watershed plan for managing
stormwater runoff for a watershed, adopted by Delaware and Chester
Counties as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), as
amended, and known as the "Storm Water Management Act."65 See also
"watershed stormwater management plan."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by
the applicant or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will
be managed at the particular site of interest according to this chapter, and
including all necessary design drawings, calculations, supporting text, and
documentation to demonstrate that chapter requirements have been met,
hereafter referred to as "SWM site plan."
STREAM — A natural watercourse.
64.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
65.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 174-9 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-9
162:328
STREAM BUFFER — The land area adjacent to each side of a stream
essential to maintaining water quality (see also "riparian buffer").
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a regulated
water of the commonwealth.
SUBAREA (SUBWATERSHED) — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed
for which stormwater management criteria have been established in the
stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling shall be exempted.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface waters, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial,
within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
SWM SITE PLAN — See "stormwater management site plan."
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME-OF-CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time required for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point
of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland
flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TOP-OF-BANK — Highest point of elevation in a stream channel cross
section at which a rising water level just begins to flow out of the channel
and over the floodplain.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
UNDEVELOPED CONDITION — Natural condition (see also
"predevelopment condition").
VERNAL POND — Seasonal depressional wetlands that are covered by
shallow water for variable periods from winter to spring but may be
completely dry for most of the summer and fall.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
§ 174-9 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-9
162:329
WATERSHED STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A watershed plan
for managing stormwater runoff for a watershed, adopted by Delaware and
Chester Counties as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), as amended, and known as the "Storm Water Management Act"66 (e.g.,
Chester Creek, Ridley Creek, Crum Creek, Darby-Cobbs Creeks). See also
"stormwater management plan."
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
WELLHEAD —
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA — The surface and subsurface area
surrounding a water supply well, well field, or spring supplying a public
water system through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move
toward and reach the water source.
WET BASIN — Pond for urban runoff management that is designed to detain
urban runoff and always contains water.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas.
WOODS — A natural groundcover with more than one viable tree of a DBH
of six inches or greater per 1,500 square feet which existed within three
years of application; a cover condition for which SCS curve numbers have
been assigned or to which equivalent Rational Method runoff coefficients
have been assigned.
A. A structure built over a well.
B. The source of water for a well.
66.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 174-9 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-9
162:330
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management
§ 174-10. General requirements.
A. Applicants proposing regulated activities in the municipality which do
not fall under the exemption criteria shown in § 174-6 shall submit a
stormwater management site plan consistent with this chapter and the
applicable watershed stormwater management plan to the municipality
for review. The stormwater management criteria of this chapter shall
apply to the total proposed development even if development is to take
place in stages.
B. No regulated activity within the municipality shall commence until the
municipality issues approval of a SWM plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(1) For any site with proposed regulated earth disturbance equal to or
greater than one acre where, after a close evaluation of alternative
site designs, it proves to be impracticable to meet the mandatory
minimum volume and infiltration control standards of this chapter
onsite, the municipality may approve measures other than those in
this chapter after consultation with and evaluation by PADEP that
the alternate site design meets state water quality requirements
and does not conflict with state law, including, but not limited to,
the Clean Streams Law.67
(2) For any site with proposed regulated earth disturbance that is less
than one acre where, after a close evaluation of alternative site
designs, it proves to be impracticable to meet any one or more of
the mandatory minimum standards of this chapter onsite, the
municipality may approve measures other than those in this
chapter.
(3) "Regulated earth disturbance" is defined to mean any activity
involving earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 92,68 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.
C. The applicant is required to design the site to minimize surface
discharge of stormwater and the creation of impervious surfaces in
order to maintain, as much as possible, the natural hydrologic regime.
D. The SWM site plan must be designed consistent with the sequencing
provisions of § 174-13 to ensure maintenance of the natural hydrologic
regime, to promote infiltration, and to protect groundwater and surface
water quality and quantity. The SWM site plan designer must proceed
sequentially in accordance with Article III of this chapter.
67.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
68.Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was reserved 10-8-2010,
effective 10-9-2010. It was replaced by Chapter 92a, National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
§ 174-10 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-10
162:331
E. Stormwater drainage systems shall be designed in order to preserve
natural flow conditions to the maximum extent practicable.
F. Existing drainage discharge onto adjacent property shall not be altered
in any manner without written permission and a maintenance access
agreement with, the affected property owner(s). Such discharge shall
be subject to any applicable discharge criteria specified in this chapter
and still must meet the requirements of Act 167.69
G. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge, whether proposed to be
concentrated or maintained as diffused drainage areas, shall be subject
to any applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of existing
discharge, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. If diffused
drainage discharge is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding, or other impacts will result from the
concentrated discharge.
H. Where a development site is traversed by a stream, drainage easements
of 20 feet shall be provided on either side of, and conform to the line of,
such streams.
I. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., is encouraged where soil
conditions permit in order to reduce the size or eliminate the need for
detention facilities or other structural BMPs.
J. All stormwater runoff from new development or redevelopment shall be
pretreated for water quality prior to discharge to surface or
groundwater. Rooftop runoff may go directly to an infiltration BMP or
be evapotranspirated.
K. All regulated activities within the municipality shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes of this
chapter, through these two elements:
(1) Erosion and sediment control during earth disturbance activities
(e.g., during construction); and
(2) Water quality protection measures after completion of earth
disturbance activities (i.e., after construction), including
operations and maintenance.
L. The BMPs shall be designed, implemented, and maintained to meet
state water quality requirements and any other more stringent
requirements as determined by the municipality.
69.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 174-10 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-10
162:332
M. Postconstruction water quality protection shall be addressed as
required by § 174-15.
N. Operations and maintenance of permanent stormwater BMPs shall be
addressed as required by Article VII.
O. All BMPs used to meet the requirements of this chapter shall conform to
the state water quality requirements and any more stringent
requirements as set forth by the municipality.
P. Techniques described in Appendix E (Low-Impact Development)70 of
this chapter shall be considered because they reduce the costs of
complying with the requirements of this chapter and the state water
quality requirements.
Q. In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof, the
applicant shall consider the following:
(1) Total contributing drainage area.
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site's soils.
(3) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(4) Seasonal high water table.
(5) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(6) Erodibility of soils.
(7) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
(8) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(9) Stream bank erosion.
(10) Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
(11) The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(12) The nature of the pollutant being removed.
(13) Maintenance requirements.
(14) Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
(15) Recreational value.
(16) Enhancement of aesthetic and property values.
R. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate
sound engineering principles and practices in a manner that does not
aggravate existing stormwater problems. The municipality reserves the
70.Editor's Note: Appendix E is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 174-10 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-10
162:333
right to disapprove any design that would result in construction in or
continuation of a stormwater problem area.
S. The applicant may meet the stormwater management criteria through
off-site stormwater management measures as long as the proposed
measures are in the same subwatershed as shown in Appendix A.71
T. Stormwater hotspots. Stormwater runoff from hotspots shall be
pretreated prior to surface or groundwater infiltration to prevent
pollutant runoff. Industrial sites referenced in 40 CFR 125 are examples
of hotspots.
(1) Below is a list of examples of hotspots:
(a) Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities.
(b) Vehicle fueling stations.
(c) Vehicle service and maintenance facilities.
(d) Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities.
(e) Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.).
(f) Industrial sites based on Standard Industrial Classification
Codes.
(g) Marinas (service and maintenance areas).
(h) Outdoor liquid container storage.
(i) Outdoor loading/unloading facilities.
(j) Public works storage areas.
(k) Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials.
(l) Commercial container nursery.
(m) Contaminated sites/brownfields.
(n) Other land uses and activities as designated by an appropriate
review authority.
(2) The following land uses and activities are not normally considered
hotspots:
(a) Residential streets and rural highways.
(b) Residential development.
(c) Institutional development.
(d) Office developments.
71.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 174-10 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-10
162:334
§ 174-11. Permit requirements by other governmental entities.
The following permit requirements may apply to certain regulated earth
disturbance activities and must be met prior to commencement of regulated
earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
(e) Nonindustrial rooftops.
(f) Pervious areas, except golf courses and nurseries [which may
need an integrated pest management (IPM) plan].
(3) While streets and highways (average daily traffic volume (ADT)
greater than 30,000) are not considered stormwater hotspots, it is
important to ensure that highway stormwater management
facilities are designed to adequately protect receiving streams and/
or groundwater.
(4) The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) NPDES stormwater
program requires some industrial sites to prepare and implement a
stormwater pollution prevention plan.
U. The following standards for protection of downgradient properties from
off-site conveyance must be accomplished: For any location where a
new concentrated discharge of stormwater from any frequency rainfall
event, up to and including the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour
event, will flow onto a downgradient property, the following are
required:
(1) A drainage easement (or other legal agreement/approval) must be
obtained for conveyance of discharges onto or through adjacent
properties.
(2) The conveyance must be designed to avoid erosion, flooding, or
other damage to the properties through which it is being conveyed.
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by PADEP under regulations at Title 25 Pennsylvania
Code Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by PADEP under
Title 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by PADEP under Title 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter
105.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on or
discharging to a state highway right-of-way, or require access to or from
a state highway shall be subject to approval by PennDOT.
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers, or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
§ 174-10 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-11
162:335
§ 174-12. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
§ 174-13. Nonstructural project design process (sequencing to
minimize stormwater impacts).
The design of all regulated activities shall include the following to minimize
stormwater impacts to reduce the surface discharge of stormwater, reduce
the creation of unnecessary impervious surfaces, prevent the degradation of
constitute a dam subject to permit by PADEP under Title 25
Pennsylvania Code Chapter 105.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until the municipality receives an approval from the PADEP
in compliance with Title 25 Chapter 102 of the Pennsylvania Code of an
erosion and sediment control plan for construction activities if
applicable.
B. PADEP has regulations regarding an erosion and sediment control
under Title 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 102.
C. In addition, under Title 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 92,72 a PADEP
"NPDES Construction Activities" Permit is required for regulated earth
disturbance activities.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate PADEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the municipality. The
issuance of an NPDES Construction Permit [or permit coverage under
the statewide General Permit (PAG-2)] satisfies the requirements of
§ 174-22A.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by PADEP regulations, shall be available on the
project site at all times.
F. Additional erosion and sediment control design standards and criteria
are recommended to be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed.
At a minimum, they shall include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to
maintain maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire drainage area contributory to the infiltration BMP has
achieved final stabilization.
72.Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was reserved 10-8-2010,
effective 10-9-2010. It was replaced by Chapter 92a, National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
§ 174-11 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-13
162:336
waters of the commonwealth, and maintain as much as possible the natural
hydrologic regime of the site.
A. The applicant shall apply low-impact development (LID) methods such
as those listed in Appendix E,73 provided that use of this method does
not conflict with other local codes.
B. The applicant shall demonstrate that the design process follows the
sequence noted below. The goal of the sequence is to minimize the
increases in stormwater runoff and impacts to water quality resulting
from the proposed regulated activity:
(1) The following items in this subsection shall be addressed prior to
development of other stormwater management site plan design
elements:
(a) Prepare an existing resource and site analysis map (ERSAM)
showing environmentally sensitive areas including, but not
limited to, steep slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands,
hydric soils, vernal pools, stream buffers, and hydrologic soil
groups. Land development, any existing recharge areas, and
other requirements outlined in the municipal SALDO shall also
be included.
(b) Establish a stream buffer according to § 174-15D.
(c) Prepare a draft project layout avoiding sensitive areas
identified in § 174-13B(1)(a).
(d) Identify site-specific existing conditions drainage areas,
discharge points, recharge areas, and hydrologic soil groups A
and B (areas conducive to infiltration).
(e) Evaluate nonstructural stormwater management alternatives:
[1] Minimize earth disturbance.
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces.
[3] Break up large impervious surfaces.
(f) Determine into what management district the site falls
(chapter Appendix A74), and conduct an existing conditions
runoff analysis.
(2) The following items in this subsection may be addressed in any
order provided that all items in § 172-13B(1) have been completed.
(a) Satisfy the infiltration objective (§ 174-14) and provide for
stormwater pretreatment prior to infiltration.
73.Editor's Note: Appendix E is on file in the Borough offices.
74.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 174-13 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-13
162:337
§ 174-14. Infiltration volume requirements.
Providing for infiltration consistent with the natural hydrologic regime
is required. Design of the infiltration facilities shall consider infiltration
to compensate for the reduction in the recharge that occurs when the
ground surface is disturbed or impervious surface is created. If it cannot be
physically accomplished, then the design professional shall be responsible
for demonstrating to the satisfaction of the municipality that this cannot
be physically accomplished on the site (e.g., shallow depth to bedrock or
limiting zone, open voids, steep slopes, etc. vs. a financial hardship as
defined in § 174-9). If it can be physically accomplished, the volume of
runoff to be infiltrated shall be determined from § 174-14A(2) depending on
demonstrated site conditions, and shall be the greatest volume that can be
physically infiltrated. For example:
• Any applicant (developer or redeveloper) shall first attempt to infiltrate
the volume required in § 174-14A(2)(a).
• If the § 174-14A(2)(a) requirement cannot be physically accomplished,
then the applicant is required to attempt to infiltrate the volume
required in § 174-14A(2)(b).
• Finally, if the § 174-14A(2)(b) infiltration volume cannot be physically
accomplished, the applicant must, at a minimum, infiltrate the volume
required in § 174-14A(2)(c).
(b) Provide for water quality protection in accordance with
§ 174-15, Water quality requirements.
(c) Provide stream bank erosion protection in accordance with
§ 174-16, Stream bank erosion requirements.
(d) Prepare final project design to maintain existing conditions
drainage areas and discharge points, to minimize earth
disturbance and impervious surfaces, and, to the maximum
extent possible, to ensure that the remaining site development
has no surface or point discharge.
(e) Conduct a proposed conditions runoff analysis based on the
final design that meets the management district requirements
(§ 174-17).
(f) Manage any remaining runoff prior to discharge through
detention, bioretention, direct discharge, or other structural
control.
A. Infiltration BMPs shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(1) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed or
redeveloped areas shall be selected based on suitability of soils and
site conditions and shall be constructed on soils that have the
following characteristics:
§ 174-13 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-14
162:338
(a) A minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the BMP
and the top of the limiting zone.
(b) An infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional
stormwater volume and dewater completely as determined by
field tests conducted by the applicant's design professional.
(c) The infiltration facility shall be capable of completely draining
the retention (infiltration) volume (Rev) within three days (72
hours) from the end of the design storm.
(2) The size of the infiltration facility and Rev shall be based upon the
following volume criteria:
(a) Modified Control Guideline One (MCG-1) of the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices (PA BMP) Manual.
The retention (infiltration) volume (Rev) to be captured and
infiltrated shall be the net two-year twenty-four-hour volume.
The net volume is the difference between the postdevelopment
runoff volume and the predevelopment runoff volume. The
postdevelopment total runoff volume for all storms equal to or
less than the two-year twenty-four-hour duration precipitation
shall not be increased. For modeling purposes, existing
(predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be
considered meadow in good condition or its equivalent, and
20% of existing impervious area, when present, shall be
considered meadow in good condition.
(b) Infiltrating the entire Rev volume in § 174-14A(2)(a) (above)
may not be feasible on every site due to site-specific limitations
such as shallow depth to bedrock or the water table. If it
cannot be physically accomplished, then the following criteria
from Modified Control Guideline Two (MCG-2) of the
Pennsylvania BMP Manual must be satisfied:
[1] At least the first one inch of runoff from new or
replacement impervious surfaces shall be infiltrated.
Rev = I (inch)* impervious area (square feet) ÷ 12
(inches) = cubic feet (cf)
An asterisk (*) in equations denotes multiplication.
(c) Only if infiltrating the entire Rev volume in § 174-14A(2)(b)
(above) cannot be physically accomplished, then the following
minimum criteria from Modified Control Guideline Two
(MCG-2) of the Pennsylvania BMP Manual must be satisfied:
[1] Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be
designed to accommodate infiltration of the entire water
quality volume (WQv) (§ 174-15B); however, in all cases at
least the first one-half inch of the WQv shall be infiltrated.
§ 174-14 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-14
162:339
The minimum infiltration volume (Rev) required would,
therefore, be computed as:
Rev = 1 *impervious area (square feet) ÷ 12 (inches) =
cubic feet (cf)
An asterisk (*) in equations denotes multiplication.
Where:
I = The maximum equivalent infiltration amount (inches)
that the site can physically accept or 0.50 inch, whichever
is greater.
[2] The retention volume values derived from the methods in
§ 174-14A(2)(a), (b) or (c) is the minimum volume the
applicant must control through an infiltration BMP facility.
If site conditions preclude capture of runoff from portions
of the impervious area, the infiltration volume for the
remaining area should be increased an equivalent amount
to offset the loss.
[3] Only if the minimum of 0.50 inch of infiltration
requirement cannot be physically accomplished, a waiver
from § 174-14, Infiltration volume requirements, is
required from the municipality.
B. Soils. A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be required to
determine the suitability of infiltration facilities. The evaluation shall be
performed by a qualified design professional and at minimum address
soil permeability, depth to bedrock, and subgrade stability. The general
process for designing the infiltration BMP shall be:
(1) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made
features within the site to determine general areas of suitability for
infiltration practices. In areas where development on fill material is
under consideration, conduct geotechnical investigations of
subgrade stability; infiltration may not be ruled out without
conducting these tests.
(2) Provide field tests such as double-ring infiltrometer or hydraulic
conductivity tests (at the level of the proposed infiltration surface)
to determine the appropriate hydraulic conductivity rate.
Percolation tests are not recommended for design purposes.
(3) Design the infiltration structure for the required retention (Rev)
volume based on field determined capacity at the level of the
proposed infiltration surface.
(4) If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed by the applicant's
design professional, it must be demonstrated to the municipality
that the soils are conducive to infiltrate on the lots identified.
§ 174-14 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-14
162:340
§ 174-15. Water Quality Requirements.
The applicant shall comply with the following water quality requirements of
this article:
C. Infiltration facilities should, to the greatest extent practicable, be
located to avoid introducing contaminants via groundwater, and be in
conformance with an approved source water protection assessment or
source water protection plan.
D. Roadway drainage systems should provide an opportunity to capture
accidental spills. Road deicing material storage facilities shall be
designed to avoid salt and chloride runoff from entering waterways and
infiltration facilities. The qualified design professional shall evaluate
the possibility of groundwater contamination from the proposed
infiltration facility and perform a hydrogeologic justification study if
necessary.
E. The antidegredation analysis found in Chapter 9375 shall be applied in
HQ or EV streams.
F. An impermeable liner will be required in detention basins where the
possibility of groundwater contamination exists. The municipality may
require a detailed hydrogeologic investigation.
G. The applicant should provide safeguards against groundwater
contamination for land uses that may cause groundwater contamination
should there be a mishap or spill.
A. To control postconstruction stormwater impacts from regulated
activities and conform to state water quality requirements, BMPs which
replicate predevelopment stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions
must be provided in the site design such that postconstruction
stormwater discharges do not degrade the physical, chemical, or
biological characteristics of the receiving waters. This may be achieved
by the following:
(1) Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration
conditions;
(2) Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to provide filtering
of chemical and physical pollutants from the stormwater runoff;
and
(3) Stream bank and streambed protection: management of volume
and rate of postconstruction stormwater discharges to prevent
physical degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring).
B. Developed areas shall provide adequate storage and treatment facilities
necessary to capture and treat stormwater runoff. The infiltration
75.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa Code Chapter 93.
§ 174-14 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-15
162:341
volume computed under Section 305 may be a component of the water
quality volume if the applicant chooses to manage both components
in a single facility. If the calculated water quality volume (WQv) is
greater than the volume required to be infiltrated as described in
Section 305.A.2, then the difference between the two volumes shall
be treated for water quality by an acceptable stormwater management
practice(s). The required water quality volume (WQv) is the storage
capacity needed to capture and treat a portion of stormwater runoff
from the developed areas of the site. To achieve this requirement, the
following criterion is established:
(1) From Control Guideline (CG-1) in the Pennsylvania BMP Manual,
the water quality volume shall be the net two-year twenty-four-hour
volume. The net volume is the difference between the
postdevelopment runoff volume and the predevelopment runoff
volume. The postdevelopment total runoff volume for all storms
equal to or less than the two-year twenty-four-hour duration
precipitation shall not be increased. For modeling purposes,
existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be
considered meadow in good condition or its equivalent, and 20% of
existing impervious area, when present, shall be considered
meadow in good condition.
(2) This volume requirement can be managed by the permanent
volume of a wet basin or the detained volume from other BMPs.
Where appropriate, wet basins shall be utilized for water quality
control and shall follow the guidelines of the Pennsylvania BMP
manual referenced in Appendix G.76
(3) Release of water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert
of the water quality orifice is at the invert of the facility). The
design of the facility shall provide for protection from clogging and
unwanted sedimentation.
C. The temperature of receiving waters shall be protected through the use
of BMPs that moderate temperature.
D. If a perennial or intermittent stream passes through, or a waterbody
(i.e., lake, pond, wetland) is present on the site, the applicant shall
create a riparian buffer extending a minimum of 50 feet, to either side
of the top-of-bank of the channel, lake, or wetland. The buffer area shall
be planted with native vegetation and maintained in a vegetated state
(refer to Appendix B, Pennsylvania Native Plant List, contained in the
Pennsylvania BMP Manual).
(1) The following provisions also apply to riparian buffers on lots in
existence at the time of adoption of this chapter:
76.Editor's Note: Appendix G is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 174-15 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-15
162:342
§ 174-16. Stream bank erosion requirements.
(a) If the applicable zoning setback is less than 50 feet, the buffer
width may be reduced to 25% of the setback or 25 feet,
whichever is greater.
(b) If a stream traverses a site in a manner that significantly
reduces the use of the site, the buffer may be either:
[1] Reduced to 25 feet on either side, with municipal approval;
or.
[2] Reduced to 10 feet with municipal waiver.
(2) Permitted uses within the buffer include the following, subject to
municipal approval and provided that they comply with all federal,
state, and local regulations:
(a) Recreational trails. See Appendix J, Riparian Buffer Trail
Guidelines.77
(b) Utility rights-of-way.
(c) Bridges.
(d) Other uses subject to municipal approval.
E. If an existing buffer is legally prescribed (i.e., deed, covenant,
easement, etc.) and it exceeds the requirements of this chapter, the
existing buffer shall be maintained.
A. In addition to controlling the water quality volume (in order to minimize
the impact of stormwater runoff on downstream stream bank erosion),
the primary requirement to control stream bank erosion is to design a
BMP to detain the proposed conditions two-year, twenty-four-hour
design storm to the existing conditions one-year flow using the SCS
Type II distribution. Additionally, provisions shall be made (such as
adding a small orifice at the bottom of the outlet structure) to release
the proposed conditions one-year storm for a minimum of 24 hours from
a point in time when the maximum volume of water from the one-year
storm is stored in a proposed BMP (i.e., the maximum water surface
elevation is achieved in the facility). Release of water can begin at the
start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the water quality orifice is at the
invert of the facility).
B. The minimum orifice size in the outlet structure to the BMP shall be
three inches in diameter where possible, and a trash rack shall be
installed to prevent clogging. On sites with small drainage areas
contributing to this BMP that do not provide enough runoff volume to
allow a twenty-four-hour attenuation with the three-inch orifice, the
calculations shall be submitted showing this condition. When the
77.Editor's Note: Appendix J is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 174-15 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-16
162:343
§ 174-17. Stormwater peak rate control.
calculated orifice size is below three inches, gravel filters (or other
methods) are recommended to discharge low-flow rates subject to the
municipal engineer's satisfaction. When filters are utilized,
maintenance provisions shall be provided to ensure filters meet the
design function. All facilities shall make use of measures to extend the
flow path and increase the travel time of flows in the facility.
A. The watersheds in the municipality are shown on the Marcus Hook
Borough Watershed Map in Appendix A.78
(1) In addition to the watershed-specific requirements specified in
Table 174-17 below, the erosion and sedimentation control
(§ 174-12), the nonstructural project design (§ 174-13), the
infiltration (§ 174-14), the water quality (§ 174-15), and the stream
bank erosion (§ 174-16) requirements shall be implemented.
(2) Standards for managing runoff in the municipality for the two-, five-
, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year design storms are
shown in Table 174-17. Development sites in the municipality must
control proposed conditions runoff rates to existing conditions
runoff rates for the design storms in accordance with the table.
B. General. Proposed conditions rates of runoff from any regulated activity
shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff from existing
conditions for the design storms.
C. A copy of the official map at a reduced scale is included in Appendix A79
and is available for inspection at the municipal and County Planning
offices.
Table 174-17 [Delaware River*]
(*includes portions of Marcus Hook, Naamans and Delaware
Direct Watersheds)
Peak Rate Control Standards in the Delaware River Watershed
Proposed Condition
Design Storm Reduce to
Existing Condition
Design Storm
2-year 1-year
5-year 5-year
10-year 10-year
25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year
78.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
79.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 174-16 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-17
162:344
D. Off-site areas. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development
site are not subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable
peak runoff rates. On-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely
convey off-site flows through the development site.
E. Site areas. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area, only
the proposed impact area utilizing stormwater management measures
shall be subject to the peak rate control standards noted above.
Unimpacted areas for which the discharge point has not changed are
not subject to the peak rate control standards.
F. Hardship option for regulated activities less than one acre. There may
be certain instances, where the peak rate criteria are too restrictive for
a particular landowner or applicant. The existing drainage network in
some areas may be capable of safely transporting slight increases in
flows without causing a problem or increasing flows elsewhere. This
must be demonstrated as per § 174-17H below in order for the hardship
option to be considered. If an applicant or homeowner cannot meet the
stormwater standards due to lot conditions or if conformance would
become a hardship to an owner, the hardship option may be applied.
The applicant would have to plead his/her case to the governing body
with the final determination made by the municipality. Any landowners
pleading the "hardship option" will assume all liabilities that may arise
due to exercising this option. Cost or financial burden cannot be
considered as a hardship. The applicant may consider off-site
management controls or contributing to the Municipal Stormwater
Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund (§ 174-37) as long
as the stormwater management controls are within the same
subwatershed.
G. Downstream Hydraulic Capacity Analysis. Any downstream capacity
hydraulic analysis conducted in accordance with this chapter shall use
the following criteria for determining adequacy of accepting increased
peak flow rates:
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a two-year storm event within
their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the channels
from erosion. Velocities shall be based upon criteria and
methodologies acceptable to the municipality.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
increased twenty-five-year storm event runoff without creating any
increased hazard to persons or property.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other hydraulic facilities
which must pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be
designed in accordance with PADEP Chapter 105 regulations (if
applicable) and, at a minimum, pass the increased twenty-five-year
storm event runoff.
§ 174-17 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-17
162:345
§ 174-18. Calculation methodology.
(4) Water quality requirements defined in § 174-16 must be met.
(5) Postconstruction peak rates shall not exceed the existing peak
rates for the respective subarea.
H. Alternate Criteria for Redevelopment Sites. For redevelopment sites,
one of the following minimum design parameters shall be
accomplished, whichever is most appropriate for the given site
conditions as determined by municipality;
(1) Meet the full requirements specified by Table 308.1 and § 174-17A
through H; or
(2) Subject to municipal approval the applicant may reduce the total
impervious surface on the site by at least 20%; based upon a
comparison of existing impervious surface to proposed impervious
surface. In this case, calculations must be provided that show the
peak rate has not increased.
A. Stormwater runoff from all development sites with a drainage area of
greater than five acres shall be calculated using a generally accepted
calculation technique that is based on the NRCS Soil Cover Complex
Method. Table 174-18 summarizes acceptable computation methods.
The method selected by the design professional shall be based on the
individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site. The use of the Rational Method to estimate peak discharges for
drainage areas greater than five acres shall be permitted only upon
approval of the municipality.
Table 174-18
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for SWM Site Plan
Method Developed By Applicability
TR-20 (or
commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of
full hydrology computer
model is desirable or
necessary.
TR-55 (or
commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans where
limitations described in
TR-55
HEC-1/HEC-HMS US Army Corps of
engineers
Applicable where use of a
full hydrologic computer
model is desirable or
necessary.
§ 174-17 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-18
162:346
Table 174-18
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for SWM Site Plan
Method Developed By Applicability
Rational Method (or
commercial
computer package
based on Rational
Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For sites up to five acres,
or as approved by the
municipality and/or
municipal engineer.
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved
by the municipality and/or
municipal engineer.
B. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil Cover
Complex Method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the
various return period storms. Rainfall depths shall be according to
NOAA Atlas 14 values consistent with a partial duration series. When
stormwater calculations are performed for routing procedures or water
quality functions, the duration of rainfall shall be 24 hours.
C. The following criteria shall be used for peak rate runoff calculations:
(1) For development sites not considered redevelopment, the ground
cover used in determining the existing conditions flow rates shall
be as follows:
(a) Wooded sites shall use a ground cover of "woods in good
condition." Portions of a site having more than one viable tree
measuring a diameter at breast height (DBH) of six inches or
greater per 1,500 square feet shall be considered wooded
where such trees existed within three years of application.
(b) The undeveloped portion of the site including agriculture, bare
earth, and fallow ground shall be considered as "meadow in
good condition," unless the natural ground cover generates a
lower curve (CN) number or Rational "c" value (i.e., woods) as
listed in Tables F-1 or F-2 in Appendix F of this chapter.80
(2) For redevelopment sites, the ground cover used in determining the
existing conditions flow rates for the developed portion of the site
shall be based upon actual land cover conditions.
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times-of-concentration (duration) and
storm events with rainfall intensities obtained from NOAA Atlas 14
partial duration series estimates, or the latest version of the PennDOT
Drainage Manual (PDM Publication 584). Times-of-concentration shall
be calculated based on the methodology recommended in the
80.Editor's Note: Appendix F is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 174-18 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-18
162:347
§ 174-19. Other requirements.
respective model used. Times of concentration for channel and pipe
flow shall be computed using Manning's equation.
E. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the Soil Cover Complex Method shall be obtained from
Table F-1 in Appendix F of this chapter.81
F. Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use
in the Rational Method shall be obtained from Table F-2 in Appendix F
of this chapter.82
G. Hydraulic computations to determine the capacity of pipes, culverts,
and storm sewers shall be consistent with methods and computations
contained in the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic Design
Series Number 5 (Publication No. FHWA-NHI-01-020 HDS No. 5).
Hydraulic computations to determine the capacity of open channels
shall be consistent with methods and computations contained in the
Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic Engineering Circular
Number 15 (Publication No. FHWA-NHI-05-114 HEC 15). Values for
Manning's roughness coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table F-3
in Appendix F of the chapter.83
H. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using any
generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
I. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the
performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing the
design storm hydrograph through these facilities using an acceptable
method. The design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a
calculation method that produces a full hydrograph. The municipality
may approve the use of any generally accepted full hydrograph
approximation technique that shall use a total runoff volume that is
consistent with the volume from a method that produces a full
hydrograph.
A. All wet basin designs shall incorporate biologic controls consistent with
the West Nile Guidance found in Appendix H, PADEP document
363-0300-001 "Design Criteria — Wetlands Replacement/Monitoring,"
or contact the Pennsylvania State Cooperative Wetland Center
(www.wetlands.psu.edu/) or the Penn State Cooperative Extension
Office (www.extension.psu.edu/extmap.html).
B. Any stormwater basin required or regulated by this chapter designed to
store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen embankment shall be
81.Editor's Note: Appendix F is on file in the Borough offices.
82.Editor's Note: Appendix F is on file in the Borough offices.
83.Editor's Note: Appendix F is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 174-18 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-19
162:348
designed to provide an emergency spillway to handle flow up to and
including the one-hundred-year proposed conditions. The height of
embankment must provide a minimum recommended one foot of
freeboard above the maximum pool elevation computed when the
facility functions for the one-hundred-year proposed conditions inflow.
Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105
concerning dam safety. Chapter 105 may require the passing of storms
larger than one-hundred-year event.
C. Any drainage conveyance facility and/or channel not governed by
Chapter 105 regulations must be able to convey, without damage to the
drainage structure or roadway, runoff from the twenty-five-year storm
event. The larger events (fifty-year and one-hundred-year) must also be
safely conveyed in the direction of natural flow without creating
additional damage to any drainage structures, nearby structures, or
roadways.
D. Conveyance facilities to or exiting from stormwater management
facilities (i.e., detention basins) shall be designed to convey the design
flow to or from the facility.
E. Roadway crossings or structures located within designated floodplain
areas must be able to convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design
storm consistent with Federal Emergency Management Agency
National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management
requirements.
F. Any facility located within a PennDOT right-of-way must meet PennDOT
minimum design standards and permit submission requirements.
G. Adequate erosion protection and energy dissipation shall be provided
along all open channels and at all points of discharge. Design methods
shall be consistent with the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic
Engineering Circular Number 11 (Publication No. FHWA-IP-89-016)
and the PADEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program
Manual (Publication No. 363-2134-008).
§ 174-19 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-19
162:349

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 174-20. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter, the preliminary or final
approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of
any building or occupancy permit, or the commencement of any earth
disturbance activity may not proceed until the property owner, applicant,
or his/her agent has received written approval of a SWM site plan from the
municipality and an adequate erosion and sediment control plan review by
the Conservation District unless the project qualifies for an exemption in
§ 174-6.
§ 174-21. SWM site plan contents.
The SWM site plan shall consist of a general description of the project
including sequencing items described in § 174-13, calculations, maps, and
plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and
erosion and sediment control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of
the computations and erosion and sediment control plan shall refer to the
associated maps by title and date. All SWM site plan materials shall be
submitted to the municipality in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat,
and well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall not be accepted for
review and shall be returned to the applicant. The following items shall be
included in the SWM site plan, when applicable:
A. General.
(1) General description of the project, including those areas described
in § 174-13B.
(2) General description of proposed permanent stormwater
management techniques, including construction specifications of
the materials to be used for stormwater management facilities.
(3) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities.
(4) An erosion and sediment control plan, including all reviews and
letters of adequacy from the Conservation District.
(5) A general description of proposed nonpoint source pollution
controls.
(6) The SWM Site Plan Application and completed fee schedule form
and associated fee (Appendix C-1).84
(7) The SWM Site Plan Checklist (Appendix C-2).85
84.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Borough offices.
85.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 174-20 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-21
162:351
B. Maps. Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch
by thirty-six-inch sheets and/or shall be prepared in a form that meets
the requirements for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds
of Delaware County. If the SALDO has more stringent criteria than this
chapter, then the more stringent criteria shall apply. The contents of the
map(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipal
boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of slopes greater
than 25%, five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(3) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other waters of the
commonwealth within the project area.
(4) Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries, stream
buffers, existing drainage courses, areas of natural vegetation to be
preserved, and the total extent of the upstream area draining
through the site.
(5) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
and water lines within 50 feet of property lines.
(6) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
(7) Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of
impervious area that would be added.
(8) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(9) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 25%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(10) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(11) The date of submission.
(12) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale shall be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet.
(13) A north arrow.
(14) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(15) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(16) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
(17) Location of all open channels.
§ 174-21 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-21
162:352
(18) Overland drainage patterns and swales.
(19) A fifteen-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
management facilities that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way.
(20) The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities.
(21) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be
located off site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance
standards and design criteria specified in this chapter.
(22) A statement, signed by the applicant, acknowledging that any
revision to the approved SWM site plan must be approved by the
municipality, and that a revised erosion and sediment control plan
must be submitted to the Conservation District for a determination
of adequacy.
(23) The following signature block for the design engineer:
"I, (Design engineer), on this date (date of signature), hereby
certify that the SWM site plan meets all design standards and
criteria of the Marcus Hook Stormwater Management Ordinance."
[Note: the engineer's license stamp should be included here.]
C. Supplemental information to be submitted to the municipality:
(1) A written description of the following information shall be
submitted by the applicant and shall include:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project
designed in accordance with § 174-13.
(b) Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this chapter.
(c) Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during
and after development.
(d) Expected project time schedule.
(e) Development stages or project phases, if so proposed.
(f) An operations and maintenance plan in accordance with
§ 174-31 of this chapter.
(2) An erosion and sediment control plan.
(3) A description of the effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes
and peak flows) on adjacent properties and on any existing
municipal stormwater collection system that may receive runoff
from the project site.
§ 174-21 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-21
162:353
§ 174-22. Plan submission.
The municipality shall require receipt of a complete SWM site plan, as
specified in this chapter.
(4) A Declaration of Adequacy and Highway Occupancy Permit from
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) District
office when utilization of a PennDOT storm drainage system is
proposed.
D. Stormwater management facilities.
(1) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail.
(2) When infiltration measures such as seepage pits, beds, or trenches
are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic tank
infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
(3) All calculations, assumptions, loading ratios (guidelines presented
in the Pennsylvania BMP Manual), and criteria used in the design of
the stormwater management facilities must be shown.
A. Proof of application or documentation of required permit(s) or
approvals for the programs listed below shall be part of the plan, if
applicable:
(1) NPDES Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Construction
Activities.
(2) PADEP permits as needed.
(a) PADEP Joint Permit Application.
(b) Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management).86
(c) Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management).87
(3) PennDOT Highway Occupancy Permit.
(4) Any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations.
B. The plan shall be coordinated with the state and federal permit process
and the municipal SALDO review process. The process implementing
the provisions in this chapter is illustrated in Appendices D-1 and D-2.88
C. For projects that require SALDO approval, the SWM site plan shall be
submitted by the applicant as part of the preliminary plan submission
where applicable for the regulated activity.
86.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
87.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 106.
88.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 174-21 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-22
162:354
§ 174-23. Stormwater management (SWM) site plan review.
D. For regulated activities that do not require SALDO approval, see
§ 174-10, General requirements.
E. Five copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted by the applicant for
review in accordance with established criteria and procedures:
(1) Two copies to the municipality accompanied by the requisite
municipal review fee, as specified in this chapter.
(2) Two copies to the County Conservation District.
(3) One copy to the municipal engineer.
F. Any submissions to the agencies listed above that are found to be
incomplete shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the
applicant with a notification in writing of the specific manner in which
the submission is incomplete.
A. SWM plans shall be submitted to the municipality for review by the
municipal engineer for consistency with this chapter and the respective
Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan. Any plan found incomplete may
not be accepted for review and may be returned to the applicant. The
municipal engineer will review the SWM site plan for any subdivision or
land development against the municipal SALDO provisions not
otherwise superseded by this chapter.
B. The applicant shall respond to the Conservation District comments on
the SWM site plan prior to being considered for final approval by the
municipality.
C. For activities regulated by this chapter (§ 174-5), the municipal
engineer will notify the applicant and the municipality in writing, with a
copy to the Building Permit Officer, within 14 calendar days, whether
the SWM site plan is consistent with the stormwater management plan.
(1) If the municipal engineer determines that the SWM site plan is
consistent with the stormwater management ordinance, the
municipal engineer will forward a letter of consistency to the
municipality, who will then forward a copy to the applicant.
(2) If the municipal engineer determines that the SWM site plan is
inconsistent or noncompliant with the stormwater management
ordinance, the municipal engineer will forward a letter to the
municipality, with a copy to the applicant citing the reason(s) and
specific chapter sections for the inconsistency or noncompliance.
Inconsistency or noncompliance may be due to inadequate
information to make a reasonable judgment as to compliance with
the stormwater management plan. Any SWM site plans that are
inconsistent or noncompliant may be revised by the applicant and
resubmitted when consistent with this chapter.
§ 174-22 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-23
162:355
§ 174-24. Revision of plans.
D. For regulated activities under this chapter that require an NPDES
permit application, the applicant shall forward a copy of the municipal
engineer's letter stating that the SWM site plan is consistent with the
stormwater management ordinance to the Conservation District.
PADEP and the Conservation District may consider the municipal
engineer's review comments in determining whether to issue a permit.
E. The municipality will not grant preliminary or final approval to any
subdivision or land development for regulated activities specified in this
chapter if the SWM site plan has been found by the municipal engineer
to be inconsistent with the stormwater management ordinance. All
required permits from PADEP must be obtained prior to approval of any
subdivision or land development.
F. No building permits for any regulated activity specified in this chapter
will be approved by the municipality if the SWM site plan has been
found to be inconsistent with the stormwater management ordinance,
as determined by the municipal engineer and Conservation District, or
without considering the comments of the municipal engineer and
Conservation District. All required permits from PADEP must be
obtained prior to issuance of a building permit.
G. The applicant shall be responsible for completing record drawings of all
stormwater management facilities included in the approved SWM site
plan. The record drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with
the design plans shall be submitted to the municipal engineer for final
approval. In no case will the municipality approve the record drawings
until the municipality receives a copy of an approved declaration of
adequacy and/or highway occupancy permit from the PennDOT District
office, NPDES Permit, and any other applicable permits or approvals
from PADEP or the Conservation District. The above permits and
approvals must be based on the record drawings.
H. The municipality's approval of a SWM site plan shall be valid for a
period not to exceed five years commencing on the date that the
municipality signs the approved SWM site plan. If stormwater
management facilities included in the approved SWM site plan have not
been constructed, or if constructed, record drawings of these facilities
have not been approved within this five-year time period, then the
municipality may consider the SWM site plan inconsistent or
noncompliant and may revoke any and all permits. SWM site plans that
are determined to be inconsistent or noncompliant by the municipality
shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 174-25 of this chapter.
A. A revision to a submitted SWM site plan under review by the
municipality for a development site that involves the following shall
require a resubmission to the municipality of a revised SWM site plan
consistent with § 174-22 of this chapter and be subject to review as
specified in § 174-23 of this chapter:
§ 174-23 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-24
162:356
§ 174-25. Resubmission of inconsistent or noncompliant SWM site
plans.
An inconsistent or noncompliant SWM site plan may be resubmitted with
the revisions addressing the municipal engineer's concerns documented
in writing. It must be addressed to the municipality in accordance with
§ 174-22 of this chapter, distributed accordingly, and be subject to review
as specified in § 174-23 of this chapter. The applicable municipal review
and inspection fee must accompany a resubmission of an inconsistent or
noncompliant SWM site plan.
(1) Change in stormwater management facilities or techniques;
(2) Relocation or redesign of stormwater management facilities; or
(3) Is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on
the SWM site plan as determined by the municipal engineer.
B. A revision to an already approved or inconsistent or noncompliant SWM
site plan shall be submitted to the municipality, accompanied by the
applicable municipal review and inspection fee. A revision to a SWM
site plan for which a formal action has not been taken by the
municipality shall be submitted to the municipality accompanied by the
applicable municipal review and inspection fee.
§ 174-24 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-25
162:357

ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 174-26. Inspections.
§ 174-27. As-built plans; completion certificate; final inspections.
A. The municipal engineer or his municipal designee shall inspect all
phases of the installation of the permanent BMPs and/or stormwater
management facilities as deemed appropriate by the municipal
engineer.
B. During any stage of the work, if the municipal engineer or his municipal
designee determines that the permanent BMPs and/or stormwater
management facilities are not being installed in accordance with the
approved stormwater management plan, the municipality may revoke
any existing permits or other approvals and issue a cease and desist
order until a revised SWM site plan is submitted and approved, as
specified in this chapter, and until the deficiencies are corrected.
C. A final inspection of all BMPs and/or stormwater management facilities
shall be conducted by the municipal engineer or his municipal designee
to confirm compliance with the approved SWM site plan prior to the
issuance of any occupancy permit.
A. The developer shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan for activities
involving proposed impervious surfaces 1,000 square feet or greater
and for earth disturbances 5,000 square feet or greater. The as-built
plans and all explanation of any discrepancies with the construction
plans shall be submitted to the municipality within three months of the
completion of construction of the SWM BMPs.
B. As-built plans shall show the location and as-built conditions of all SWM
BMP structures and include the following information: impervious
surfaces included in the approved SWM site plan; topographic
contours; and existing, proposed, and built impervious surfaces shown
in the as-built drawings.
C. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a design professional verifying that all permanent SWM
BMPs have been constructed according to the approved plans and
specifications.
D. The municipality will review the as-built submission for consistency
with the approved SWM site plan as well as actual conditions at the
project site. After receipt of the completion certification by the
municipality, the municipality may conduct a final inspection.
§ 174-26 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-27
162:359

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 174-28. Municipality SWM site plan review and inspection fee.
Fees have been established by the municipality to defray plan review and
construction inspection costs incurred by the municipality. All fees shall be
paid by the applicant at the time of SWM site plan submission. A review and
inspection fee schedule has been established by resolution of the municipal
governing body based on the size of the regulated activity and based
on the municipality's costs for reviewing SWM site plans and conducting
inspections pursuant to § 174-26. The municipality shall periodically update
the review and inspection fee schedule to ensure that review costs are
adequately reimbursed.
§ 174-29. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall at a minimum cover:
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the SWM site plan by the municipality and the municipal
engineer.
C. The site inspections.
D. The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage
improvements during construction.
E. The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and drainage improvements presented in the SWM site plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 174-28 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-29
162:361

ARTICLE VII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 174-30. Performance guarantee.
§ 174-31. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance (O&M)
of stormwater controls and BMPs.
A. For all activities requiring submittal of a SWM site plan, the applicant
shall provide a financial guarantee to the municipality for the timely
installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
facilities as:
(1) Required by the approved SWM site plan equal to or greater than
the full construction cost of the required facilities; or
(2) The amount and method of payment provided for in the SALDO.
B. For other regulated activities, the municipality may require a financial
guarantee from the applicant.
A. The SWM site plan shall include a BMP operations and maintenance
plan that describes how the permanent (e.g., postconstruction)
stormwater controls and BMPs will be properly operated, inspected,
and maintained.
B. Establish access easements that include all significant stormwater
controls, conveyances, and BMPs, and indicate a fifteen-foot perimeter
area surrounding these features that will provide the municipality
sufficient ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way.
C. The following items shall be included in the stormwater control and
BMP operations and maintenance plan, as applicable:
(1) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements
for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Delaware
County, shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch
sheets. The contents of the maps(s) shall include, but not be limited
to:
(a) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater controls and BMPs;
(b) The location of the project site relative to highways, municipal
boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks;
(c) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others as
appropriate;
(d) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within
the project site area;
§ 174-30 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-31
162:363
(e) Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, and areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved;
(f) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines within 50 feet of property lines of the
project site;
(g) Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative
cover, including the type and amount of impervious area that
would be added;
(h) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings;
and
(i) Access easement boundaries.
(2) A description of how each permanent stormwater control and BMP
will be operated and maintained,
(3) The identity and contact information associated with the person(s)
responsible for operations and maintenance,
(4) The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of
the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the
plan, and
(5) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater controls and BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or
removed only after approval by the municipality.
D. The stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan for
the project site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing
operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater controls and
BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots that are to be separately owned
and in which streets, sewers, and other public improvements are to
be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater controls and BMPs
may, at the municipality's discretion, also be dedicated to and
maintained by the municipality;
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single owner or
if sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, the operations and maintenance of stormwater
controls and BMPs shall be the responsibility of the landowner.
E. The municipality will make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The municipality reserves
the right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater controls and BMPs.
§ 174-31 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-32
162:364
§ 174-32. Municipal review of stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
§ 174-33. Adherence to approved stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater control
and BMP required by an approved stormwater control and BMP operations
and maintenance plan or to allow the property to remain in a condition
which does not conform to an approved stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
§ 174-34. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately
owned stormwater controls and BMPs.
§ 174-35. Stormwater management easements.
A. The municipality will review the stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan for consistency with this chapter and
any permits issued by PADEP.
B. The municipality will notify the applicant in writing whether or not the
stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan is
approved.
C. The municipality will require an as-built plan per § 174-27 showing all
constructed stormwater controls and BMPs and an explanation of any
discrepancies with the approved operations and maintenance plan.
A. Prior to final approval of the site's SWM site plan (including plans for
private facilities constructed under the simplified method), the
applicant shall sign and record an operations and maintenance
agreement with the municipality covering all stormwater controls and
BMPs that are to be privately owned (refer to Appendix I89). The
maintenance agreement shall be transferred with transfer of ownership
in perpetuity. The agreement shall be substantially the same as the
agreement in Appendix I of this chapter.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of
all permanent stormwater controls and BMPs. The agreement shall be
subject to the review and approval of the municipality.
A. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the
municipality.
B. Stormwater management easements shall be provided to the
municipality by the applicant or property owner for access for
inspections and maintenance, the preservation of stormwater runoff
89.Editor's Note: Appendix I is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 174-32 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-35
162:365
§ 174-36. Recording of approved stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan and related agreements.
§ 174-37. Municipal Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and
Maintenance Fund.
conveyance, infiltration, and detention areas, and for other stormwater
controls. The purpose of the easement shall be specified in any
agreement under § 174-34.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent stormwater controls and
BMPs will be placed, constructed, implemented, or permanently
maintained, as described in the stormwater control and BMP operations
and maintenance plan, shall record the following documents in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds for Delaware County within 15 days of
approval of the stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan by the municipality:
(1) The operations and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof;
(2) Operations and maintenance agreements under § 174-34; and
(3) Easements under § 174-35.
B. The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of failure on the part of the owner to comply
with this section.
A. Persons installing stormwater controls or BMPs shall be required to pay
a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater Control and BMP
Operation and Maintenance Fund to help defray costs of periodic
inspections and maintenance expenses. The amount of the deposit shall
be determined as follows:
(1) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be privately owned and
maintained, the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections
performed by the municipality, as estimated by the municipal
engineer, for a period of 10 years. This is to be paid in a manner
specified by the municipality. After that period of time, inspections
will be performed at the expense of the municipality.
(2) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be owned and maintained by
the municipality, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for
maintenance and inspections for 10 years. The municipality will
establish the estimated costs utilizing information submitted by the
applicant.
(3) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to present
worth of the annual series values. The municipality shall determine
the present worth equivalents, which shall be subject to the
approval of the governing body.
§ 174-35 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-37
162:366
B. If a stormwater control or BMP is proposed that also serves as a
recreational facility (e.g., ball field or lake), the municipality may
reduce or waive the amount of the maintenance fund deposit based
upon the value of the land for public recreational purpose.
C. If at some future time, a stormwater control or BMP (whether publicly
or privately owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers
or other storage facility, the unused portion of the maintenance fund
deposit will be applied to the cost of abandoning or demolishing the
facility and connecting to the storm sewer system or other facility. Any
amount of the deposit remaining after the costs of abandonment or
demolition will be used for inspection, maintenance, and operation of
the receiving stormwater management system.
D. If stormwater controls or BMPs are accepted by the municipality for
dedication, the municipality may require persons installing stormwater
controls or BMPs to pay a specified amount to the Municipal
Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund to help
defray costs of operations and maintenance activities. The amount may
be determined as follows:
(1) The amount shall cover the estimated costs for operations and
maintenance for 10 years, as determined by the municipality.
(2) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
E. If a stormwater control or BMP is proposed that also serves as a
recreational facility (e.g., ball field or lake), the municipality may adjust
the amount due accordingly.
F. The municipality may require applicants to pay a fee to the Municipal
Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund to
cover long-term maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs.
G. The municipality may require applicants to pay a fee to the Municipal
Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund to
cover stormwater-related problems which may arise from the land
development and earth disturbance.
§ 174-37 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-37
162:367

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 174-38. Prohibited discharges.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the waters of this commonwealth
is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, stormwater discharges into the
municipality's separate storm sewer system that are not composed
entirely of stormwater, except as provided in Subsection C below, and
discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from fire fighting activities;
(2) Potable water sources including water line and fire hydrant
flushings;
(3) Irrigation drainage;
(4) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds);
(5) Air conditioning condensate;
(6) Water from individual residential car washing;
(7) Springs and water from crawl space pumps;
(8) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains;
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(10) Lawn watering;
(11) Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used;
(12) Uncontaminated groundwater;
(13) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
D. In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges
identified in § 174-38C significantly contribute to pollution of waters of
the commonwealth, or is so notified by PADEP, the municipality will
notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
§ 174-38 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-38
162:369
§ 174-39. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 174-38C
above:
§ 174-40. Roof drains and sump pumps.
§ 174-41. Alteration of BMPs.
E. Upon notice provided by the municipality under § 174-38D, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
municipality, to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
F. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, wash water entering the separate storm sewer system, and
any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks.
A. Roof drains and sump pumps shall not be connected to sanitary sewers.
B. Roof drains and sump pumps shall not be connected to streets, storm
sewers, or roadside ditches except on a case by case basis as
determined by the municipality.
C. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration areas or
vegetative BMPs to the maximum extent practicable where
advantageous to do so.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing
stormwater control or BMP unless it is part of an approved
maintenance program without the written approval of the municipality.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into
a stormwater control or BMP or within a drainage easement that would
limit or alter the functioning of the stormwater control or BMP without
the written approval of the municipality.
§ 174-38 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-41
162:370
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 174-42. Right-of-entry.
§ 174-43. Public nuisance.
§ 174-44. Enforcement generally.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operation and maintenance of the stormwater controls or
BMPs in regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on or in any stormwater control or BMP in the
municipality such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/
or sampling of the discharges from such stormwater control or BMP.
C. If the property owner or representative does not grant access to the
municipality within 24 hours of notification, it will be a violation of this
chapter.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the municipality may
order compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such
notice may, without limitation, require the following remedies:
(1) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) Elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) Abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) Implementation of stormwater controls and BMPs; and
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
§ 174-42 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-44
162:371
§ 174-45. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
§ 174-46. Violations and penalties.
by the municipality or designee, and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Any building, land development, or other permit or approval issued by
the municipality may be suspended or revoked by the municipality for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other law or
regulation applicable to the regulated activity;
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development that constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life, health, or property of
others.
B. Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit and at the request of the
applicant, the governing body shall schedule a hearing to discuss the
noncompliance if there is no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property. The expense of a hearing shall be the applicant's
responsibility.
C. A suspended permit or approval may be reinstated by the municipality
when:
(1) The municipal engineer or designee has inspected and approved
the corrections to the stormwater controls and BMPs or the
elimination of the hazard or nuisance; and/or
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
D. A permit or approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot
be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit in accordance
with this chapter.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine as established by the municipality for each violation, recoverable
with costs. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense and the applicable fines are cumulative.
B. In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
§ 174-44 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-46
162:372
§ 174-47. Notification.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, and the municipality chooses to pursue enforcement action,
the municipality will provide written notification of the violation. Such
notification will state the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time
limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply within the time
specified will subject such person to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
All such penalties will be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the
municipality from pursuing any and all remedies. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the real property on which any regulated
activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred to comply with
the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 174-48. Enforcement.
The municipal governing body is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding compliance
with the SWM site plan shall be the responsibility of the municipality or its
designee.
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. A set of design plans approved by the municipality shall be on file and
available for viewing at the site throughout the duration of the
construction activity. Periodic inspections may be made by the
municipality or its designee during construction.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to undertake
any regulated activity under § 174-5 on any property except as provided
for in the approved SWM site plan and pursuant to the requirements of
this chapter. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control
structure required by the SWM site plan pursuant to this chapter or to
allow the property to remain in a condition that does not conform to the
approved SWM site plan.
C. At the completion of the project and as a prerequisite for the release of
the performance guarantee, the owner or his representatives shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor, or other qualified person verifying that all stormwater
facilities have been constructed according to the plans and
specifications and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of as-built (record) drawings per § 174-27.
D. After receipt of the certification by the municipality, a final inspection
shall be conducted by the municipality or its designee to certify
compliance with this chapter.
§ 174-46 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-48
162:373
§ 174-49. Appeals.
E. An occupancy permit will not be issued unless the certification of
completion pursuant to § 174-48C(1) has been secured. The occupancy
permit shall be required for each lot owner and/or applicant for all
subdivisions and land developments in the municipality.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee
relevant to the provision of this chapter may appeal to the
municipality's governing body within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality's governing
body relevant to the provision of this chapter may appeal to the County
Court of Common Pleas in the County where the activity has taken
place within 30 days of the municipal decision.
§ 174-48 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 174-49
162:374
Chapter 175
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 51.
Littering — See Ch. 121.
Zoning — See Ch. 196.
§ 174-49 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 174-49
162:375

ARTICLE I
Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters
[Adopted 7-6-1942 by Ord. No. 424, approved 7-6-1942]
§ 175-1. Construction by property owner.
Every person, which shall include also firms and corporations, owning
ground fronting or abutting upon any street, highway, road, avenue or
alley of the Borough of Marcus Hook which is or shall be brought to
the established grade, shall grade and pave the ground and construct
sidewalks, curbs and gutters, or any or all of them, in accordance with the
provisions of this article and with the established lines and grades to be
furnished by the Borough Engineer, within 30 days after receipt of notice so
to do, as provided in § 175-4, or after service of such notice in the manner
hereinafter provided.
§ 175-2. Maintenance and repairs. [Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-5, approved 9-3-2013]
It shall be the duty of all owners of ground fronting or abutting on any
street, highway, road, avenue or alley of the Borough of Marcus Hook to
keep their sidewalks in good repair and passable condition, whether such
sidewalks are at the established grade or not, and when notified to do
so, they shall make all necessary grading, paving, repaving and/or repairs
of sidewalks and/or the construction of curbs and/or gutters within 30
days after receipt of notice as required by § 175-4 or after the service of
such notice in the manner hereinafter stated; provided, further, that when
sidewalks, curbs or gutters are in a dangerous condition they shall be
temporarily repaired and rendered safe within 24 hours after the receipt
of notice to that effect or after the service of such notice in the manner
hereinafter provided, which notice may be signed by any member of the
Highway Committee of the Borough Council, the Code Enforcement Officer
or the Building Code Official, and upon failure of the owner or owners to
comply with the notice, the said Committee, Code Enforcement Officer or
Building Code Official shall have the necessary temporary repairs made,
and the proper Borough authorities shall collect the costs of the work and
the materials from such owner or owners in the manner provided by law.
The phrase "good repair" of all sidewalks and curbs within the Borough of
Marcus Hook shall include the removal of any grass, weeds, trash, debris,
refuse or foliage located and/or growing in the street or curb joint abutting
a public street. Further, all owners or occupants of properties within the
Borough are prohibited from placing or dumping the clippings of grass,
foliage, bushes, or trees, as well as trash and debris, refuse, etc., into a
public street.
§ 175-3. Reconstruction to conform to lines and grades.
When any street is or shall be brought to the established grade and it
is found that the sidewalks, curbs and gutters already constructed do
not conform to the established grade or width or to the requirements of
§ 175-1 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 175-3
162:377
this article, it shall be the duty of the owner or owners of the ground
fronting or abutting on such sidewalks or any such street, highway, road,
avenue or alley to repave or correct such sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters in
accordance with the proper lines and grades and with the provisions of this
article within 30 days after the receipt of notice to that effect or after the
service of such notice, served as hereinafter provided.
§ 175-4. Service of notice.
All notices directing, requiring and/or regulating the grading, paving,
correcting or repairing of sidewalks or the construction, correction or
repairing of curbs and/or gutters shall be printed or written and shall
specify the width to be paved and the location of such proposed sidewalk.
All such notices shall be served upon the owner or owners of the premises
to which such notice refers, if such owner or owners are residents of the
Borough of Marcus Hook. If the owner or owners are not such resident or
residents, then the notice may be served upon the agent or tenant of the
owner or owners or upon the occupant of such premises, if any. If the owner
or owners have no agent or tenant or there is no occupier of such premises,
then service shall be by posting the said printed or written notice upon the
premises.
§ 175-5. Specifications for sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
A. Materials. Said paving and/or repaving, curbing and/or recurbing,
guttering and/or reguttering shall be constructed of cement-concrete or
of such other material as shall meet with the approval of the Borough
Council.
B. Curbs.
(1) Stone. This type of curbing shall consist of granite or other
approved stone. It shall be not less than five inches in width at the
top, not less than 22 inches in depth and not more than eight feet
nor less than four feet in length. The bottom of the stone curb
preferably should be two inches wider than the top. The top surface
shall be tool-dressed and with a one-fourth-inch bevel, the ends of
the curb cut square for the full depth and width of the stone, and
the front face of the curb tool-dressed to not less than three inches
below the top. All curved curbing where the radius exceeds five
feet shall be cut and dressed as specified for straight stone curbing,
except that the width at the top shall be six inches, the width at the
bottom eight inches and the back face vertical and the front face on
a batter. All stone curb radii under five feet shall be cast as a
cornerstone where the top and front face only shall be tool-dressed
as specified for straight curbing. All joints on stone curbing shall be
true and straight and not exceed 1/4 inch in width for a distance of
12 inches below the top and may be wider from this point to the
bottom. All joints shall be filled and pointed with a stiff mortar
composed of one part of portland cement and two parts of approved
§ 175-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 175-5
162:378
sand. When indicated or directed, drainage openings shall be made
through the stone curbing at the elevation and of the size required.
Any curbing required crossing the entrance to an alley, driveway
or private entranceway shall have the top set two inches above the
outside edge or gutter line of the finished roadway pavement.
(2) Cement-concrete. These shall be of monolithic construction with a
width of six inches at the top, eight inches at the bottom and with a
depth of 20 inches and each section 10 feet in length, excepting
where necessary to make closures, where the minimum length may
be four feet. The back face shall be vertical. Any curbing required
crossing the entrance to an alley, driveway or private entranceway
shall have the top finished within two inches above the outside
edge or gutter line of the finished roadway pavement. When
indicated or directed, drainage openings shall be made through the
cement-concrete curb at the elevation and of the size required. The
proportion of portland cement, clean sharp sand and three-fourthsinch
crushed pebbles or stone used in the curbing shall be 1:2:4,
volumetric measuring. When the temperature of the air falls below
40° F., calcium chloride must be added to the mix to ensure quick
setup. Its use shall be a proportion not exceeding 4% of the cement
used. All curb returns at street intersections shall be circular and
have a radius not less than equal to the least width of the sidewalk
area of such intersecting streets. All joints are to be filled with bar
sand upon withdrawal of forms and templates, excepting that for
every fourth or fifth joint, the filler shall be of an approved
bituminous material not less than 3/8 of an inch in thickness.
(3) Excavation. Excavation for curb subgrade shall be at a point not
less than 20 inches from the top of the finished curb unless
otherwise specified by the Borough Engineer, in which case it may
be required that this excavation be increased a further depth of six
inches and refilled with a tamped layer or stone, gravel, rubble or
cinders due to unsuitable conditions. Backfilling around all curb
construction shall be hand-tamped and grass plots and other
adjacent sidewalk areas brought to a level not lower than the top of
the curb.
(4) Forms. These shall be of such material and type as will meet with
the approval of the Borough Engineer and shall not be withdrawn
within 24 hours from the pouring of the concrete.
(5) Mixing. The cement-concrete may be mixed on the site in such
manner and by such method as shall meet with the approval of the
Borough Engineer or may be delivered on the job from a central
mixing plant if the Engineer so approves.
(6) Finishing. All finishing of curbs shall be attained by the application
of a one-to-two mortar in all voids exposed upon withdrawal of
forms, and finally by rubbing in a manner to be approved by the
Borough Engineer. At no time will a finish be permitted by the
§ 175-5 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 175-5
162:379
application of a mortar coating on the poured or tooled surfaces of
the curb. The outer edge of the top of the curb shall have a radius
of not less than 3/4 of an inch while all other edges shall have a
radius of 1/4 of an inch.
C. Sidewalks.
(1) Excavation. The subgrade shall be excavated to a depth of four
inches below and parallel to the top of the finished pavement and
well compacted. If, after excavation, the subgrade is found to be of
unsuitable material, then the Borough Engineer may, at his
discretion, require additional excavation to a depth of not less than
six inches and its replacement with cinders or rubble well
compacted.
(2) Cement-concrete. The ingredients for cement-concrete sidewalks
shall be of the same proportion as provided for under curbs.90 The
concrete may be job-mixed or supplied from a central mixing plant,
and each block of sidewalk shall be jointed every four feet, with
every fourth joint opened to the subgrade and filled with an
approved bituminous material upon withdrawal of forms and
templates. This bituminous filler shall be not less than 3/8 of an
inch in thickness. At street corners the sidewalk tangent shall be
extended each way across grass plots to the curved curb. All
sidewalks shall have a slope of 1/4 inch per foot toward the curb.
All sidewalks shall be of monolithic construction, and finishing to
be by screeding, floating and brushing.
D. Driveways. All private driveways constructed across the sidewalk area
shall have the finished grade meet the finished grade of the sidewalk,
with the ramp or approach beginning two inches above the gutter line
of the roadway pavement and terminating at the edge of the sidewalk
nearest to the curb. Curb returns are not required for this type of
driveway approach.
E. Gutters. Cement-concrete gutters shall be not less than six inches in
depth, 20 inches in width and jointed where possible every 10 feet.
These shall be constructed separately from the curbs, and the curb
surface contacting the gutter depth shall have two coats of asphalt
paint prior to replacement of cement-concete in the gutter. The
proportion of cement-concrete shall be one part of portland cement,
two parts of clean sharp sand and 3 1/2 parts of clean three-fourthsinch
commercial stone or crushed pebbles, volumetric measuring. All
joints shall be filled with an approved bituminous material upon
withdrawal of forms and templates and finishing to be by screeding,
floating and brushing.
F. Relevant provisions. Excavating, laying, constructing, form work,
jointing, edging and finishing of all curbs, sidewalks, driveways and
90.Editor's Note: See Subsection B(2) of this section.
§ 175-5 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 175-5
162:380
§ 175-6. Sidewalk width.
The paved width of all sidewalks in said Borough shall not be less than four
feet. The width of the paved portion of the sidewalk area and the location
thereof shall be as directed by resolution of the Borough Council, and those
parts not occupied by the paving shall be brought to the official Borough
grade, and no unpaved area between the sidewalk and the back face of the
curb shall be less than 24 inches in width.
§ 175-7. Permit required for sidewalk construction. [Amended
9-3-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-5, approved 9-3-2013]
No sidewalk shall be constructed or reconstructed nor any grading, paving
or repaving done to the same and no gutters or curbs shall be constructed
or corrected until the owner or owners of the ground, or the person having
charge of the work, shall first have obtained a permit for the same from
the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough. The permit shall be placed,
by the party applying for the same, in the hands of the Borough Engineer,
who shall furnish the said person with the established lines and grades,
for which services he shall receive his proper charge from the Borough
Council, provided that if, in the judgment of the Borough Engineer, such
construction or reconstruction, grading, paving, repaving or repairing shall
be inexpedient or dangerous because of the existing grade of the street or
of the contiguous sidewalk, such permit shall not issue, or if issued, shall
be confiscated by the Borough Engineer and returned to the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer for cancellation and the cost thereof shall be returned
to the applicant. The cost of each permit shall be determined by resolution
of the Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook and may, from time to time,
be changed by resolution. No permit shall be valid after 60 days from date
of issue.
§ 175-8. Conformity to specifications.
Any owner, person, firm or corporation engaging in construction or
reconstruction of sidewalks, curbs or gutters on the streets, highways,
roads, avenues or alleys of the Borough of Marcus Hook shall be fully bound
by the provisions and specifications of this article, as fully as if upon notice
to do such work as hereinbefore provided.
gutters shall be according to the best practice and methods and in
every case such as will meet with the approval of the Borough Engineer.
Every provision separately noted under curbs, sidewalks, driveways or
gutters and applying under each of another classification shall be with
as full force and effect as if set out at length in each such classification
of curbs, sidewalks, driveways and gutters. Any materials, practices
and methods to be employed in these classifications and not now
contemplated in these specifications may be put into effect or regulated
by the Borough Engineer, with the approval of the Chairman of the
Highway Committee.
§ 175-5 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 175-9
162:381
§ 175-9. Performance of work by Borough; lien for costs.
If any person or persons shall neglect or refuse to grade, pave, repave or
repair any sidewalk or to construct, correct or repair any curb or gutter
or to keep the same in repair pursuant to notice given as above mentioned
for the space of 30 days after receipt of notice as required by this article
or service of the same as hereinbefore provided, the Borough Council shall
forthwith cause such grading, paving, repaving and repairing of sidewalks
and such constructing, correcting and repairing of curbs and gutters to be
done at the cost of the owner or owners of the ground fronting or abutting
the same, and the proper Borough authorities shall collect the cost of same,
with 10% additional as provided by law, from such owner or owners, by
action in assumpsit or by filing a municipal lien against the said property.
§ 175-10. Sidewalk obstructions.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or owners of any property to place,
allow or maintain any encroachment or obstructions upon the sidewalk area
fronting or abutting such property, such as a porch, building extension,
steps, railings, fences, hedges or other shrubbery. Excavations for a
basement or cellar door at grade, with protecting grating or railing, may
be permitted by the Borough Council upon application duly made, which
said application shall specifically set forth the construction desired and the
manner in which the same will be maintained. It shall also be unlawful to
place or allow any awning to be constructed, hung or maintained over a
sidewalk area at a height less than seven feet above the sidewalk grade. It
shall also be unlawful to permit the branches of any tree in the sidewalk
area to be at a height less than nine feet above the sidewalk area, except
that in the case of young trees, the branches may be permitted to extend
over the sidewalk area a distance of not more than two feet from the truck
of the tree.
§ 175-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
§ 175-9 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 175-11
162:382
ARTICLE II
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 4-3-1961 by Ord. No. 619, approved 4-3-1961]
§ 175-12. Time for removal.
It shall be unlawful and shall be a nuisance to permit snow to remain on
any sidewalk or walkways in the Borough of Marcus Hook for a period of 24
hours after the snow has ceased to fall.
§ 175-13. Removal by owners or occupants.
All owners and/or occupiers of any lot or building and lot abutting any street
or lane in the Borough of Marcus Hook shall remove from the sidewalk
or walkway in front of said premises all snow, ice, slush or any remains
whatsoever of snow or sleet within 24 hours after the same has ceased to
fall.
§ 175-14. Removal by Borough; costs.
In any and all cases were the owners and/or occupiers as aforesaid shall
fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provisions of this article within
24 hours after snow has ceased to fall, then the Borough authorities may
proceed without further notice immediately to clear all snow and/or ice
and slush from the sidewalk of such properties and to collect the expenses
thereof, with any additional amount allowed by law, from such owner and/or
occupier, as the case may be, which may be in addition to any fine or penalty
imposed under this article.
§ 175-15. Violations of penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
§ 175-12 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 175-15
162:383

ARTICLE III
Excavations in Streets and Sidewalks
[Adopted 6-2-1969 by Ord. No. 659, approved 6-2-1969]
§ 175-16. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, firm, company, association
or corporation to open or to excavate any street, road, lane, alley, sidewalk,
curb, highway or footway in the Borough of Marcus Hook without first
procuring a permit from the Borough Secretary.
§ 175-17. Application for permit.
Any person, partnership, firm, company, association or corporation who
shall desire to make any opening or excavation in any of the streets, roads,
lanes, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, highways or footways in the Borough of
Marcus Hook shall make application to the Borough Secretary in writing for
the purpose. Such application shall be made upon blanks to be furnished by
the Borough and shall set forth the name of the applicant, the exact location
of the proposed opening or excavation and the approximate size or depth
thereof, and shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that the
work shall be done in full compliance with the ordinances and regulations
of the Borough and the laws of the commonwealth in relation thereto and
that the applicant shall well and truly save, defend and keep harmless the
Borough from and indemnify it against any and all actions, suits, demands,
payments, costs and charges for or by reason of the proposed opening or
excavation and all damages to persons or property resulting in any manner
therefrom or occurring in the prosecution of the work connected therewith
or from any other matter, cause or thing relating thereto.
§ 175-18. Permit fees.
Before any permit shall be issued to open or to excavate any street, road,
lane, alley, sidewalk, curbing, highway or footway in the Borough, the
applicant shall pay to the Borough Secretary a permit fee as follows:91
A. Sidewalk and curb openings and excavations: a permit fee of $30 per
opening, plus $1 for each additional square foot of trench required over
and above 50 square feet. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Res. No. R-94-1,
approved 1-3-1994]
B. Street openings and excavations: a permit fee of $50 per opening, plus
$1 for each additional square foot of trench required over and above 50
square feet. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Res. No. R-94-1, approved
1-3-1994]
C. Where two or more separate openings are made, the applicant shall be
required to pay permit fees for each of said openings.
91.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 175-16 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 175-19
162:385
§ 175-19. Refilling of excavations.
Any applicant who shall make an opening or excavation as provided in
this article shall promptly, thoroughly and completely refill the opening or
excavation, puddling and ramming so as to prevent any settling thereafter,
and shall restore the surface to the same condition as it was before the
opening or excavation, and such opening or excavation and the restoration
thereof shall be in accordance with the terms of this article and with the
regulations which have been and shall be adopted from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council, and a copy of which said regulations
shall be given to each applicant at the time of making application for a
permit hereunder, and which are hereby adopted as specifications of the
Borough for restoration of surfaces, and as restored, the surface shall
conform to the proper grade and be of the same surface covering as the
area immediately adjoining the opening or excavation. If within three years
after the restoration of the surface as herein provided, defects shall appear
therein resulting from defective backfilling or resurfacing by the applicant,
the applicant shall reimburse the Borough for the cost of all necessary
repairs to the permanent paving or curbing.
§ 175-20. Supervision of work.
All other work in connection with openings in any street, including
excavation, protection, refilling and temporary paving, shall be done by
the applicant at his expense, and all such work shall be subject to the
provisions of this article and the regulations pertaining thereto and to the
supervision and approval of the Highway Chairman or Highway Foreman of
the Borough.
§ 175-21. Inspections.
The Highway Chairman or Highway Foreman of the Borough shall have the
authority and the duty to inspect any and all openings or excavations to
determine that a permit for said opening or excavation has been issued,
that the opening or excavation complies with the application for the permit
and that the opening or excavation, the backfilling and the resurfacing
thereof have been done in accordance with the terms of this article and the
regulations pertaining thereto.
§ 175-22. Emergencies.
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe,
line, construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning
or responsible for such pipe, line, construction or apparatus to commence
an excavation to remedy such condition before securing a permit, provided
that application for a permit shall be made immediately and not later
than the next business day thereafter and that all other provisions of this
article are fully complied with. If any such emergency condition shall not be
immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for such pipe,
line, construction or apparatus, the Borough Secretary, after such notice as
§ 175-19 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 175-22
162:386
he shall deem necessary under the circumstances of the particular case,
shall proceed to do the work necessary and required by such emergency
and charge the same on the basis of cost plus 20% to such owner or person.
§ 175-23. Notice of impending paving; opening new pavement.
The Borough Secretary shall give timely notice to all persons owning
property abutting on any street within the Borough about to be paved or
improved, and to all public utility companies operating in the Borough,
and all such persons and utility companies shall make all water, gas or
sewer connections as well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate
excavation of the said street within 30 days from the giving of such notice,
unless such time is extended in writing, for cause shown, by the Borough
Secretary. New paving shall not be opened for a period of five years after
the completion thereof, except in case of emergency, the existence of which
emergency and the necessity for the opening of such paving to be
determined by the Borough Secretary. If it is sought to excavate upon or
open a street within five years after the completion of the paving thereof
for any other reason than an emergency as above stated, the applicant shall
make written application to the Borough Council and a permit for such
opening shall only be issued after express approval of Council.
§ 175-24. New water or gas mains or extensions.
No new water or gas main shall hereafter be laid or constructed and no
existing water or gas main shall be extended in any of the streets of the
Borough until the exact location thereof and the plan therefor shall have
been first approved by the Borough Council.
§ 175-25. Payment for work done by Borough.
Payment for all work done by the Borough under the provisions hereof shall
be made by the person made liable therefor under the provisions hereof
within 30 days after a bill therefor is sent to such person by the Borough.
Upon failure to pay such charges within such time, the same shall be
collectible by the Borough in the manner provided by law for the collection
of municipal claims.
§ 175-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approve 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
§ 175-27. Revising rules and fees.
Borough Council may, from time to time, by resolution, fix the amount
of permit fees to be charged under this article and make such rules and
regulations pertaining to openings and excavations hereunder as it may
deem necessary.
§ 175-22 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 175-27
162:387

ARTICLE IV
Overhead Banners and Signs
[Adopted 8-3-1998 by Res. No. R-98-8, approved 8-3-1998]
§ 175-28. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all overhead signs and banners
in the Borough of Marcus Hook, and duly issued permits shall constitute the
inclusion of the permitted sign under the provisions of this article.
§ 175-29. Issuance of permits.
Permits for overhead signs and banners shall be issued by the Borough
Zoning Officer only in accord with this Resolution and all applicable zoning
requirements.
§ 175-30. Standards.
A. As required by department policy, overhead signs and banners shall
conform to the following, and permits for such signs shall include the
information necessary to document compliance with the same:
(1) Location: SR number and segment/offset.
(2) Vertical clearance above the roadway: minimum of 17 feet and six
inches.
(3) Size of banner: as specified on permit.
(4) Description of activity: must constitute a national, state, regional or
local function or nonprofit activity sponsored by a political
subdivision or agency thereof or nonprofit organization recognized
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(5) Message: no more than 20% of the message shall relate to naming
or advertising a commercial product, enterprise, business or
company, regardless of whether such entity is sponsoring the
activity or banner installation.
(6) Duration of display: approximate dates of installation or removal
not to exceed 30 days.
(7) The banner will be removed within five days or less from the ending
date of the event for which the banner was displayed.
(8) The banner shall be installed under the supervision and control of
the Borough on permanent cables at locations approved by and in
accord with specifications provided by the Borough.
(9) Traffic control shall be performed in accord with the most current
Department Publication 203.
§ 175-28 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 175-30
162:389
§ 175-31. Notification of Department of Transportation.
Upon the issuance of any permit pursuant to this Resolution, the Borough
Zoning Officer shall promptly forward a copy of the permit to the District
Office of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
§ 175-32. Responsibility and liability.
By applying for a permit, the applicant assumes full responsibility for
erecting, maintaining and removing any such sign or banner and all liability
for damages occurring to any person or property arising from any act of
omission associated with the sign or banner, and a statement to that effect
shall be included on the application for the permit.
B. The dates of installation, duration and removal, as well as the size, the
message, event and/or organization will vary, but in all cases the
requirements of this Resolution will be satisfied.
§ 175-30 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 175-32
162:390
Chapter 178
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 34. Zoning — See Ch. 196.
§ 178-1. Recognition of applicability of county regulations.
[Amended 11-7-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-4, approved 11-7-2016]
The Borough Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook recognizes the
Delaware County Land Development and Subdivision Ordinance of 2016,
and thereafter amended, has legal jurisdiction and is being enforced within
the incorporated boundaries of Marcus Hook, Delaware County.92
§ 178-2. Adoption by reference of county fee schedule.
The Borough of Marcus Hook adopts by reference Delaware County
Resolution 7601 as amended in 1985, and further amended in 1989, known
as the "Delaware County Fee Schedule for Subdivision and Land
Development Reviews," to help defray the cost of subdivision and land
development reviews by the Borough of Marcus Hook, to remain applicable
and consistent with the Delaware County Fee Schedule as currently written
and as modified or amended, by authority of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code of 1968, Act 247, as amended by Act 194 of 1974 and Act
170 of 1988.
Chapter 180
TAXATION
92.Editor's Note: A preamble to this chapter stated that the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code establishes the basic authority for the exercise of municipal land use
controls by Pennsylvania municipalities; that the Planning Code enables local
governments to govern community development through zoning and subdivision and land
development ordinances; that Article V, Section 502 of the Planning Code (53 P.S.
§ 10502), provides for the governing bodies of counties to enact subdivision and land
development ordinances having jurisdiction in cities, boroughs, incorporated towns and
townships within the county which have no such ordinances in effect at the time a
subdivision of land development ordinance is introduced in the county; that such an
ordinance had been adopted by Delaware County in 1978 and amended in 1981; and that
Delaware County had adopted a resolution establishing a fee schedule for land
development and subdivision review.
§ 175-32 TAXATION § 178-2
180:391

ARTICLE I
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 1-2-1967 by Ord. No. 644, approved 1-2-1967; amended in
its entirety 12-3-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-5, approved 12-3-2007]
§ 180-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation, as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited-liability
corporation, limited-liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Marcus Hook.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 180-2 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 180-2. Levy of tax.
§ 180-1 TAXATION § 180-2
180:393
§ 180-3. Exemption and refunds.
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging
in an occupation with a primary place of employment within the
Borough of Marcus Hook during the tax year. Each natural person who
exercises such privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall
pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata
basis, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. This tax may be used solely for the following purposes as the same may
be allocated by the Borough of Marcus Hook from time to time:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes; or
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85,
Subchapter F93 (relating to homestead property exclusion).
C. The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the tax for emergency services.
D. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore
levied by the political subdivision.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
93.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8581 et seq.
§ 180-2 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 180-3
180:394
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States
Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine
Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States
Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of
all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption from the tax for
a given calendar year, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption from the tax for a given
calendar year becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year
under Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
§ 180-3 TAXATION § 180-3
180:395
§ 180-4. Duty of employers to collect.
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Borough of Marcus Hook, in consultation with the
Collector and DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of
refund claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for
exemption, which procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the
general municipal law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest
on overpayments. Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or
75 days after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax for
the last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be
subject to interest. No refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a
calendar year that do not exceed $1. The Borough of Marcus Hook or
the Collector shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide
refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his employ, whether
said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and whether or not
all such services are performed within the political subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll-period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section, For purposes of this
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
§ 180-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 180-4
180:396
§ 180-5. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him to an
employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer shall be
responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had been
originally levied against the employer.
§ 180-6. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer, and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of Subsection B
of § 180-3 of this article and this section and remits the amount so
withheld in accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 180-4 TAXATION § 180-7
180:397
§ 180-7. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 180-8. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 180-9. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his tax is not paid, the political subdivision shall
have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee for
the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 180-10. Duty of Collector; administration and enforcement of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires that the
person work in more than one political subdivision during a payroll
period, the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in
the following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his
principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
§ 180-7 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 180-10
180:398
§ 180-11. Recovery of unpaid tax; interest; penalty for nonpayment.
§ 180-12. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject
to this tax who are in his employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file
any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to enforce the penalty
herein prescribed may be instituted against any person in charge of the
received by him from each employer or self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights94 under Act 50 of
1998.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
94.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 180-10 TAXATION § 180-12
180:399
business of any employer who shall have failed or who refuses to file a
return required by this article.
§ 180-13. Interpretation; validity.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 180-12 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 180-13
180:400
ARTICLE II
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 2-1-1982 by Ord. No. O-82-495]
§ 180-14. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Marcus Hook Borough Earned Income
Tax Ordinance."
§ 180-15. Definitions.
Except as otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions
shall apply in addition to those set forth in the Enabling Act. Use of the
masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter, and reference to
the masculine singular shall include the plural.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Marcus Hook, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of Marcus Hook Borough.
OFFICER — The person or corporation designated from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council as being responsible for the collection
and reporting of the tax levied by this article.
TAXABLE YEAR — January 1 to December 31 of any year, provided that
any taxpayer whose books are maintained on a different fiscal year basis
may, with the consent of the Officer, report and pay taxes on the basis of
such fiscal year, with suitable adjustment of dates for quarterly returns as
hereinafter set forth.
§ 180-16. Incorporation of statutory provisions.
The provisions of Sections 13 and 14 of the Local Tax Enabling Act96 (Act
No. 511 of 1965, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.), its supplements and amendments,
are incorporated herein by reference, except that where options are
provided in said Sections 13 and 14, this article shall designate the option
selected, and except that if this article shall provide to the contrary, the
provisions of this article shall control.
§ 180-17. Imposition of tax.
A tax for general revenue purposes in the amount of 1% is hereby imposed
on earned income, including, inter alia, salaries, wages, commissions,
bonuses, incentive payments, fees, tips and other compensation, received
by residents of the Borough of Marcus Hook, and on earned income,
including, inter alia, salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation, received by nonresidents of
95.Editor's Note: While the annual reenactment of an earned income tax ordinance is not
required under 53 P.S. § 6913, II, the Borough Council is accustomed to adopt an annual
resolution to readopt the tax.
96.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 6913 and 6914.
§ 180-14 TAXATION § 180-17
180:401
the Borough of Marcus Hook, for work done or services performed or
rendered in the Borough of Marcus Hook, and on the net profits received
from businesses, professions or other activities conducted by residents of
the Borough of Marcus Hook and the net profits received from businesses,
professions or other activities conducted in the Borough of Marcus Hook by
nonresidents of the Borough of Marcus Hook during the period beginning
on the first day of March 1982 or the effective date of this article, whichever
is later, and continuing for each taxable year thereafter.
§ 180-18. Declaration, return and payment of tax.
§ 180-19. Collection at source.
A. Net profits. Every taxpayer making net profits in 1982 and in any year
succeeding 1982 shall file a declaration of his estimated net profits for
the current year and shall pay the tax due thereon in quarterly
installments and shall file a final return and pay to the Officer the
balance of the tax due, all as provided in Section 13, III, A(1)(ii) and (2)
through (5), inclusive, of the Local Tax Enabling Act, its supplements
and amendments.97
B. Earned income for 1982 and each year succeeding the year 1982, every
taxpayer shall make and file final returns and pay the taxes due, all as
provided in Section 13, III, B, first paragraph of the Local Tax Enabling
Act, its supplements and amendments.98
C. Quarterly returns. Every taxpayer who is employed for a salary, wage or
other compensation and who receives any earned income not subject to
the provisions relating to collection at source shall make and file with
the Officer quarterly returns and shall pay quarterly-annually the
amount of tax shown as due on such returns, all as provided in Section
13, III, B(2) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, its supplements and
amendments.99
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the corporate limits of the Borough of
Marcus Hook shall deduct the tax imposed by this article on the earned
income due his employee or employees and shall file quarterly returns
and final returns and pay quarterly to the Officer the amount of taxes
deducted, all as set forth in Section 13, IV, of said Local Tax Enabling
Act, its supplements and amendments, commencing March 1, 1982.100
B. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of any
year shall, within 30 days after discontinuance of business, file returns
and withholding statements hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
97.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6913, III, A(1)(ii) and (2) through (5).
98.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6913, III, B, first paragraph.
99.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6913, III, B(2).
100. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6913, IV.
§ 180-17 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 180-19
180:402
§ 180-20. Administration.
The Income Tax Officer shall be selected from time to time by resolution
of, and shall receive such compensation for his services and expenses as
determined from time to time by, the Borough Council. Such Officer shall
have the powers and duties and be subject to the penalties provided in the
Local Tax Enabling Act, its supplements and amendments.101
§ 180-21. Applicability.
The tax imposed in § 180-17 shall not be levied on the net profits of any
person, institution or organization as to whom it is beyond the power of the
Borough Council to impose said tax under the Constitution of the United
States of America or the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 180-22. Credits.
§ 180-23. Violations and penalties.
C. No employer shall be required to register, deduct taxes, file returns or
pay taxes in the case of domestic servants.
A. Payment of any tax on income to a state other than Pennsylvania or to
any political subdivision thereof by residents thereof, pursuant to any
state or local law, to the extent that such income includes salaries,
wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive payments, fees, tips and other
compensation or net profits of businesses, professions or other
activities, but in such proportions as hereinafter set forth, shall be
credited to and allowed as a deduction from the liability of such person
for the tax imposed by this article on salaries, wages, commissions,
bonuses, incentive payments, fees, tips and other compensation or net
profits of businesses, professions or other activities if residents of the
Borough of Marcus Hook received credits and deductions of a similar
kind to a like degree from the tax on income imposed by the other state
or political subdivision thereof.
B. Where a credit or a deduction is allowable, it shall be allowed in
proportion to the concurrent periods for which taxes are imposed by the
other state or respective political subdivisions, but not in excess of the
amount previously paid for a concurrent period.
A. In enforcing the collection of the tax hereby levied, the Officer shall
have all the remedies prescribed by the Enabling Act and shall be
entitled to add to the amount of any delinquent tax or debt created by
the failure to pay or to collect at one source such taxes plus interest at
the rate of 6% per annum plus an additional penalty at 1/2 of 1% of the
amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid.
101. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6913, V.
§ 180-19 TAXATION § 180-23
180:403
B. In addition, any taxpayer violating or conspiring to violate any provision
of this article or the Enabling Act shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding, be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or, in default of
payment thereof, a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.
[Amended 7-2-1990 by Ord. No. O-90-1, approved 7-2-1990]
§ 180-23 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 180-23
180:404
ARTICLE III
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 1-4-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-1; approved 1-4-1988]
§ 180-24. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Borough of Marcus Hook."
§ 180-25. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Borough of Marcus Hook regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements
on such transfer took place, as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 180-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or conform a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 180-25.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The "business of agriculture" shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
§ 180-24 TAXATION § 180-26
180:405
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSONS — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person" as applied to associations shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Borough of Marcus
Hook, including without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures,
mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or
lower boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or
interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of land,
but excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
A.
§ 180-26 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 180-26
180:406
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
§ 180-27. Imposition of tax; interest.
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold; or
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, by reason of either the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term of renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such document shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the "value" of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
§ 180-26 TAXATION § 180-27
180:407
§ 180-28. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 180-29. Excluded transactions.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder whereon the date
of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer, then the tax levied by the Borough of Marcus Hook under the
authority of that Act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1 1/2 of the rate,
and such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part
of the Borough of Marcus Hook; provided, however, that the Borough of
Marcus Hook and any other political subdivision which imposes such
tax on the same person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting
their respective rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will
impose respectively different rates, the total of which shall not exceed
the maximum rate permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 180-27 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line
§ 180-27 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 180-29
180:408
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Borough of Marcus Hook is prohibited from
taxing under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax-delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties takes shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife; between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce; between parent
and child or the spouse of such child; between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister; and between grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to
a successor trustee.
§ 180-29 TAXATION § 180-29
180:409
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party, or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture and the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(C)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
§ 180-29 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 180-29
180:410
§ 180-30. Documents relating to associations or corporations.
Except as otherwise provided in § 180-29, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 180-31. Acquired companies.
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided for in this section, the true,
full and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement
of value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however, effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company and, of itself or together
with prior changes, has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation, or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
§ 180-29 TAXATION § 180-31
180:411
§ 180-32. Credits against tax.
§ 180-33. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 180-34. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff or other
officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
§ 180-31 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 180-35
180:412
§ 180-35. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 180-36. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 180-37. Civil penalties.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Borough
of Marcus Hook based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer
tax, without compensation from the Borough of Marcus Hook.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Borough of Marcus Hook all local realty transfer taxes collected, less
2% for use of the county, together with a report containing the
information as is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in
reporting collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The 2%
commission shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee have been
tendered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
§ 180-35 TAXATION § 180-37
180:413
§ 180-38. Lien for tax.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Borough of Marcus Hook,
which lands, tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described
in or conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the
tax imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the
time when the tax under this article is due and payable and continue until
discharged by payment or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas
of Delaware County in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
§ 180-39. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 180-40. Regulations.
The Council of the Borough of Marcus Hook is charged with the
enforcement and collection of the tax and is empowered to promulgate
and enforce reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the
tax. The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into
and made a part of this article.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 180-37 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 180-40
180:414
ARTICLE IV
Tax Collector Fees
[Adopted 2-5-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-2, approved 2-5-2007]
§ 180-41. Tax certification fee.
The Marcus Hook Borough Tax Collector is hereby authorized to charge
a tax certification fee of $10 per taxing year certified for certifications
requested by the owner of the real estate or his or her authorized agent.
Such fees shall be the property of the Borough Tax Collector.
§ 180-42. Duplicate tax bill fee.
The Marcus Hook Borough Tax Collector is hereby authorized to charge a
duplicate tax bill fee of $10 for each document issued to all taxpayers and
their authorized agents requesting a duplicate copy of the tax bills. Such
fees shall be the property of the Borough Tax Collector.
§ 180-43. Fraudulent check charge.
The Marcus Hook Borough Tax Collector is hereby authorized to charge a
fee of $15 to any person submitting a check for the payment of Borough
taxes which is returned for insufficient funds. Such fees shall be the
property of the Borough of Marcus Hook.
§ 180-41 TAXATION § 180-43
180:415
Chapter 182
TELEPHONE SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 175. Zoning — See Ch. 196.
§ 180-43 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 180-43
182:416
ARTICLE I
Pay Telephones
[Adopted 8-8-1995 by Ord. No. O-95-3, approved 8-8-1995]
§ 182-1. Permit required; application.
No person may place or maintain any outdoor telephone on, above, abutting
or adjacent to any public street or sidewalk without having first obtained
a permit as provided in this article. Permits shall be issued subject to
the approval of the location and means of installation of the telephone
by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Marcus Hook. Before
installation, a plan or sketch of the telephone and its enclosure shall be
furnished in sufficient detail to describe the size, location, equipment and
means of installation and cabling.
§ 182-2. Fees.
The initial fee for a permit shall be $25 for each telephone. The annual
renewal fee shall be $10 for each telephone.
§ 182-3. Removal or relocation of telephones.
The Borough of Marcus Hook shall be informed of the intent of any person
to remove or relocate a telephone. Relocation of a telephone requires
compliance with § 182-1 hereof.
§ 182-4. Regulation of telephones contributing to illegal or illicit
activities.
The Borough of Marcus Hook may reject any permit application or require
the removal of an existing outdoor public telephone if the public telephone
has the potential to or has demonstrated a propensity to create or
contribute to illegal or illicit activities or otherwise interfere with free
passage of pedestrians and the rights of the public.
§ 182-5. Exemption from fees.
No fees shall be charged for telephones furnished by the Borough of Marcus
Hook as an accommodation to the public or for permits issued to any
nonprofit entity. Such entity shall not, however, be exempt from the
regulatory provisions of this article.
§ 182-6. Installation and maintenance standards.
A. Any telephone installation subject to this article shall comply with the
following standards:
(1) No booth surrounding a telephone shall exceed eight feet in height,
four feet in width or four feet in thickness.
§ 182-1 TELEPHONE SERVICES § 182-6
182:417
§ 182-7. Calls permitted without charge; rate information to be
provided.
(2) Each telephone shall be equipped with a coin-returning mechanism
to permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate
refund if a call cannot be placed. The coin mechanism shall be
maintained in good working order.
(3) Each telephone shall have affixed to it, in a place visible to
everyone using the telephone, the name and address of the
distributor and the telephone number of a working telephone
service to report a malfunction, secure a refund or give the notices
provided for in this article.
(4) Telephones shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all times. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, a telephone shall be serviced and maintained so that:
(a) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked
paint in the visible painted areas thereof.
(b) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible
unpainted metal areas thereon.
(c) Any clear plastic or glass parts are unbroken and reasonably
free of cracks, dents, graffiti, blemishes and discolorations.
(d) Any paper or cardboard parts or inserts are reasonably free of
tears, peeling or fading.
(e) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly
misshapen.
(f) The telephone receiver is attached to the telephone.
B. Any person who fails to maintain a telephone in working condition may
be given a ten-day notice by the Borough of Marcus Hook to repair the
telephone.
C. Each telephone shall, upon the written request of the Borough
Manager, be capable of being restricted to outgoing calls only within 10
days of the request.
A. Telephones shall permit the following calls to be placed without charge:
(1) Calls to the 911 emergency number.
(2) Emergency calls placed through operator assistance to the Police
and Fire Departments of the Borough.
B. Current telephone rates for a local coin call shall be posted on the
telephone or on the telephone booth if applicable.
C. Toll rate quotations must be available from the operator upon request.
§ 182-6 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 182-8
182:418
§ 182-8. Location and placement of telephones.
§ 182-9. Applicability to existing telephones.
The owners of existing telephones shall apply for the permit required
hereunder within 30 days from the date this article becomes final. The
Borough of Marcus Hook reserves the right to reject any and all locations
submitted for approval based upon their existing conformance to this
article. However, the location of all existing telephones which are external
to structures shall be permitted to continue to exist in that location
regardless of whether or not the location is in conformity with this article.
Existing telephones external to structures as of the time of the adoption
of this article will, however, have to comply with the maintenance
requirements contained in this article.
§ 182-10. Violation and penalties.
Any violation of this article will subject the property owner to fines and
penalties in accordance with the general Code provision.
A. No telephone shall be installed in a residential zone.
B. No telephone shall be permitted to rest upon, in, over or adjacent to any
public street or sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance:
(1) Endangers the safety of persons or property.
(2) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicles.
C. Telephones shall be placed or otherwise secured so as to prevent their
being blown down or around the public street or sidewalk but shall not
be chained or otherwise secured to any traffic or street signs, signals,
hydrants or mailboxes.
D. No telephone will be permitted to be installed or relocated within 500
feet of an existing telephone which is external to a structure.
§ 182-8 TELEPHONE SERVICES § 182-10
182:419
Chapter 185
VECTOR CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food establishments — See Ch. 102.
Garbage and rubbish — See Ch. 106.
Solid wastes — See Ch. 172.
§ 185-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Vector Control
Ordinance."
§ 185-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare by:
§ 185-3. Definitions and usage.
A. Preventing or controlling the spread of vector-borne disease;
B. Averting the blighting effects which the presence of vector infestation
placed on an affected neighborhood, including undermining the
desirability of housing, causing decline in property value and
contributing to the image of an environmentally unfit area; and
C. Facilitating the services of the Joint Vector Control Program staff by
making more uniform municipal regulations concerning vector control.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of vectors by
eliminating harborage areas, by removing food sources or making them
inaccessible, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or any other
legal vector elimination method which is not injurious to human health
or the safety of domestic animals.
GARBAGE — The animal and/or vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, serving or nonconsumption of food.
INFESTATION — The presence of vectors within or contiguous to a
structure or premises.
INSPECTION OFFICER — The Municipal Health Officer, a staff member
of the Joint Vector Control Program and/or any other persons
authorized in writing by the governing body of the Borough of Marcus
Hook to conduct inspection and administrative procedures to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 182-10 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 185-3
185:420
JUNK — All large items of rubbish, including but not limited to:
OCCUPANT — Any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or
actually having possession of, a dwelling unit or a rooming unit, except
that in dwelling units a temporary guest will not be considered an
"occupant."
OWNER — Any person who, alone or joint-severally with others:
PERSON — Any individual, business, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
PREMISES — All areas of a property, including all interior, exterior,
grounds and yard spaces.
RUBBISH — Solid wastes other than garbage, consisting of either:
STRUCTURE — Any man-made construction or building which is
located on any part of the premises.
URBANIZED AREA — Any area which is located within 1,000 feet of
either:
VECTOR — An organism which, either directly or indirectly via
microorganisms which it carries, can transmit disease to man. For the
purposes of this chapter, the term "vector" shall ordinarily but not
exclusively refer to rodent, insect or vermin species.
VECTOR HARBORAGE or VECTOR SOURCE — Any area, interior or
exterior, where vectors can live, nest, breed or seek any form of shelter.
(1) Nonoperable automobiles.
(2) Nonoperable appliances (such as refrigerators or stoves).
(3) Scrap metal.
Shall have legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit,
with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
(1)
Shall have charge, care or control of any premises, dwelling or
dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as an executor,
administrator, trustee, assignee of rents or guardian of the estate
of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner
shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter to the
same extent as if he were the owner.
(2)
Combustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, plastic, yard
clippings and wood; or
(1)
(2) Noncombustible wastes such as metal, glass and crockery.
Any structure which is designed for human occupancy for any
purpose, be it residential, business or leisure-time, at any time of
the day or night; or
(1)
(2) A public or privately owned outdoor recreation site.
§ 185-3 VECTOR CONTROL § 185-3
185:421
§ 185-4. Inspection procedures.
VECTORPROOF — Describing a form of construction which prevents
the ingress or egress of vectors to and from a given space or structure
or which prevents vectors from gaining access to food, water or
harborage.
B. Interpretation of the language of the chapter. In interpreting the
language of this chapter, the singular shall be construed to include the
plural, the masculine to include the feminine and the present tense to
include the past and future tense.
A. Inspection procedures shall be conducted by the Inspection Officer.
B. The Inspection Officer shall be empowered to inspect any structure or
premises in the Borough of Marcus Hook at any reasonable time. The
Inspection Officer is authorized to conduct the inspection on any part of
the premises, including any interior spaces.
C. In the event that the owner or occupant refuses to permit the Inspection
Officer to inspect the premises, the Inspection Officer shall obtain an
administrative search warrant from the District Justice of competent
jurisdiction authorizing entry to the premises in question.
D. The Inspection Officer shall continue to inspect the premises
periodically as he deems necessary until he has certified that the
violation has been corrected.
E. The Health Officer shall reinspect any premises which has been
previously cited for violating the terms of this chapter within 180 days
of the date on which the violation has been certified as having been
corrected.
F. Inspection of specific types of land uses which are prone to vector
harborage shall occur regularly as indicated below:
(1) Commercial, industrial or institutional establishments in which
foodstuffs are sold, handled, processed or stored: semiannual
inspection.
(2) Commercial, industrial or institutional establishments in which
large quantities of materials must be regularly located in outside
storage areas: semiannual inspection.
G. Any owner or occupant within the Borough of Marcus Hook may issue a
complaint requesting action by the Inspection Officer. The complaint
must be signed and in writing. The identity of the complainant shall be
kept confidential unless otherwise requested by the complainant or a
court of competent jurisdiction. Within 15 days of the receipt of the
complaint, the Inspection Officer shall indicate in writing the action
taken on the complaint.
§ 185-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 185-5
185:422
§ 185-5. Notice of violation.
§ 185-6. Violations and penalties; additional remedies.
A. When the Inspection Officer has deemed any premises in violation of
this chapter, he shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner
and/or occupant, depending on the nature of the violation, and shall
require the owner and/or occupant to correct the cited violation.
B. The written notice of violation shall contain at a minimum the following
information:
(1) Indicate the address and/or the location of the premises.
(2) Describe all violations, including the date(s) on which they were
observed and indicating where on the premises the violations exist
or were practiced.
(3) At the discretion of the Inspection Officer, indicate alternative
techniques or practices which are satisfactory to correct the cited
violation.
(4) Issue an order to correct and indicate the penalties for
noncompliance.
(5) Specify a period of time by which the violation must be corrected.
(6) Carry the signature or facsimile of the signature of the Inspection
Officer.
(7) Indicate the name, office mailing address and office telephone
number of the Inspection Officer.
C. The notice of violation shall be served upon the owner of record or the
occupant of the structure by any one of the following methods:
(1) Delivering the notice directly to the hands of the owner or occupant
or responsible person in his household who will sign for him;
(2) Mailing the notice or a copy thereof by return receipt mail to the
last known address of the owner or occupant; or
(3) If the letter is returned showing that it cannot be delivered, posting
a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place in or about the cited
premises.
D. The Inspection Officer shall certify to the correction of the violation
cited in the notice. Such certification at a minimum shall consist of the
Inspection Officer's signature and the date on which the certification is
made.
A. Each day that a violation remains uncorrected after the period stated
for correction in the notice of violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 185-5 VECTOR CONTROL § 185-6
185:423
§ 185-7. Regulations.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
[Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
C. In cases of extended noncompliance or in cases of a clear and present
danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the citizenry, the
governing body of the Borough of Marcus Hook shall be empowered to
exercise any of the following actions, subject to adequate notice to the
owner of the property:
(1) Order the Inspection Officer to cause the immediate vacancy of the
cited premises by any and all individuals. The Inspection Officer
shall post in plain view a notice stating "unfit for human occupancy"
and requiring the vacancy of said premises until the violation is
corrected;
(2) Order the correction of the violation by municipal staff;
(3) Engage a qualified contractor to correct the violation; or
(4) Authorize the condemnation and demolition of the cited premises.
D. Reimbursement for municipal costs incurred in the correction of
violations or in demolition shall be recouped from the owner and/or
occupant in any of the following ways:
(1) Attaching a municipal lien on the cited property;
(2) Civil action against the owner and/or occupant; or
(3) Sale of personalty found on the premises.
A. General requirements for all property owners.
(1) The interior and exterior of all premises shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition which shall prevent vector harborage.
(2) During construction activities, preventive measures shall be taken
which shall preclude vector harborage.
(3) If vectorproofing materials are removed from a structure during
structural renovations, these materials shall be comparably
replaced.
(4) Upon receipt of a notice of violation, proper techniques of
vectorproofing and/or extermination must be taken by the owner to
correct the identified violation. If continued reapplication is
necessary to correct the problem, the owner shall continue the
extermination techniques as determined by the Inspection Officer.
B. General requirements of occupants and lessees.
§ 185-6 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 185-7
185:424
(1) Every occupant of a dwelling unit or a rooming unit and every
lessee of space of a commercial, office or industrial premises shall
be responsible to maintain said unit or space in a clean and sanitary
condition which shall prevent vector harborage.
(2) Every occupant and lessee shall dispose of all garbage and rubbish
in a safe, clean and sanitary manner. Garbage must be temporarily
stored prior to its collection for ultimate disposal in a tightly sealed
metal or heavy plastic container designed specifically for this
purpose. Garbage may be stored in plastic bags, provided that they
are not placed out for pickup any sooner than 24 hours prior to
regularly scheduled rubbish pickup.
(3) An occupant or lessee shall be held responsible for the
extermination of vectors, rather than the property owner, when the
unit or space occupied by the occupant or lessee is the only one in
which infestation is detected on a multiple-occupancy premises.
However, where infestation is found to be a direct result of owner
neglect, the owner shall be held responsible for extermination.
(4) Upon receipt of a notice of violation, proper steps must be taken by
the occupant or lessee to correct the identified violation. If
continued reapplication is necessary to correct the problem, the
occupant or lessee shall continue the extermination techniques as
determined by the Inspection Officer.
C. Building requirements.
(1) All openings, including any openings for utility lines, must be
protected by vectorproof material such as screening.
(2) The walls, flooring, porches and basements of any structure must
be vectorproofed.
(3) Every plumbing and waste pipe shall be properly maintained in
good sanitary condition in order to prevent a point of vector
harborage on the premises.
D. Yard and grounds requirements:
(1) The exterior spaces of all premises shall be kept free of all
accumulated garbage, rubbish and junk.
(2) Firewood stacks shall be raised at least 12 inches above ground
level.
(3) Any exterior spaces located in an urbanized area shall be kept free
of high grass or weed growth that may serve as a vector harborage.
(4) Any exterior space located in an urbanized area shall be kept free
of standing pools of stagnated water that may serve as a vector
harborage.
§ 185-7 VECTOR CONTROL § 185-7
185:425
Chapter 188
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 191.
§ 188-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the chapter is to protect the health, safety, morals and
welfare of the citizens of the Borough by causing the removal of abandoned,
illegally parked, stored, wrecked, junked and stripped automobiles from
both public and private property and to abate public nuisances caused by
the storage of, parking of and accumulation of such automobiles which are
detrimental to the health, safety, morals and welfare of the citizens of the
Borough and which constitute a peril to highway and traffic safety.102
§ 188-2. Abandonment on private property.
It shall be unlawful to park, store or leave any vehicle of any kind in
a wrecked, junked, stripped or abandoned condition, or any automobile,
whether occupied or not, in a place where its presence constitutes a hazard
on private property, or for the owner of such automobile or vehicle or the
owner or occupant of any property to allow, permit or suffer the same to
be left upon any privately owned property unless the same is authorized in
(5) No material, including firewood or building lumber, which may
serve as a vector harborage, shall be stored or stacked directly
against the exterior wall of any structure.
E. Requirements for animal shelters. An animal shelter for more than two
animals must be properly and regularly sanitized and fumigated as
necessary in order to prevent vector harborage. Feed materials must be
stored within vector-proofed, sealed containers or structures
inaccessible to vectors.
F. Extermination.
(1) At the time infestation is identified, acceptable techniques of
extermination shall be initiated by the person cited in the notice of
violation to remove the infestation.
(2) After the extermination is complete, proper precautions shall be
taken to prevent reinfestation.
102. Editor's Note: Former Article II of this chapter, which dealt with abandonment of vehicles
on public property, has been deleted as having been superseded by Article V, Removal and
Impounding of Certain Vehicles, of Ch. 191, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 185-7 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 188-2
188:426
conjunction with a business properly operated pursuant to the zoning laws
and other laws of the Borough.103
§ 188-3. Notice to owners. [Amended 7-2-1990 by Ord. No. O-90-1,
approved 7-2-1990]
If the Police Department or the Borough Secretary or any of their authorized
agents find that a violation of this chapter exists, the Police Department
or the Borough Secretary shall notify the owner of the property on which
the vehicle is stored or parked or the owner of the vehicle, or both, of the
violation and request either or both of said owners to remove said motor
vehicle or vehicles within five days thereof or any other reasonable time as
the conditions warrant.
§ 188-4. Giving of notice.
Notice shall be given by personal service or registered mail to the last
known address of the violator. In the event that, on diligent search, the
address of either the property owner or the vehicle owner cannot be
ascertained, the posting of the said notice or copies thereof on the real
property, vehicle, structure or area immediately adjacent thereto shall
constitute sufficient notice.
§ 188-5. Request for hearing authorized.
Within two days after notice, the party or parties affected may request a
hearing by filling out a written request with the Borough Secretary.
§ 188-6. Failure to request hearing.
If a hearing is not requested within the two-day period, the said notice shall
become an order and the parties affected shall proceed to remove or have
removed the vehicle or vehicles in question from the property in question in
accordance with the notice and order.
§ 188-7. Notice of hearing.
On proper request, a hearing on the matter shall be given forthwith, and
where more than one party is involved, it shall be the duty of the party
requesting the said hearing to notify all other parties affected or interested
of the time and place of the impending hearing.
§ 188-8. Failure to act; imposition of costs.
If the violation complained of shall not have been remedied within the
period as required by the order, the Borough of Marcus Hook shall, through
its own agents, contractors and/or employees, remedy the violation and
charge the costs thereof to the real property owner on whose property the
vehicle or vehicles are located. Said costs shall, after a proper demand and
103. Editor's Note: See Ch. 196, Zoning.
§ 188-2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 188-8
188:427
refusal or a failure to pay after 30 days, constitute a lien on the said realty,
which shall be filed by the Solicitor upon receipt of all information.
§ 188-9. Emergency powers.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent duly authorized police officials from
removing from private property, without notice, any attended or unattended
automobile or vehicle, the presence of which constitutes a hazard or a
threat to the life, health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens of the
Borough of Marcus Hook and which is immediately dangerous and, in the
opinion of the authorized police officials, constitutes a nuisance which gives
rise to the existence of emergency conditions.
§ 188-10. Other provisions. [Amended 7-2-1990 by Ord. No. O-90-1,
approved 7-2-1990]
The provisions of Article V of Chapter 191, Vehicles and Traffic, concerning
the place of storage, towing and charges therefor and the bonding
provisions and the recording of any removal and impounding, shall be
followed in any procedure under this chapter where the same do not conflict
with any provision of this chapter.
§ 188-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-5, approved 9-6-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute.
Chapter 191
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 188. Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 193.
§ 188-8 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 188-11
188:428
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 191-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 191-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Borough of Marcus Hook.
§ 191-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 191-4. Experimental regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq. (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except
that in this chapter the word "street" may be used interchangeably with
the word "highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word
"highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
police in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any person who
drives or parks a vehicle in violation of any such regulation or who shall
move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign or marking erected,
posted or made to give notice of any such regulation shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
A. The Borough Council may, from time to time, designate places upon and
along the streets in the Borough where, for a period of not more than 90
days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
§ 191-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-4
188:429
§ 191-5. Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events.
§ 191-6. Authority of police officers.
The police shall have authority to direct traffic on the streets in the
Borough, at intersections in public and in other places where the Vehicle
Code or this chapter applies.
restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate those
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in
this chapter. No person shall drive or park a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made
by authority of this section. Any person who violates any provision of
this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty set out in the
law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
A. The Borough Council shall have authority to close any street or specific
part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police
officers at each end of the closed portion, while construction or
maintenance work is under way or a special event is being conducted
on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Borough Council shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
under way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
§ 191-4 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 191-6
188:430
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 191-7. Speed limits.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I (§ 191-66), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated in said
schedule. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that street or part of a street.
§ 191-8. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated (or are ratified if
previously installed) at the intersection of those streets described in
Schedule II (§ 191-67), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 191-9. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
into another one-way street) when facing a steady red signal at any of the
locations described in Schedule III (§ 191-68), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 191-10. Prohibited turns at intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a turn of the kind
designated (left, right, all) at any of the intersections described in Schedule
IV (§ 191-69), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 191-11. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn on any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V (§ 191-70), attached
to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 191-12. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI (§ 191-71), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any one-way street other than in the direction established for
traffic on that street.
§ 191-13. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established along those streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VII (§ 191-72), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake
or pass another vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any nopassing
zone described in said schedule.
§ 191-7 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-14
188:431
§ 191-14. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VIII (§ 191-73),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby established as
through streets; and the driver of any vehicle, upon approaching any such
street at any intersection thereof (except for such intersections where there
are now or shall hereafter be located official traffic signals), shall come to
a full stop or yield the right-of-way, as the case may be, before entering any
such through street.
§ 191-15. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 191-74), attached to and made
a part of this chapter (in addition to intersections with the through streets
established by § 191-14), are hereby established as stop intersections, and
official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected) in
such a position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching
the second-named street in the direction or directions indicated in said
schedule. Every driver of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon
the first-named street, in the direction or directions indicated in each case,
shall come to a full stop before entering any such intersection.
§ 191-16. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule X (§ 191-75), attached to and made
a part of this chapter (in addition to intersections with the through streets
established by § 191-14), are hereby established as yield intersections, and
official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected) in
such a position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street in the direction or directions indicated. Every driver of
a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street, in
the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop
the vehicle and then yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection
or approaching on the second-named street so closely as to constitute a
hazard during the time that the driver is moving across or within such
intersection.
§ 191-17. Closing of certain streets to certain vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle, except a passenger
vehicle (but not including any passenger vehicle drawing any trailer or
towing any other vehicle), upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XI (§ 191-76), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 191-18. Street access prohibited certain hours.
Vehicles shall not enter those streets listed in Schedule XII (§ 191-77)
during the hours and on the days designated on signs posted at the
entrances to such streets.
§ 191-14 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 191-19
188:432
§ 191-19. Vehicle weight limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any commercial vehicle or
other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination, having a gross weight in
excess of that respectively prescribed, upon any of the streets or bridges,
or portions thereof, described in Schedule XIII (§ 191-78), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, except for the purpose of making local
deliveries on said streets.
§ 191-19 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-19
188:433

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 191-20. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 191-21. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XIV (§ 191-79), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, except at the angle designated and only within the painted stall
lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is now or shall
hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked with
the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 191-22. Parking prohibited at all times. [Amended 11-1-1993 by
Ord. No. O-93-7, approved 11-1-1993]
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
thereof in conflict with the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq., as amended, Chapter 33, Subchapter E, and as described in Schedule
XV (§ 191-80), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 191-22.1. Parking of certain vehicles prohibited at all times.
[Added 6-5-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-4, approved 6-5-2006]
A. The parking of commercial motor vehicles, tractors, tractor-trailer
combinations, buses, mobile homes, camping trailers, recreational
vehicles or any other vehicle of a similar character with a gross vehicle
weight in excess of 10,000 pounds is hereby prohibited on any Borough
highway, street or alleyway.
B. The parking of any motor vehicle that is 21 feet in length or longer or
which is six feet six inches in width or wider, or both, is hereby
prohibited on any Borough highway, street or alleyway.
C. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Vehicles of the Borough of Marcus Hook; fire apparatus;
ambulances; or vehicles engaged in the work of a public utility.
(2) Vehicles actually engaged in the course of construction or repair of
streets or while actually engaged in making deliveries or rendering
services on or upon any property adjacent to the street where said
vehicle is parked.
§ 191-20 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-22.1
188:435
§ 191-23. Parking prohibited certain hours.
§ 191-24. Time limit parking.
§ 191-25. Special purpose parking zones/residential parking zones.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to allow the
same to remain parked in any special purpose parking zone established
in Schedule XVIII (§ 191-83), attached to and made a part of this chapter,
except as specifically provided for such zone.
§ 191-26. (Reserved)104
§ 191-26.1. Vehicle idling. [Added 3-6-1995 by Ord. No. O-95-2,
approved 3-6-1995]
No person shall operate an engine of any standing truck and/or tractor
trailer with a weight in excess of 10,000 pounds manufacturer's gross
vehicle weight (GVW) when such vehicle is parked on a residential
premises, on a street within a residential zoning district, on a street next
to a residential zoning district or within 150 feet of any residential zoning
(3) Any school bus actually engaged in picking up or discharging
students but only for a period of time necessary to safely pick up
and discharge students.
A. No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XVI (§ 191-81), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, during the hours specified in said schedule, on any day
except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
B. No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
during the hours and on the days designated on temporary or
permanent signs posted thereon for the purpose of street cleaning and
street improvements, maintenance and/or repairs. [Added 8-4-1997
by Ord. No. O-97-1, approved 8-4-1997]
A. No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon
any of the streets or parts of street described in Schedule XVII
(§ 191-82), attached to and made a part of this chapter, between the
hours specified, for longer than the time indicated in said schedule.
B. The parking of any vehicle in the same location for a period of time in
excess of 96 consecutive hours is hereby prohibited on any Borough
highway, street or alleyway. Vehicles must be moved (driven) at least
once every 96 hours. Pushing a vehicle up and down the street does not
satisfy the requirements of this section. [Added 6-5-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-4, approved 6-5-2006]
104. Editor's Note: Former § 191-26, Limited all-night parking, was repealed 6-5-2006 by Ord.
No. O-06-4, approved 6-5-2006.
§ 191-22.1 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 191-26.1
188:436
district. Trucks making local deliveries to residents are exempt from the
provisions of this section.
§ 191-26.2. Obstruction in streets. [Added 4-2-2002 by Ord. No.
O-02-2, approved 4-2-2002]
No person shall place any obstacle or obstruction of any kind on any
highway, street or alleyway within the boundary limits of the Borough of
Marcus Hook, with the exception of an operating motor vehicle, legally
parked, which shall obstruct the parking of any vehicle on any highway,
street or alleyway within the boundary limits of the Borough of Marcus
Hook, regardless of weather conditions. No person shall shovel, push or
throw snow, sleet or ice into a public street in the Borough of Marcus Hook
that has been plowed or otherwise cleared of snow, sleet or ice, with the
intent of clearing a parking space for his motor vehicle.
§ 191-26.3. Trailers, boats and similar vehicles excluded. [Added
4-2-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-2, approved 4-2-2002]
No person shall park any nonmotorized vehicle or apparatus or a vehicle
or apparatus which must be towed, such as but not limited to a boat, boat
trailer, house or vacation trailer, utility trailer, or similar vehicle, on any
highway, street or alleyway, within the boundary limits of the Borough of
Marcus Hook.
§ 191-26.4. Repairing vehicles parked on street. [Added 6-5-2006 by
Ord. No. O-06-4, approved 6-5-2006]
No person shall, at any hour of the day or night, make mechanical repairs
of any nature or description whatsoever to any motor vehicle or leave
unattended any motor vehicle on a vehicle lifting or support device (i.e.,
jacks, ramps, blocks) while said motor vehicle is parked or standing on
any Borough highway, street or alleyway. The Chief of Police is hereby
authorized to remove or direct to remove any vehicle found leaking gasoline
or engine fluids (where no other alternative is available) while said motor
vehicle is parked or standing on any Borough highway, street or alleyway.
§ 191-27. Handicapped parking.
A. Delegation of authority. Borough Council delegates to the Mayor the
authority to establish the number, location, size and identification
requirements for handicapped parking spaces in the Borough of Marcus
Hook.
B. Identification of spaces. Any spaces deemed to be appropriate by the
Mayor shall be clearly marked with the international wheelchair symbol
on a sign post, wall or painted on the space itself.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in a space
designated as a space for the handicapped unless the operator or a
passenger of the vehicle is handicapped.
§ 191-26.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-27
188:437
§ 191-28. Parking in private alleys.
No person shall park a vehicle within a private alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle within a private alley in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
§ 191-29. Penalties for parking violations. [Amended 8-7-2006 by
Ord. No. O-06-6, approved 8-7-2006]
Any person violating the provisions of § 191-27, relating to handicapped
parking, shall be fined $50. Any person violating any other provision of this
article shall be fined $25. It shall be the duty of the police officers and
of parking enforcement personnel of the Borough to report to the Mayor
all violations of any provision of this article, indicating, in each case, the
section violated, the license number of the vehicle involved in the violation,
the location where the violation took place and any other facts that might
be necessary in order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances
attending the violation. The police officer or other person making this report
shall also attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that
the vehicle was parked in violation of this article.
D. Notification by Mayor of the designation of spaces. The Mayor shall
notify the President of Borough Council in writing whenever a parking
space for the handicapped is designated. Borough Council shall have
the power to reverse any such designation by the Mayor upon proper
motion and majority vote of the members of Council.
§ 191-27 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 191-29
188:438
ARTICLE IV
Metered Parking
§ 191-30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPERATOR — Every individual who shall operate a vehicle.
PARKING METER — A mechanical device located upon a public street or
sidewalk or public parking facility in a place designated by the article
as a parking meter zone, hereafter defined, which device shall record a
certain number of minutes by the use of a clock mechanism determining the
period of time for which parking privileges may be extended to the person
depositing a coin therein.
PARKING METER ZONE — An area designated by ordinance where a
vehicle may be temporarily parked and allowed to remain for the period of
time indicated on the meter.
POLICE OFFICER — Any employee of the Borough designated individually
by job description classification by the Chief of Police, Personnel Director
or the Borough Manager as having authority to enforce provisions of this
article, and any police officer of the Borough.
§ 191-31. Parking meter zones.
Parking meter zones shall be such as may from time to time be established
by ordinance.
§ 191-32. Parking rules.
§ 191-33. Installation of meters.
Parking meters shall be installed in the parking meter zones as established
and provided for by ordinance and shall be placed upon the curb
immediately adjacent to the individual parking places hereinafter
described. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such a manner as
to show or display by a signal whether or not the parking space adjacent to
such meter is legally in use.
A. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or to permit a vehicle to remain
parked in any parking meter zone for a period longer than designated
on such meter, between the hours designated thereon, except on
Sundays.
B. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any such parking meter zone
without paying the fee designated or to permit such vehicle to remain
for a longer period than that covered by the amount paid.
§ 191-30 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-34
188:439
§ 191-34. Designation of parking spaces.
The Chief of Police shall have markings painted or placed upon the curb of
the street adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating
the parking space and the angle at which vehicles are to be parked to the
curb. Each vehicle parking within any parking meter zone shall park within
the line or markings so established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle
across any such line or marking or to park said vehicle in such position that
the same shall not be entirely within the area designated by such lines or
markings.
§ 191-35. Placing coins in meters.
Any person desiring to park any vehicle within such parking meter space
shall deposit the proper coins for the time desired, as posted on said meter.
§ 191-36. Tampering with meters.
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the Borough to deface,
injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness
of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this article.
§ 191-37. Purchase, installation and maintenance of meters.
Parking meters shall be installed in each of the parking meter zones
established by this article. The Borough Manager is hereby directed to
provide recommendations for the purchase, leasing, acquiring, installation,
operation, maintenance, supervision and use of such meters. The Borough
shall enter into a contract, after approval of the terms and conditions
thereof by the Council, for such protection and maintenance of the parking
meters as may be necessary to maintain the same in good operating
condition.
§ 191-38. Location of meters.
Each parking meter installed in accord with the provisions of this article
shall be placed upon the curb immediately adjacent to an individual parking
space or adjoining public parking lot areas.
§ 191-39. Meter display.
Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such manner as to show or
display by a signal that the parking space adjacent to such meter is or is
not legally in use. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper
legend the days and times the parking meter charges are in effect and the
charge therefor and, when operated, shall indicate on and by its dial and
pointer or other device the duration of the period of legal parking, and, on
the expiration of such period, shall indicate illegal or over parking.
§ 191-34 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 191-40
188:440
§ 191-40. Parking within marked space.
The Borough Council shall have lines or markings painted or placed upon
the curb or upon the street adjacent to each parking meter or on each lot
for the purpose of designating the parking space for which the meter is to
be used, and each vehicle parking adjacent or next to any parking meter
shall park within the lines or markings so established. It shall be unlawful
and a violation of this article to park any vehicle across any such line or
marking or to park a vehicle in such position that the same shall not be
entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings.
§ 191-41. Deposit of coin.
Except as provided by this article, when any vehicle is parked in any
space adjacent to which a parking meter is located in accordance with the
provisions of this article, the operator of the vehicle shall, upon entering the
space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited the charges in United
States coins in such parking meter and put such meter in operation, and
failure to deposit such coin and put the meter in operation shall constitute
a violation of this article; provided, however, that no charge for the use of a
parking meter space shall be made between 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. during
weekdays, and no charge shall be made on Sundays; and provided further
that persons operating commercial vehicles shall not be required to place
a coin in a parking meter while occupying a parking space during the time
necessary for the loading or the unloading of such commercial vehicle.
§ 191-42. Effect of coin deposit.
Upon the deposit of the charges and placing a parking meter in operation,
as required by the preceding section, the parking space may be lawfully
occupied by the vehicle during the period of parking time which has been
prescribed for the part of the street in which the space is located.
§ 191-43. Purpose of meter charge.
The charges required to be deposited in parking meters are hereby levied
and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulating and control of
traffic and parking upon the public streets, for the cost of supervision and
regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones created in this
article and to cover the cost of purchasing, leasing, acquiring, installation,
operation, maintenance, supervision, regulation and control of the parking
meters. The meter locations and parking meter charges shall be as stated
in Schedule XX (§ 191-85), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 191-44. Overtime parking.
If any vehicle remains parked in any parking meter space beyond the
parking time fixed for such space, the parking meter shall, by its dial and
pointer or other device, indicate such illegal parking, and in that event such
vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime in violation of this article. It
shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle
§ 191-40 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-44
188:441
registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked overtime
or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter
zone.
§ 191-45. Deposit of slugs prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any
parking meter any slug, device or metallic substance or any other substitute
for a coin of the United States.
§ 191-46. Police reports of violations.
It shall be the duty of police officers of the Borough to report:
§ 191-47. Parades.105
At the time of any parade for which a parade permit has been issued, the
Chief of Police shall cause covers or hoods to be placed over each parking
meter along the parade route. Such cover shall say "No parking today.
Parade route."
§ 191-48. Hooding of meters.
The Chief of Police, under the direction of the Mayor or the Borough
Manager, may temporarily have hoods placed over specific parking meters
to accommodate funerals, heavy loading and unloading operations and
other special needs or emergencies. It shall be unlawful and a violation of
this article for any person to park a vehicle or to allow a vehicle to remain
parked in a parking space adjacent to a hooded meter.
§ 191-49. Notice of violation.
A police officer finding a vehicle parked in violation of this article shall
attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such
vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this article and
instructing such owner or operator to report and pay the amount of penalty
voluntarily or to appear in court at a time and date stated.
A. The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space adjacent thereto is or has been parked in
violation of any of the provisions of this article.
B. The state license number of such vehicle.
C. The time when such vehicle was parked in violation of any of the
provisions of this article.
D. Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
105. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 145, Parades.
§ 191-44 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 191-50
188:442
§ 191-50. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating the provisions of § 191-36, relating to tampering
with meters, or § 191-45, relating to the deposit of slugs, shall be fined
$100 and, in addition, will be required to pay the amount required to
repair the meter.
B. Any person violating §§ 191-32, 191-40, 191-41, 191-44 or 191-48 shall
be fined $15 for each offense. Any offense will be deemed to have
occurred when a vehicle is in a parking space adjacent to any parking
meter while the meter is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle
has parked beyond the period of time prescribed for such space.
Additionally, if the vehicle remains in that space with an expired meter
for more than the maximum time allowed by the meter, then an
additional offense will have occurred. [Amended 8-7-2006 by Ord.
No. O-06-6, approved 8-7-2006]
C. (Reserved)106
106. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, dealing with fine reductions, was repealed 11-1-1993
by Ord. No. O-93-7, approved 11-1-1993.
§ 191-50 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-50
188:443

ARTICLE V
Removal, Impounding and Immobilization of Certain Vehicles
[Amended 4-2-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-3, approved 4-2-2007]
§ 191-51. Statutory authority; scope.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code and gives authority to the Borough to remove and impound
vehicles that are parked on the highways, streets or public property in the
Borough in violation of local ordinances.
§ 191-52. Authority to remove and impound vehicles.
The Borough shall have the authority to remove and impound any vehicle
by means of towing to the nearest approved storage garage any vehicle
that is parked on the highways, streets or public property in the Borough
in violation of local ordinances. No vehicle shall be removed under the
authority of this section if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner
or the person for the time being in charge of the vehicle is present and
expresses a willingness and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 191-53. Authority to immobilize and impound vehicles.
The Borough shall have the authority to immobilize any vehicle for up to 72
hours by means of applying a boot and then towing to the nearest approved
storage garage, if not reclaimed, any vehicle that is parked on the highways,
streets or public property in the Borough and has three or more delinquent
parking tickets for which appropriate notice has been sent to the registered
owner. In any case involving immobilization of a vehicle pursuant to this
section, a notice shall be placed on such a vehicle in a conspicuous manner
sufficient to warn any individual that such vehicle has been immobilized and
that any attempt to move such vehicle may result in damage thereto and
that proof of payment of the delinquent parking tickets must be presented
to the Borough in order for the boot to be removed.
§ 191-54. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that the vehicle was removed
and impounded shall be sent by the Borough to the owner of record of the
vehicle. The notice shall designate the place from which the vehicle was
removed, the reason for its removal, the garage in which it was impounded,
the applicable fees and the possibility that the vehicle will be sold at
public auction if not reclaimed within 15 days of issuance of the notice.
When the Borough intends to retain possession of the vehicle pending
an investigation, the notice shall so state, and the Borough shall issue a
subsequent notice informing the owner of the appropriate time that the
vehicle may be reclaimed.
§ 191-51 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-55
188:445
§ 191-55. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this article
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive and
shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If
payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a District Justice. Payment
of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any
vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision
of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 191-56. Failure to reclaim vehicle.
When a vehicle has not been reclaimed within 15 days of issuance of notice
that it is available to be reclaimed, the Borough or its designated agent shall
thereafter send notice to the owner of record and all registered lienholders
of the vehicle informing such owner and lienholders that the vehicle may
be reclaimed upon proof of right to possession and payment of outstanding
fees, charges and fines and that the vehicle may be sold at public auction if
not reclaimed within 15 days.
§ 191-57. Designation of garages; bonding; towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time
by the Borough Council. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the
Borough Council that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in
an amount satisfactory to the Borough Council as sufficient to indemnify
owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those vehicles
while in the custody of the garage keeper for the purpose of towing or
storage. The approved garage shall submit to the Borough Council its
schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this article
and, when the schedule is approved by the Borough Council, those charges
shall be adhered to by the approved storage garage. No different schedule
of charges shall be adopted without approval by the Borough Council, and
no different charges shall be demanded of or collected from any person
whose vehicle is removed or impounded under this article by any approved
storage garage. The Borough Council shall delete from its list of approved
storage garages any garage that makes any unapproved charge in
connection with any vehicle removed or impounded under this article.
§ 191-57.1. Record of vehicles removed, impounded and
immobilized.
The Borough shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles removed,
impounded or immobilized under this article and shall be able at all
reasonable times to furnish the owners or the agents of the owners of those
vehicles with information as to the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 191-55 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 191-57.1
188:446
ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 191-58. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of
snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named pursuant to § 191-60
of this article, the Mayor, in his discretion, may declare a snow and ice
emergency (designated in this article as a "snow emergency"). Information
on the existence of a snow emergency may be given by the Borough through
radio, newspaper or other available media, and information on the
termination of the emergency may be given by use of the same media.
§ 191-59. Parking and driving restrictions.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 191-60. Snow emergency routes.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XIX (§ 191-84),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as snow
emergency routes.
§ 191-61. Violations and penalties.
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated pursuant to
§ 191-60; or
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
A. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 191-58 of this article, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a
motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency
route, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon
conviction, shall be punishable as provided in § 191-29 of this chapter.
B. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 191-58 of this article, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and,
upon conviction, shall be punishable as provided in § 191-62 of this
chapter.
§ 191-58 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-61
188:447

ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 191-62. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or except as herein specified, every person
convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, or any supplement
thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of $25 and costs of prosecution.
§ 191-63. Repeal of previous ordinances; effect.
§ 191-64. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of
this chapter. It is hereby declared as a legislative intent that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise
invalid provision not been included herein.
§ 191-65. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect upon the adoption of the Code of the Borough
of Marcus Hook.
A. All previous ordinances of the Borough of Marcus Hook pertaining to
the regulation of traffic and parking are hereby repealed.
B. The repeal of ordinances provided for in Subsection A above shall not
affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any
act done or liability incurred in violation of any ordinance or regulation
in force immediately prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
C. The provisions of this chapter, insofar as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments.
§ 191-62 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-65
188:449

ARTICLE VIII
Schedules
§ 191-66. Schedule I: Speed Limits.
§ 191-67. Schedule II: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 191-8, traffic control signals shall
be installed and operated (or are ratified if previously installed) at the
intersections described below:
Intersection
East Tenth Street and Church Street
East Tenth Street and Plaza Street
East Tenth Street and Yates Avenue
Market Street and Tenth Street
West Tenth Street and Blueball Avenue
West Tenth Street and Green Street
West Tenth Street and Hewes Avenue
§ 191-68. Schedule III: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 191-9, no person shall make a right
turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another one-way street) when
facing a steady red signal at any of the locations described below:
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 191-7, the speed limit for both
directions of traffic for all streets in the Borough shall be regulated at
15 miles per hour except as provided below.
B. Additional speed limits shall be in accordance with the following
schedule:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Green Street 15 From Twelfth Street to Tenth
Street
Green Street 20 From Tenth Street to Delaware
Avenue
Route 13, also known
as Tenth Street or
Post Road
25 From Borough line at Trainer to
Green Street
Route 13, also known
as Tenth Street or
Post Road
35 From Green Street to Delaware
state line
§ 191-66 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-68
188:451
Name of Street Direction Prohibited Turn Onto
Church Street North East Tenth Street
East Tenth Street West Market Street
Green Street North West Tenth Street
Market Street North East Tenth Street
Market Street South West Tenth Street
West Tenth Street East Green Street
West Tenth Street East Market Street
Yates Avenue [Added
11-4-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-6,
approved
11-4-2013]
South East Tenth Street, Monday
through Friday, between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and
3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m.
§ 191-69. Schedule IV: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 191-10, no driver of any vehicle shall
make a turn of the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At
Intersection
of
(Reserved)
§ 191-70. Schedule V: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 191-11, no driver of any vehicle shall
make a U-turn at any intersection or on any street, roadway or alley within
the Borough except for:
Street
Twelfth and Market Streets, which travel north to south
§ 191-71. Schedule VI: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 191-12, the following-described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Cedar Street South Entire length
Church Street [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-2, approved
6-2-2014]
North Eighth Street to Ninth Street
§ 191-68 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 191-71
188:452
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
East Eighth Street [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-2, approved
6-2-2014]
East Market Street to Church
Street
Foltz Lane [Amended
11-4-1991 by Ord. No.
O-91-5; approved
11-4-1991]
East McClenachan Terrace to Yates
Avenue
Green Street South Twelfth Street to Tenth Street
Ledward Lane South Entire length
Maiden Lane South Twelfth Street to Fifth Street
Mallon Avenue West Maiden Lane to Green Street
Marshall Avenue West Entire length
McClure Lane South Entire length
Montella Lane East Entire length
Plaza Street West Entire length
Reed Lane [Amended
9-8-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-4, approved
9-8-2009]
North Entire length
Rennie Lane South Entire length
Ross Lane East McClure Lane to Church
Street
Spruce Street North Entire length
Walnut Street North Entire length
Washington Street North Entire length
Wertz Lane West Entire length
West Eighth Street West Market Street to Green Street
West Ninth Street East Green Street to Market Street
West Second Street West Entire length
West Third Street West Entire length
Williams Lane North Entire length
§ 191-72. Schedule VII: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 191-13, no vehicle shall pass another
vehicle traveling in the same direction on the following streets, alleys or
lanes unless the other vehicle is stopped when not required or permitted
to do so or otherwise causing an obstruction, therefore forcing the passing
vehicle to go around. Markings or other traffic control devices shall be
§ 191-71 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-72
188:453
displayed on the following streets. It is understood that some streets are
already marked with double yellow lines:
Name of Street Location
Green Street From Tenth Street to Delaware Avenue
Market Street From bridge to Fourth Street
Tenth Street From Trainer/Marcus Hook Borough line to
approximately 200 feet west of Green Street
§ 191-73. Schedule VIII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 191-14, the following-described
streets or parts of streets are hereby established as through streets:
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 191-74. Schedule IX: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 191-15, the following-described
intersections are hereby established as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be erected thereon as indicated in § 191-15:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Cedar Street South Dalton Lane
Cedar Street South Pine Street
Cedar Street South Plaza Street
Chestnut Street East Maple Street
Chestnut Street West Maple Street
Church Street North East Fourth Street
Church Street North East Ninth Street
Church Street South Delaware Avenue
Church Street South East Eighth Street
Church Street South East Ninth Street
Dalton Lane East Walnut Street
Dalton Lane West Cedar Street
East Delaware Avenue West Market Street
East Eighth Street East Church Street
East Eighth Street West Market Street
East Fourth Street West Market Street
East Ninth Street East Church Street
East Ninth Street West Market Street
§ 191-72 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 191-74
188:454
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Eleventh Street East Market Street
Eleventh Street East Washington Street
Eleventh Street West Washington Street
Foltz Lane East McClenachan Terrace
Foltz Lane East Yates Avenue
Green Street North West Ninth Street
Green Street [Added
5-6-2019 by Ord. No.
O-19-2, approved
5-6-2019]
North and
south
Fourth Street
Green Street South Delaware Avenue
Green Street South Eleventh Street
Green Street South West Ninth Street
Maiden Lane South East Ninth Street
Maiden Lane South Eleventh Street
Maiden Lane South Marshall Avenue
Maiden Lane South West Eighth Street
Maiden Lane South West Fifth Street
Maiden Lane South West Seventh Street
Maiden Lane South West Sixth Street
Mallon Avenue West Green Street
Maple Street North Chestnut Street
Maple Street North Pine Street
Maple Street South Pine Street
Maple Street South Plaza Street
Market Lane East Church Street
Market Lane West Market Street
Market Street North Eighth Street
Market Street North Fourth Street
Market Street [Added
1-7-1991 by Ord. No.
O-91-1; approved
1-7-1991]
North Ninth Street
Market Street North Seventh Street
§ 191-74 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-74
188:455
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Market Street [Added
6-5-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-4, approved
6-5-2006]
North Sixth Street
Market Street South Delaware Avenue
Market Street South Eighth Street
Market Street South Eleventh Street
Market Street South Fourth Street
Market Street [Added
1-7-1991 by Ord. No.
O-91-1; approved
1-7-1991]
South Ninth Street
Market Street [Added
6-5-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-4, approved
6-5-2006]
South Second Street
Market Street South Seventh Street
Market Street [Added
6-5-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-4, approved
6-5-2006]
South Sixth Street
Market Street [Added
6-6-2016 by Ord. No.
O-16-3, approved
6-6-2016]
South Third Street
Marshall Avenue West Green Street
McClenachan Terrace South East Tenth Street
McClure Lane South East Eighth Street
McClure Lane South East Ninth Street
McClure Lane South Market Street Parking Lot No. 2
Montella Lane East Church Street
Pine Street East Cedar Street
Pine Street East Maple Street
Pine Street [Added
11-4-1991 by Ord. No.
O-91-5; approved
11-4-1991]
East Walnut Street
Pine Street West Cedar Street
Pine Street West Maple Street
§ 191-74 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 191-74
188:456
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Pine Street West Spruce Street
Plum Street North East Fourth Street
Plum Street West Market Street
Rennie Lane [Added
11-4-1991 by Ord. No.
O-91-5; approved
11-4-1991]
South 126 feet north of Tenth Street
Roberts Lane North Chestnut Street
Spruce Street North Chestnut Street
Spruce Street [Added
11-4-2019 by Ord. No.
O-19-5, approved
11-4-2019]
Northwest Spruce Street Pine Street
Walnut Street North Dalton Lane
Walnut Street North Pine Street
Washington Street North Eleventh Street
Washington Street North Twelfth Street
Wertz Lane West McClure Lane
West Delaware Avenue East Market Street
West Eighth Street West Green Street
West Fifth Street East Market Street
West Fifth Street West Green Street
West Fourth Street West Green Street
West Ninth Street East Green Street
West Ninth Street East Market Street
West Second Street West Green Street
West Seventh Street East Market Street
West Seventh Street West Green Street
West Sixth Street East Market Street
West Sixth Street West Green Street
West Third Street West Green Street
Williams Lane East Yates Avenue
Williams Lane South Foltz Lane
Yates Avenue North Chestnut Street
§ 191-74 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-75
188:457
§ 191-75. Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 191-16, the following-described
intersections are hereby established as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be erected thereon as indicated in § 191-16:
Yield Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 191-76. Schedule XI: Closing of Certain Streets to Certain
Vehicles; Prohibiting Trucks Except for Local Deliveries. [Amended
7-11-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-3, approved 7-11-2011]
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 191-17, it shall be unlawful for
any person to drive any vehicle, except a passenger vehicle (but not
including any passenger vehicle drawing any trailer or towing any other
vehicle), upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
[Amended 1-2-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-1, approved 1-2-2017]
Name of Street Limits
Church Street From Eighth Street to Tenth Street
Eighth Street From Market Street to Church Street
Eleventh Street From Market Street to Green Street
Green Street From Tenth Street to Twelfth Street
Ninth Street From Market Street to Church Street
Second Street From Market Street to Green Street
Third Street From Market Street to Green Street
Twelfth Street From Market Street to Green Street
Washington Street From Tenth Street to Twelfth Street
B. In accordance with the provisions of § 191-17, trucks are prohibited
from accessing the streets described below, except for local deliveries.
Local deliveries are defined as deliveries or picking up materials or
merchandise going to or from a residence, commercial/business
establishment, or public property.
Name of Street Limits
Church Street From Tenth Street to Eighth Street
Green Street From Tenth Street to Delaware Avenue
Market Street From Tenth Street to Delaware Avenue
Penn Avenue From Tenth Street to Fourth Street
C. In accordance with the provisions of § 191-17, trucks are prohibited
from accessing the streets described below, except for local residential
deliveries. Local residential deliveries are defined as deliveries or
§ 191-75 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 191-76
188:458
§ 191-77. Schedule XII: Street Access Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 191-18, vehicles shall not enter the
streets listed below during the hours and on the days designated on signs
posted thereon and listed herewith:
Name of Street Hours Location
Green Street 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday through
Friday
At Twelfth Street and
Green Street
Maiden Lane 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday through
Friday
At Twelfth Street and
Maiden Lane
Reed Lane 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday through
Friday
At Twelfth Street and Reed
Lane
Rennie Lane 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday through
Friday
At Twelfth Street and
Rennie Lane
§ 191-78. Schedule XIII: Vehicle Weight Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 191-19, gross weight limits are
established as indicated for commercial vehicles or other tractor, trailer or
tractor-trailer combinations upon the streets or bridges or portions thereof
described below, except for the purpose of making local deliveries on said
streets:
Name of Street or
Bridge
Maximum Gross
Weight
(pounds) Location
Market Street [Added
9-5-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-5, approved
9-5-2017]
21,000 From Fourth Street to
Delaware Avenue
§ 191-79. Schedule XIV: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 191-21, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below except at the angle
designated:
picking up materials or merchandise going to or from a residence.
[Added 11-7-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-5, approved 11-7-2016]
Name of Street Limits
Plaza Street Entire length
Yates Avenue From Tenth Street to Chestnut Street
§ 191-76 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-79
188:459
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
Delaware Avenue South 90 Between Market Street
and Church Street and
Market Square Memorial
Park
Market Street (1100
block)
West 45 Under railroad bridge
Twelfth Street North 90 Between Washington
Street and Rennie Lane
§ 191-80. Schedule XV: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 191-22, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following-described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Cedar Street East Entire length
Chestnut Street South Entire length
Church Street [Added
2-6-1995 by Ord. No.
O-95-1, approved
2-6-1995]
East From the Eighth (8th) Street
south curbline for a distance of
80 feet north
Church Street West From Delaware Avenue to
Fourth Street
Church Street West From Tenth Street to Wertz Lane
Dalton Lane South From Cedar Street to Walnut
Street
Delaware Avenue [Added
12-7-1998 by Ord. No.
O-98-2, approved
12-7-1998]
North From Market Street to Church
Street
Delaware Avenue South From Church Street to Green
Street except in designated
areas properly marked
East Eighth Street Both From Market Street to McClure
Lane
East Fourth Street North From Market Street to Church
Street
East Ninth Street South From Market Street to McClure
Lane
East Tenth Street [Repealed 5-3-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-1, approved
5-3-2004]
§ 191-79 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 191-80
188:460
Name of Street Side Location
East Tenth Street South From Church Street to Borough
line
Eleventh Street North From Maiden Lane to Market
Street
Eleventh Street South From Market Street to
Washington Street
Foltz Lane Both Entire length
Green Street East From Fourth Street to Tenth
Street
Green Street [Added
1-6-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-1, approved
1-6-2003]
West Delaware Avenue to Seventh
Street
Green Street [Added
10-5-1992 by Ord. No.
O-92-2, approved
10-5-1992]
West From Marshall Avenue to Tenth
Street, a distance of 235 feet
Green Street West From Second Street to Delaware
Avenue
Green Street West From Tenth Street to Twelfth
Street
Green Street [Added
11-7-1994 by Ord. No.
O-94-6, approved
11-7-1994]
West From 10th Street south a
distance of 193 feet
Ledward Lane Both Entire length
Maiden Lane Both Entire length
Mallon Avenue Both Entire length
Market Lane North From Church Street to Market
Street
Market Street [Amended
11-4-1991 by Ord. No.
O-91-5; approved
11-4-1991]
East From Twelfth Street to Fourth
Street
Marshall Avenue South From Market Street to Green
Street
McClenachan Terrace West Entire length
McClure Lane Both Entire length
Montella Lane Both Entire length
Mullen Lane Both Entire length
Olive Lane Both Entire length
§ 191-80 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-80
188:461
Name of Street Side Location
Pine Street South Entire length
Plum Street East Plum Street at Fourth Street
Plum Street South East Plum Street
Reed Lane Both Entire length
Roberts Lane Both Entire length
Rodgers Lane Both Entire length
Ross Lane Both Entire length
Second Street North From Market Street to Green
Street
Spruce Street West Entire length
Tenth Street Both From Delaware state line to
Green Street except north side
from Green Street to Rennie
Lane
Twelfth Street Both From Market Street to
Washington Street
Twelfth Street Both From Washington Street to
Rennie Lane except in
designated areas properly
marked for residential parking
Washington Street [Added
11-2-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-5, approved
11-2-2009]
East From the Tenth Street north
curbline for a distance of 85 feet
north to unnamed private alley
Washington Street East From Eleventh Street to Twelfth
Street
Washington Street West From Tenth Street to Eleventh
Street
West Fourth Street [Added
9-8-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-4, approved
9-8-2015]
South Maiden Lane to Green Street
West Fourth Street North From Market Street to Green
Street
Williams Lane Both Entire length
§ 191-81. Schedule XVI: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
[Amended 11-4-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-6, approved 11-4-2013;
9-8-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-4, approved 9-8-2015]
In accordance with the provisions of § 191-23, no person shall stop, stand,
park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in
§ 191-80 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 191-81
188:462
any of the following locations listed below, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police
officer, other authorized officer or official traffic control device between the
hours specified below of any day, except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays,
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
§ 191-82. Schedule XVII: Time Limit Parking.
Name of Street Side Time Limit Location
East Ninth Street
[Added 5-4-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-1,
approved 5-4-2015]
South 15 minutes, 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
From Market Street
to McClure Lane
Green Street East 15 minutes, 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday
through
Saturday
From Second Street
to Delaware Avenue
A. Exceptions.
(1) Any vehicle actually engaged in picking up or discharging
physically or mentally disabled students who are attending or
visiting the school.
(2) Vehicles of the Borough of Marcus Hook or employees engaged in
the work of the Borough; fire apparatus; ambulances; or vehicles
engaged in the work of a public utility.
(3) Any school bus actually engaged in picking up or discharging
students but only for a period of time necessary to safely pick up
and discharge students.
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
East Eighth
Street
South During regular
school hours
From Market Street
to Church Street
Green Street East 8:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m., Monday
through Friday
From Municipal
Building Garage to
Tenth Street,
reserved for
Borough employees
Market Street West 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., Monday
through Friday
From Eleventh
Street to Tenth
Street
Rennie Lane East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon, Tuesday
From Twelfth Street
to Tenth Street
§ 191-81 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-82
188:463
Name of Street Side Time Limit Location
Market Street [Added
6-5-2017 by Ord.
No. O-17-3,
approved 6-5-2017]
West 15 minutes In front of 924 and
926 Market Street
Tenth Street South 15 minutes From Market Street
to McClure Lane
§ 191-83. Schedule XVIII: Special Purpose Parking Zones/
Residential Parking Zones.
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 191-25, the following are hereby
established as residential parking zones: [Amended 6-5-2006 by Ord.
No. O-06-4, approved 6-5-2006]
(1) Designation of residential parking area. All streets in the Borough
of Marcus Hook are hereby designated as residential permit
parking areas seven days a week, 24 hours a day, with the
exception of Market Street, between 4th Street and Delaware
Avenue, 10th Street, entire length, and metered parking spaces.
(a) Market Street, between 4th Street and Delaware Avenue, and
10th Street, entire length, are designated residential permit
parking areas between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(b) Signs shall be erected along the streets indicating that parking
shall be by permit only.
(2) Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(a) Vehicles of the Borough of Marcus Hook or employees engaged
in the work of the Borough; fire apparatus; ambulances; or
vehicles engaged in the work of a public utility.
(b) Vehicles actually engaged in the course of construction or
repair of streets or while actually engaged in making deliveries
or rendering services on or upon any property adjacent to the
street where said vehicle is parked.
(c) Any school bus actually engaged in picking up or discharging
students but only for a period of time necessary to safely pick
up and discharge students.
(d) Employees of businesses adjoining residential permit parking
areas who have been issued special parking permits.
(3) Application for permit. Effective January 1, 2020, every three years,
application for a residential parking permit shall be made to the
Chief of Police by the person desiring the permit, who shall be the
owner or the driver of a motor vehicle who resides on a property
immediately adjacent to a street or other location within the
§ 191-82 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 191-83
188:464
residential permit parking area. A separate application shall be
required for each motor vehicle. Each application shall contain the
following information: the name of the owner of the motor vehicle;
the address of the resident; the make, model and registration
number of the motor vehicle; the driver number as taken from
the applicant's current driver's license; and vehicle insurance
information. The applicant shall be required, at the time of making
application, to present a valid Pennsylvania driver's license listing
a Marcus Hook address. One residential parking permit will be
issued for each vehicle registered to a Marcus Hook address but
not to exceed the number of licensed drivers in the household.
[Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-1, approved 3-7-2011;
8-7-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-4, approved 8-7-2017; 11-4-2019
by Ord. No. O-19-4, approved 11-4-2019]
(4) Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of the application and
determination by the Chief of Police that the information upon the
application shows that the applicant is entitled to a residential
parking permit, the Chief of Police shall issue to the applicant a
residential parking permit.
(5) Temporary and exemption parking permits. Temporary parking
permits may be issued by the Chief of Police to bona fide visitors of
residents and to residents with rented vehicles. Residents are to
advise the Marcus Hook Police Department when a visitor or
visitors are expected, providing the make, model, and license
number of the visitor's vehicle. A visitor parking permit shall not
authorize its holder to park a motor vehicle in any one place on a
street designated a residential parking area for a period in excess
of 12 consecutive hours and in excess of five occasions per month.
(6) Responsibility of permit holder.
(a) While a vehicle for which a residential parking permit has been
issued is so parked, the permit shall be displayed on the
exterior of the rear windshield, driver's side top corner of the
vehicle. A residential parking permit does not guarantee or
reserve to the holder a parking space within the residential
parking areas of the Borough of Marcus Hook. [Amended
8-7-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-4, approved 8-7-2017]
(b) A residential parking permit shall not authorize its holder to
park a motor vehicle in any place where or at any time when
stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicle is prohibited or
set aside for other specified type of vehicles, nor shall the
permit exempt its holder from the observance of any traffic or
parking regulation other than residential permit parking
regulations or restriction.
(c) No permit issued shall be transferable. No person other than
the permit holder who was issued the permit shall use a
§ 191-83 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-83
188:465
residential parking permit or display it on a vehicle operated.
Any such use or display by a person other than the permit
holder shall constitute a violation of this section by the permit
holder and by the person who so used or displayed the parking
permit.
(d) It shall constitute a violation of this section for any person
falsely to represent himself as eligible for residential parking
permit or to furnish false information in an application to the
Chief of Police in order to obtain a residential parking permit.
(7) Revocation of permit. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to
revoke the residential parking permit of any permit holder found to
be in violation of any provision of this section. Upon written
notification to the permit holder of the revocation, the permit
holder shall surrender the permit to the Chief of Police. Failure to
do so, when so requested, shall constitute a violation of this
section, provided that any person receiving such a notice may,
within 10 days after the date of the notice, appeal to the Council for
a hearing on the revocation, and the decision of the Council shall be
final.107
B. Other locations may vary depending on approved application of persons
who meet the qualifications. Special purpose parking zone will be
posted by clearly marked signs indicating the type of special purpose
parking.
(1) (Reserved)108
(2) The following is hereby established as a loading and unloading
zone for commercial vehicles: [Added 12-7-1998 by Ord. No.
O-98-2, approved 12-7-1998]
Name of Street Side Location
Church Street East 90 feet south of 10th Street
curbline for a distance of 72 feet
(3) The following is hereby established as clergy parking zone: [Added
4-2-2001 by Ord. No. O-01-2, approved 4-2-2001]
Name of Street Side Location
Eighth Street South 15 feet east of intersection with
Green Street (1 parking space)
(4) The following is hereby established as a loading and unloading
zone for commercial vehicles:109 [Added 1-6-2003 by Ord. No.
107. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(8), Residential parking permit fee, which immediately
followed, was repealed 12-4-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-7, approved 12-4-2017.
108. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1), providing a Police Department parking zone, was
repealed 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-4, approved 8-7-2017.
§ 191-83 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 191-83
188:466
§ 191-84. Schedule XIX: Snow Emergency Routes.
In accordance with the provisions of § 191-60, the following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as snow emergency routes:
Name of Street Units
Green Street West Tenth Street to Delaware Avenue
Market Street Entire length
Tenth Street Entire length
§ 191-85. Schedule XX: Parking Meter Locations and Rules.
Parking meters shall be installed at the following locations and may be
operated for the periods of time and at the rates indicated:
Location
Number of
Meters
Length of
Meter Clock Rate
Market Street, west side
from Eleventh Street to
Marshall Avenue
17 2 hours $0.25 per
hour
Market Street, west side
from Eleventh Street
north to railroad tracks
16 10 hours $0.50 per 5
hours
Parking Lot No. 1,
Eleventh and Market
Streets [Amended
4-6-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-1, approved
4-6-2009]
42 10 hours $1 per 5
hours
O-03-1, approved 1-6-2003; amended 11-7-2016 by Ord. No.
O-16-6, approved 11-7-2016]
Name of Street Side Location Times
Market Street
[Added 4-2-2018
by Ord. No.
O-18-2;
approved
4-2-2018]
East In front of 46
East Tenth
Street
8:00 a.m. through
6:00 p.m.,
Monday through
Saturday
109. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5) regarding emergency responder parking zones,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 8-4-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-1,
approved 8-4-2008.
§ 191-83 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 191-85
188:467
Location
Number of
Meters
Length of
Meter Clock Rate
Parking Lot No. 1,
Eleventh and Market
Streets [Amended
11-1-1993 by Ord. No.
O-93-8, approved
11-1-1993; 4-6-2009
by Ord. No. O-09-1,
approved 4-6-2009]
24 3 hours $0.50 per 3
hours
Parking Lot No. 2,
Market Street
[Amended 11-1-1993
by Ord. No. O-93-8,
approved 11-1-1993;
4-6-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-1, approved
4-6-2009]
20 3 hours $0.50 per 3
hours
Tenth Street, south side
from Green Street to
Church Street
19 2 hours $0.25 per
hour
Tenth Street, north side
from Washington Street
east to railroad tracks
[Amended 11-1-1993
by Ord. No. O-93-8,
approved 11-1-1993]
22 2 hours $0.25 per
hour
§ 191-85 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 191-85
188:468
Chapter 193
VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 175. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 191.
§ 193-1. Operation of motor vehicles, motorcycles or tractors on
sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any individual to operate a motor vehicle, motorcycle
or tractor upon any sidewalk in the Borough; nor shall any individual
operate a motor vehicle, tractor or motor cycle upon or across any sidewalk,
except in order to gain access to or egress from a driveway or alley at such
location where the curb, if such sidewalk is curbed, shall have been properly
cut down for said purpose.
§ 193-2. Operation of all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles, etc., on
sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any individual to operate any motor-driven vehicle
or device, including but not limited to all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles,
minibikes, motor scooters, trail bikes, skateboards, power-wheels,
pedacycles or motorized go-carts upon any sidewalk located in the Borough.
§ 193-3. Unlicensed motor-driven vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any individual to operate any type of unlicensed
motor-driven vehicle or device, including but not limited to all-terrain
vehicles, snowmobiles, minibikes, trail bikes, motor scooters, skateboards,
power wheels, pedacycles, motorized go-carts, upon any street, way, alley,
roadway, trafficway, highway or public grounds located in the Borough of
Marcus Hook. This section does not apply to any passenger motor vehicle,
tractor or motorcycle which is a properly registered motor vehicle, provided
that said vehicle is operated by a properly licensed driver.
§ 193-4. Exceptions.
This section shall not apply to any person who is physically handicapped,
physically disabled or is physically challenged and is operating a motorized
device as a result of said handicap, disability or physical challenge, which
device is recognized by the Americans With Disabilities Act as a proper
mode of conveyance.
§ 193-5. Operation on private property.
It shall be unlawful for any individual to operate any type of motor-driven
vehicle or device, including but not limited to all-terrain vehicles,
§ 191-85 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 193-5
193:469
snowmobiles, minibikes, trail bikes, motor scooters, skateboards, power
wheels, pedacycles, motorized go-carts on the private property of another
without the express written permission of the owner or occupant. This
prohibition shall prevail whether or not the vehicle or operator is licensed
or unlicensed.
§ 193-6. Impoundment of vehicle.
The Police Department of the Borough of Marcus Hook or any law
enforcement officer of the Borough of Marcus Hook shall confiscate and
impound the unlicensed vehicle operated in violation of this chapter. The
unlicensed vehicle shall be returned to the owner thereof upon payment
of any fine imposed as a result of the violation of this chapter and upon
payment of any storage charges incurred as a result of the impoundment.
§ 193-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of up to the
maximum amount provided from time to time by state statute. Should that
owner of any unlicensed vehicle be convicted of a second violation of the
terms of this chapter within a period of six months from the date of the first
violation, the Police Department shall impound the vehicle and shall sell the
same pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code
pertaining to forfeited and/or impounded vehicles.
Chapter 196
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historical Commission — See Ch. 17.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 34.
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 51.
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 62.
Billboards and advertising structures — See
Ch. 70.
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 84.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 96.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 99.
Massage parlors — See Ch. 129.
Multiple dwellings; rooming houses; rental
units — See Ch. 135.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 157.
Solid waste — See Ch. 172.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 174.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
178.
§ 193-5 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 193-7
193:470
ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 196-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Marcus Hook Borough
Zoning Ordinance of 2005."
§ 196-2. Purposes.
The zoning regulations and districts set forth in this chapter are designed to
achieve the following purposes as stated in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (MPC), Act 247 of 1968, as amended:110
§ 196-3. Establishment of districts.
For the purposes of this chapter, Marcus Hook Borough is hereby divided
into the following zoning districts:
R-1 Residential District
R-2 Residential District
R-3 Residential District
R-4 Planned Residential District
A. To promote, protect, and facilitate any or all of the following: the public
health, safety, and general welfare; coordinated and practical
community development and growth and proper population density;
guidance on uses of land and structures, type and location of public
grounds and facilities; promotion of energy conservation through
planning practices and promotion of the effective utilization of
renewable energy sources; the provision of adequate light, water, and
air, access to incident solar energy, police and fire protection,
transportation, sewerage, and schools; and preservation of the natural,
scenic, and historic values in the environment as well as the
preservation of wetlands, aquifers, and floodplains.
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land; blight;
danger and congestion in travel and transportation; or loss of health,
life, or property from fire, flood, panic, or other dangers.
C. To provide for the use of land within the municipality for residential
housing of various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of
housing, including single-family and a reasonable range of multifamily
dwellings in various arrangements.
D. To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including
population and employment growth, and opportunities for development
of a variety of residential dwelling types and nonresidential uses.
110. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 196-1 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-3
193:471
CR Central Retail District
PBP Planned Business Park District
RBC Recreational Business Campus District
DMU Downtown Mixed Use District
WMU Waterfront Mixed Use District
TOD Transit-Oriented Development District
IT Industrial Transition District
HI Heavy Industrial District
§ 196-4. Establishment of controls.
§ 196-5. Zoning Map; district boundary lines; tolerances.
A. Minimum and uniform regulations. Unless specifically indicated
otherwise, the regulations set forth in this chapter shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structures
or land.
B. Proposed uses and structures. In all zoning districts, after the effective
date of this chapter, any new building or other structure or any tract of
land shall be constructed, developed, and used only in accordance with
the regulations specified herein, except where a variance has been
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with Article
XXII.
C. Existing uses and structures. In all districts, after the effective date of
this chapter, any lawful, existing building or other structure or any tract
of land which is not in conformity with the regulations of the district in
which it is located shall be deemed to be nonconforming and subject to
the regulations of Article XIX.
A. The zoning district locations and boundaries are those that exist on the
legally adopted official Zoning Map, a copy of which is attached hereto
and made a part of this Zoning Ordinance. The original Zoning Map
shall be kept on file in the office of the Borough Manager. Whenever
changes are made in the boundaries or other matters included on the
said Zoning Map, such changes in the map shall be made by the
Borough Engineer within five days after the amendment has been
approved by Borough Council.
B. Where possible, the boundaries between districts shall follow natural or
man-made boundaries and lines. Unless otherwise indicated,
boundaries shall be the center line or extension of the center line of a
street, alley, or highway, railroad rights-of-way, streams, or other
natural or man-made features that can form logical boundaries to
districts.
§ 196-3 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-5
193:472
§ 196-6. Interpretation.
§ 196-7. Municipal liability.
The grant of a permit or approval under this chapter shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the Borough as to the
safety of the proposed use and shall create no liability upon the Borough, its
officials, or employees.
C. Where a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate
ownership at the effective date of this chapter, the regulations of the
less restricted district shall extend over the portion of the lot in the
more restricted district a distance of not more than 25 feet from the
district boundary.
D. Boundaries indicated as appearing to follow platted lot lines shall be
construed as following such lot lines. Distances not specifically
indicated on the official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of
the map. In any other circumstances not covered above or in the event
of any uncertainty as to the boundary of any district, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall interpret the district boundaries.
A. In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter,
the said provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for
the promotion and protection of the public health, welfare, and safety.
Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than
those of any other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this
chapter shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other
ordinance, or regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter,
the provisions of such statute, ordinance, or regulation shall be
controlling.
B. In interpreting the language of this Zoning Ordinance to determine the
extent of the restriction upon the use of the property, the language shall
be interpreted, where doubt exists as to the intended meaning of the
language written and enacted by Borough Council, in favor of the
property owner and against any implied extension of the restriction.
§ 196-5 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-7
193:473

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 196-8. Interpretation of language.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings indicated herein.
Words used in the present tense include the future. The singular shall
include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular. The word
"building" includes the word "structure." The phrase "used for" includes
"arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," or "occupied
for." The word "person" includes an individual, corporation, partnership,
incorporated association, or any other similar entity. The words "includes"
or "including" shall not limit the term to the specified examples but are
intended to extend their meaning to all other instances of like kind and
character. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and not discretionary,
and the word "may" is permissive. Terms not defined herein shall have the
meanings customarily assigned to them.
§ 196-9. Definitions.
In this chapter, words, terms, and phrases shall have the following
meanings:
ABANDONMENT — Where a building or land is abandoned for 12
consecutive months or more, whereby the owner discontinues the
maintenance, use, or any activity, the building or structure shall be declared
abandoned and may be required to be removed. In the case of abandonment
of a nonconforming use, § 196-150 applies.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure detached from a principal building
on the same lot and incidental and subordinate to the principal building or
use.
ACCESSORY USE — A use of land or of a building or portion thereof
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or
building and located on the same lot with such principal use.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Activities, publications, movies, videotapes,
and/or live or televised performances which have as their dominant theme
or themes explicit sexual activities and/or the exhibition of human anatomy
which is not normally seen in public or in other commercial or club-type
operations and which may or may not exclude minors by virtue or age.
Implicit in this definition are the following: bookstores, movie theaters,
restaurants, bars, and any other operation which qualifies for inclusion
by virtue of the above wording, regardless of the type of other uses or
operations which may also be conducted on or in the property or properties
involved.
ALTERATION — Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members
of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders,
or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors, windows, means of
§ 196-8 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-9
193:475
ingress and egress, or any enlargement to or diminution of a building or
structure, or the moving of a building from one location to another.
ALTERATION, INCIDENTAL — Modifications to an existing structure that
are of a cosmetic nature, replacement of utilities, or rearrangement of nonload-
bearing partitions.
ANTENNA — Any device or mechanism used in the collection, transmission,
routing, or receiving of telecommunications transmissions, radio signals, or
radio frequency energy, including, but not limited to, use by or provision
of wireless communications, cellular communications, and personal
communications services.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any pole, telescoping mast, tower,
tripod, or any other structure which supports or has attached to it an
antenna or antennas.
APARTMENT BUILDING — A structure containing three or more apartment
units.
APARTMENT UNIT — One or more rooms with individual access, private
bath and kitchen facilities, comprising an independent, self-contained
dwelling unit in a building.
BASEMENT — An enclosed area located partly or completely below grade.
A basement shall be considered a story for the purpose of height
measurement if the basement ceiling is five feet or more above the average
grade level around the building.
BILLBOARD — A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other
than the premises on which the sign is located.
BUFFER — A strip of land intended to separate one use or district from
another by providing an open, unobstructed space intended to absorb,
shield, or block noise, light, view, or other impacts of the use having the
greater impact. Buffers shall be planted with grass or other ground cover
and may be part of the required yards. Buffers are often employed between
a residential district and an abutting nonresidential district having greater
impacts. There shall be no structures other than fences and no equipment,
storage, parking, or trash disposal in buffer areas. Dimensions of buffers
shall be as required by the zoning district.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof
or other covering and designed or used for shelter or enclosure of any
person, animal, property, or equipment of any kind.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The ratio obtained by dividing the ground floor
area within the outside of the exterior walls of all principal and accessory
buildings on a lot by the total area of the lot upon which buildings are
located.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
level of the ground surrounding the structure to the top of the highest point
of the roof for flat roofs and to the ridge of the gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
§ 196-9 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-9
193:476
Chimneys, spires, towers, steeples, mechanical equipment, tanks, vessels,
antennas, and similar projections of the buildings not intended for human
occupancy shall not be included in calculating the height, unless specifically
stated otherwise in this chapter.
BUILDING LINE — A line, parallel to the street right-of-way line, which
establishes the actual location of the front wall of the principal building on
the lot.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line, parallel to the street right-of-way line,
at a distance that is at least equal to the depth of the front yard required for
the district in which the lot is located.
BUSINESS PARK — A tract of land that has been planned, developed,
and operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual industrial
or business establishments, with special attention to circulation, parking,
utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility.
CAFETERIA — A restaurant designed so that customers carry their meals
from a counter to their tables.
CELL SITE — A tract or parcel of land that contains the wireless, cellular,
or personal communications service antenna, its antenna support structure,
accessory buildings, and parking and may include other uses associated
with and ancillary to providing wireless communications, cellular
communications, or personal communications services.
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A facility which includes the
sending and receiving antennas, antenna support structures, and associated
electronic equipment that is located in a prefabricated or modular structure
or cabinets.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A document issued by a duly authorized
local authority allowing the occupancy of a building and certifying that the
structure or use has been constructed or will be used in compliance with all
applicable local codes and ordinances.
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility that is licensed to provide care for
seven or more children unrelated to the operator, where the child care areas
are not being used as a family residence.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A comprehensive long-range plan intended to
guide the growth and development of a community or region that includes
analysis, recommendations, and proposals for the community's population,
economy, housing, transportation, community facilities, land use, and
related areas.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use specifically listed within this chapter pursuant
to Article VI of the MPC111 and the applicable provisions of Article XVIII
of this chapter. Such use may only be authorized by Borough Council after
meeting the requirements of Article XVIII and the MPC.
111. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10601 et seq.
§ 196-9 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-9
193:477
CONVERSION — A change in the use of a building such as the change
of a single-family dwelling into a multifamily dwelling or the change of
a residential or retail use to offices. Such change may be accomplished
without subdivision or the introduction of a new owner. Where the use and
dimensional regulations of this chapter permit, such conversion may be
accomplished by appropriate alteration upon the issuance of the necessary
permits.
CUBIC CONTENT — The total volume of a structure (height multiplied by
length multiplied by width), but excluding that portion of a stack or other
projection that is higher than the highest point of the principal building.
DENSITY, GROSS — The maximum number of dwelling units per acre. This
term refers to all of the land within the boundaries of a particular area,
including streets, rights-of-way, easements, etc.
DENSITY, NET — The maximum number of dwelling units per acre. This
term refers to land within the boundaries of a particular area but excludes
streets, rights-of-way, and easements in calculating net density.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision, land development, or any other development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, streets
and other paving, utilities, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling
operations and the subdivision of land.
DWELLING — A building or unit designed and constructed for residential
use.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building containing three or more dwelling
units, including units that are located one over another.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED (TOWN/ROWHOUSE) — A singlefamily
dwelling unit within a building, which unit has at least one party
wall in common with other dwelling units in the same row; a townhouse or
rowhouse. After the effective date of this chapter, no such building shall be
constructed with more than six attached units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building designed for and
occupied exclusively as a residence for only one family with yards on all
sides of the dwelling.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED (TWIN) — Two dwelling
units, each accommodating one family, which are attached side by side by
means of a party wall, with each dwelling unit having only one side yard.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY DETACHED (DUPLEX) — A building designed or
occupied exclusively as a residence for two families living independently of
one another. The usual arrangement is for one unit to be located above the
other.
DWELLING UNIT — A grouping of rooms designed, occupied, or intended
for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and
§ 196-9 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-9
193:478
sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of
a single family maintaining a household.
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit when said individuals are related by blood, marriage,
or adoption, including foster children; or not more than four unrelated
individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit with single kitchen
facilities.
FAMILY-BASED COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FACILITY — A dwelling,
licensed by the appropriate state agency, shared by persons requiring
special care and their supervisors who live together as a single
housekeeping unit in a family-like environment. This facility is designed to
create a residential environment for the developmentally disabled, mentally
ill or retarded, handicapped, or similar groups unable to live without
supervision. The maximum number of residents shall not exceed seven,
excluding supervisors. These facilities shall not be used to accommodate
persons recovering from the effects of drugs or alcohol or inmates of penal
institutions.
FAMILY CHILD DAY-CARE HOME — A home, other than the child's own
home, operated for profit or not for profit, in which child care is provided at
any one time to four, five, or six children unrelated to the operator.
FERRY — A boat or other craft intended and designed for the transport or
conveyance of not more than 30 passengers. Such vessel shall not exceed a
length of 80 feet.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls
or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings, but not including
interior parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicles, or any space
where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet. "Gross floor area" also
includes, but is not limited to, the following:
FLOOR AREA, NET — The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding
stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking
or loading, and all floors below the first or ground floor, except when used
or intended to be used for human habitation or service to the public.
FOOD PREPARATION/CATERING — The preparation, packaging,
separation, shrink wrapping, and vacuum sealing of food items for the
purpose of later consumption; or the preparation, cooking, and baking
of raw food items, generally in large quantities, for transport to off-site
locations for consumption.
Elevator shaft, stairwell, and attic space providing headroom of six or
more feet.
A.
The floor areas of roofed terraces, exterior balconies, breezeways, or
porches where over 50% of the perimeter is enclosed.
B.
Any floor space used for dwelling purposes no matter where located
within a building.
C.
§ 196-9 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-9
193:479
FREESTANDING BUILDING — Any building located within a development
site which is separate from any group or cluster development on such site
and which shall comply with the regulations of the district in which it is
located.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including structures
thereon, or any building or part thereof that is used for the sale of gasoline
or other motor vehicle fuel or accessories and which may include facilities
for lubricating, washing, or otherwise servicing motor vehicles, but which
shall not include painting or body and fender repairs.
GASOLINE STATION, SELF-SERVICE — A property and/or place of business
where flammable or combustible liquids used as motor fuels are stored and
dispensed from fixed equipment into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles by a
person other than the service station attendant.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Those chemicals or substances which are
defined as "physical hazards" or "health hazards" in the most recently
adopted version of the Uniform Construction Code.
HEALTH HAZARD — A classification of a chemical for which there is
statistically significant evidence that acute or chronic health effects are
capable of occurring in exposed persons. The term "health hazard" includes
chemicals that are carcinogens, toxic or highly toxic agents, reproductive
toxins, neurotoxins, agents which are capable of acting on the
hematopoietic system, and agents which damage the lungs, skin, eyes, or
mucous membranes.
IMPACT, HEAVY — Any use that poses a health hazard, a significant threat
from fire, or involves the use of hazardous materials in any way that
could endanger persons or property in the event of accidental discharge or
combustion.
IMPACT, LIGHT OR MEDIUM — Any use whose impact is not heavy, as
herein defined.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — The coverage of the lot or tract area by
materials that prevent the percolation of water into the soil and generate
stormwater runoff, such as buildings, streets, parking areas, driveways, and
any other similar surfaces.
INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITY — Residence for the elderly that
provides rooms, meals, personal care, and supervision of medication. The
facility may provide other services such as recreational activities, financial
services, and transportation. Residents must be ambulatory and free from
communicable diseases. The facility shall be licensed by the state.
INSTITUTIONAL USE — A nonprofit, religious, or public use, such as a
religious building, library, public or private school, hospital, or governmentowned
or -operated building, structure, or land use for public purpose.
LABORATORY — A research, testing, experimental, or product development
facility, provided that any laboratory animals shall, at all times, be kept
within completely enclosed buildings. All chemical, biological, or other
substances, emissions, or by-products of the procedures or operations
§ 196-9 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-9
193:480
conducted within the laboratory shall be confined to the facility and not be
permitted to escape or be emitted outside of the facility.
LANDSCAPED PLANTING AREA — An area landscaped with grass, ground
cover, shrubs, or similar plantings placed where required by this chapter
and permanently maintained. See Article XVII, General Regulations.
LIGHT INDUSTRY — Industrial processes where the finished item, material,
or product does not exceed 15 cubic feet, which are conducted in an
enclosed building, and which comply with all performance standards listed
in Article XX. No deliveries shall be made in trucks having more than one
axle.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth for the loading or unloading
of commercial vehicles. Such spaces shall comply with Article XV.
LOT — A parcel of land that is or may be occupied by a building and/
or accessory structure or use, including open spaces and setbacks as are
required within the district in which the lot is located.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a parcel.
LOT, CORNER — A lot bounded by intersecting streets on at least two sides.
Both yards adjacent to streets shall be considered front yards.
LOT COVERAGE — That percentage of a lot that is covered by all combined
structures, paving, or any impervious surfaces. See "impervious surface."
LOT DEPTH — The distance along a straight line measured from the
midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line.
LOT LINE — A line of public record bounding a lot that divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line separating the lot from the street right-ofway.
LOT LINE, REAR — Any lot line, except the front lot line, which is parallel
to or within 45° of being parallel to the front lot line and does not intersect
any street line, except in the case of corner lots.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF — The smallest allowable lot area as established
by this chapter on which a use or structure may be located in a particular
district.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured
at right angles to the lot depth at the building setback line.
MALL — A group of commercial, retail, or personal service uses arranged
in a strip-like fashion with individual frontages and entrances or enclosed in
one building with internal frontages and shared entrances on the exterior
of the building.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT — A single building containing more than
one type of land use or a single development of more than one building
and use where different types of land uses are in close proximity, planned
§ 196-9 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-9
193:481
as a unified complementary whole, and functionally integrated by shared
vehicular and pedestrian access, parking areas, landscaping, and other
features.
MULTITENANT BUILDING — A building designed or converted to
accommodate three or more commercial tenants. Each tenant shall operate
a use that is permitted in the district where the building is located.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which construction was started
after the effective date of this chapter and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
which is clearly secondary to the residential use and in which no persons
other than members of the resident family are engaged. The use shall not
provide for on-site parking in addition to that required for the residential
use. No equipment is used other than that normally used for household or
general office use.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure
that does not comply with the provisions of this chapter, as amended, where
such building or structure lawfully existed prior to the effective date of this
chapter or of amendments thereafter.
NONCONFORMING LOT — Any lawful lot that does not conform to one or
more of the applicable provisions of the district in which it is located either
on the effective date of this chapter or of amendments thereafter.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or a structure, which
does not comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter, where such
use was lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this chapter or
amendments thereafter.
PARKING SPACE — A reasonably level space, having a surface slope not
exceeding 6%, used for parking a motor vehicle. Such space shall have
an area as listed in Article XV, which shall be exclusive of passageways,
driveways, or other means of circulation or access.
PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — Pennsylvania Act
247 of 1968 (P.L. 805), as amended, also cited as 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.,
or any subsequent Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that replaces,
supplements, or repeals any or all of the provisions of Act 247.
PERMIT — Written municipal permission issued by the appropriate local
official empowering the holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law,
but not permitted without such authorization.
PERSONAL SERVICE SHOP OR ESTABLISHMENT — A business engaged
in providing services involving the care or appearance of a person, his
or her clothing, or similar personal needs. Included in this definition are
barber, beautician, shoe repair, fitness club, laundry or cleaner, or similar
establishment, but not including a tattoo parlor, massage parlor, or body
piercing establishment.
§ 196-9 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-9
193:482
PHYSICAL HAZARD — A chemical that is a combustible liquid, compressed
gas, cryogenic, explosive, flammable gas, flammable liquid, flammable solid,
organic peroxide, oxidizer, or unstable or water-reactive material.
PLANTED VISUAL SCREEN — A strip of trees, hedges, or other plantings
adjacent to the boundary of a property which, at the time of planting,
shall be not less than six feet high and of sufficient density to constitute
an effective visual screen and thereby give visual protection to abutting
properties. Such screen shall consist primarily of dense evergreens that
shall be planted not farther than seven feet from one another and shall be
permanently maintained. Deciduous trees may be added to create interest
and variety.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING OR USE — A building or use which is the primary
building or use on a lot as distinguished from a building or buildings
relating to an accessory, incidental, or subordinate use. The primary
purpose for which land, a building, or a subordinate structure or the use
thereof is designed, arranged, or intended.
RECREATIONAL AREA — A place designed and equipped for the conduct of
sports, leisure time activities, and other customary and usual recreational
activities.
RESTAURANT, STANDARD OR SIT-DOWN — Any premises used for the
sale, dispensing, and/or serving of food, refreshments, or beverages where
the customer is normally involved with an individual menu and is served by
a restaurant employee at the table, booth, or counter at which said items
are consumed.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription,
condemnation, or other legal manner and occupied, or intended to be
occupied, by a street, crosswalk, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water line, watercourse, or similar uses.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The line that forms the boundary of a right-of-way.
ROOFLINE — The line the marks the lowest point of the roof.
ROOF RIDGE LINE — The line that marks the highest point of the roof. This
term is applicable to roofs other than flat roofs.
SATELLITE ANTENNA — An antenna together with all attachments and
parts, the purpose of which is to receive communication from orbiting
satellites.
SCREEN — Any barrier intended and designed to shield properties and uses
from other uses or activities having different sounds or other impacts (e.g.,
screening of industrial uses or activities from nearby residential structures).
SETBACK — The distance between the street right-of-way line or a lot line
and any building on a lot or tract.
SETBACK, REQUIRED — The minimum distance from the street right-ofway
line or any other lot line that establishes the area, commonly known
as the "building envelope," within which the principal structure must be
erected or placed.
§ 196-9 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-9
193:483
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments planned,
constructed, and managed as a total entity, including both attached
buildings and freestanding buildings with customer and employee parking
provided on site.
SIGN — Any object, device, display, or illustration which is used to
advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person,
institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location by
any means, including words, letters, numbers, or symbols.
SIGN, ADVERTISING CLOTH — A sign which has its letters or design
applied to cloth, canvas, or other flexible material which is durable and
weather resistant.
SIGN AREA — The entire face of a sign including the advertising surface
and framing, trim, or molding, but not including the supporting structure.
SIGN, AWNING OR CANOPY — A sign that is mounted or painted on
or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural
protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY — A sign or portion thereof with characters,
letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering
the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes
more than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not
a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter. A sign on which the
only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or
temperature shall be considered a "time and temperature sign" and not a
changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter.
SIGN, CURB OR SIDEWALK — A movable sign which is not secured or
attached permanently to the ground.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — A sign limited to directional messages principally
for pedestrians or vehicular traffic, such as "entry" or "exit," "one way,"
"loading" or "service area," "fire lanes," "parking," or a similar sign
incidental to the primary use and not itself advertising or naming that use
except as required by law.
SIGN FACE — The area or display surface used for the message.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A detached sign which shall include any sign
placed upon or in the ground, supported by a post, stake, etc., and not
attached to any building.
SIGN, GROUND — A freestanding sign other than a sign supported by a
post or pylon placed upon or supported by the ground independent of any
other structure.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — A sign giving the nature, logo, trademark, or
other identifying symbol, address, or any combination of the name, symbol,
and address of a building, business, development, or establishment on the
premises where it is located.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting
either by lights on or in the sign or directed towards the sign.
§ 196-9 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-9
193:484
SIGN, INCIDENTAL — A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the use of the property on which it is located, such as "no
parking," "entrance," "loading only," "telephone," and other similar
directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off of
the lot on which a sign is located shall be considered incidental.
SIGN, MENU — A sign that depicts the menu of food and/or drink for sale
at an eating or drinking establishment.
SIGN, MULTIFACED — A sign with two or more display areas or sides on
which messages can be displayed.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE — A sign indicating only the name and/or profession
and address of the person(s) residing or legally occupying the premises.
SIGN, NEON — A sign that is internally lighted by lamps, bulbs, tubes,
etc., that are filled with neon gas. Neon signs are prohibited throughout the
Borough.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a
building for support and which projects more than 12 inches from such
building. After the effective date of this chapter, projecting signs shall not
be erected or placed in the Borough.
SIGN, SALES OR PRICE CHANGE — A type of temporary sign that has a
high turnover, such as those advertising "sales" and frequent price changes.
These signs are most commonly found on windows/doors of supermarkets,
grocery stores, and beverage distributors. In most cases, these signs are
constructed of paper, cardboard, or other lightweight materials.
SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD — A movable sign consisting of two faces,
possibly hinged at the top.
SIGN STRUCTURE — The supports, uprights, braces, and framework of the
sign.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign that is used in connection with an event,
situation, or circumstance that is designed or intended to take place or be
completed within 30 days after the permit for the sign was issued or is
intended to remain on the location where it is placed or erected for not more
than 30 days.
SIGN, TIME AND TEMPERATURE — A sign which electronically displays
the time and temperature.
SIGN, WALL — A sign posted on, suspended from, or otherwise affixed to a
wall or vertical surface of a building which does not project more than 12
inches from the wall or vertical surface to which it is attached. Signs shall
not be painted on any surface.
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign attached or affixed to a window or door.
STREET — A public or private way used or intended to be used as a means
of vehicular and pedestrian travel and access to abutting properties and
space for public utilities that is improved in compliance with all Borough
requirements for public or private streets.
§ 196-9 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-9
193:485
STREET, EXTERIOR — A public way serving or abutting the exterior areas
of a site.
STREET, INTERIOR — A public or private way serving the internally
developed areas of a site.
STREET LINE — The line dividing the street and the abutting property. The
street line shall be the same as the street right-of-way line.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.
SWIMMING POOL (PRIVATE) — Any body of water, tank, or receptacle
of water having a depth at any point of greater than two feet used or
intended to be used for swimming or bathing solely by the owner, his
family, and guests of the household and constructed, installed, established,
or maintained outside of any building in or above the ground upon any
premises as an accessory use to the residence.
TOWNHOUSE BUILDING — A building containing single-family attached
dwelling units (townhouse units) in which each townhouse unit is attached
only by a party wall or walls to one or two other townhouse units.
Townhouse buildings erected after the effective date of this chapter shall
contain not more than six attached units.
TRACT — An area, lot, parcel, site, or property which is the subject of a
subdivision and/or land development.
TRACT AREA — The total acreage of a subdivision or land development.
Tract area shall be measured to the ultimate right-of-way line of public
streets.
TRAILER, CONSTRUCTION/OFFICE — A movable structure located at or
near a work or construction site for storage or other purpose related to or
supporting construction or office activity. Such structures shall be permitted
in all but the industrial districts and shall be considered temporary uses
that require a permit from the Borough. Such trailers shall not be used for
storage, office purposes, or similar uses unless they are located on or within
100 feet of a construction site. Also see § 196-126.
TRAILER, OFFICE/STORAGE — A movable structure located in an
industrial district used for office, storage, or similar purposes.
TRANSIT-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT (TOD) — A development approach
locating higher density, mixed uses at strategic points along the regional
transit system. The design and location of a TOD and the mix of uses
emphasize a pedestrian-friendly environment and reinforce the use of
public transportation.
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT — A tract of land having not less than five acres
that is planned, developed, operated, and maintained as a single entity
and containing two or more structures to accommodate retail, service,
commercial, office, industrial, and residential uses. The development shall
have common accessways, parking areas, and landscaping and shall be
developed following a common architectural scheme.
§ 196-9 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-9
193:486
VARIANCE — Relief granted pursuant to Articles VI and IX of the MPC112
and Article XXII, Zoning Hearing Board, of this chapter.
VIEW CORRIDOR — An open-air space, designated by the Borough, that
provides a clear view across one or more lots to the Delaware River, Marcus
Hook Creek, or another point of interest from an abutting or nearby street,
sidewalk, park, plaza, or other public spaces.
WATER-DEPENDENT USE — A use that requires direct access to or location
adjacent to the Delaware River or Marcus Hook Creek and which, therefore,
is not customarily located in inland areas. "Water-dependent uses" include,
but are not limited to, marinas, recreational and commercial fishing and
boating facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities, and commercial and
industrial uses dependent on waterborne transportation.
WATERFRONT RESTAURANT/BAR — An eating and/or drinking place
located in the Waterfront Mixed Use District which complies with the
district purposes relating to limitation of size and scope of development as
stated in Article XI of this chapter. No such restaurant/bar shall have a floor
area devoted to patron use in excess of 2,500 square feet. The term "bar"
shall include a lounge, tavern, or any other establishment serving alcoholic
beverages.
WATERFRONT RETAIL STORE — A retail store or shop located in the
Waterfront Mixed Use District which complies with the district purposes
relating to limitation of size and scope of development as stated in Article
XI of this chapter. No such store shall be established or enlarged to have a
floor area devoted to customer use in excess of 2,500 square feet.
WATER-RELATED USE — A use where a substantial portion of the goods
or services which it provides are derived from or related to water or
waterfront-dependent activities or where a substantial portion of the goods
or services which the use provides are designed to be used in connection
with such activities. Also, a use that relies on or is associated with the
recreational, environmental, historical, cultural, tourist-related, or other
activity generating aspects of the waterfront.
YARD — An unobstructed open space on the same lot with a principal
building that extends from a street line or lot line inward to the principal
building.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending the full width of the lot, the depth of
which extends from the front lot line to the nearest point of the principal
building.
YARD, INTERIOR — In the Planned Business Park District, the area between
the parking lot or an interior driveway in a development and a principal
building(s).
YARD, PERIMETER — In the Planned Business Park District, the area
between the public street abutting a development and a principal
building(s).
112. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10601 et seq. and § 10901 et seq., respectively.
§ 196-9 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-9
193:487
YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which
extends from the rear lot line to the nearest point of the principal building.
YARD, REQUIRED — The open space between a lot line and the buildable
area or "building envelope" within which the principal structure must be
erected or placed.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending between the inside lines of the front and
rear yards and extending in width from the side lot line to the nearest point
of the principal building.
ZONING ORDINANCE — An ordinance that divides the Borough or other
unit of local government into areas or zones that specify allowable uses for
real property and size and locational restrictions for buildings within these
areas.
ZONING PERMIT — Written permission issued by the Zoning Officer or
other appropriate municipal official empowering the holder thereof to erect
or alter a building or structure, including signs and fences, change the use
of a building or land, and change or extend a nonconforming use.
§ 196-9 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-9
193:488
ARTICLE III
R-1 Residential District
§ 196-10. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-1 District is to provide for medium-density residential
development. The regulations are designed to stabilize and protect the
residential characteristics of the district and to encourage a suitable
environment for residential activities. The district also allows selected
nonresidential uses, provided that they are permitted by conditional use
permit.
§ 196-11. Uses permitted by right.
Land, buildings, or premises shall be used by right for only one or more of
the following uses:
§ 196-12. Conditional uses.
The following uses shall be permitted by conditional use permit only, subject
to the applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Procedure and Standards for
Conditional Uses:
§ 196-13. Accessory uses and structures.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Single-family semidetached dwelling (twin).
C. Family-based community residence facility, subject to § 196-112.
D. Recreational, park, or play area.
A. Community center or similar municipal or civic use, subject to
§ 196-134.
B. Cemetery.
C. Religious use, subject to § 196-135.
D. Independent living facility, subject to § 196-136.
A. Off-street parking, subject to Article XV.
B. Family day-care home, subject to § 196-113.
C. Storage shed, subject to § 196-110.
D. Private swimming pool, subject to § 196-116.
E. Satellite antenna, subject to § 196-115.
F. Sign, subject to Article XVI.
G. No-impact home-based business, subject to § 196-111.
§ 196-10 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-13
193:489
§ 196-14. Dimensional regulations.
§ 196-15. Special development regulations.
H. Any accessory use or structure on the same lot with and customarily
incidental to any of the uses permitted above in this district and not
detrimental to the neighborhood.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
(1) Lot area: 5,000 square feet.
(2) Lot width: 45 feet.
(3) Building coverage: 30%, maximum.
(4) Impervious surface: 45%, maximum.
(5) Front yard: 10 feet.
(6) Rear yard: 35 feet.
(7) Side yards: 20 feet aggregate and eight feet minimum.
(8) Height: three stories or 35 feet, maximum.
B. Single-family semidetached dwelling (twin).
(1) Lot area: 3,000 square feet.
(2) Lot width: 30 feet.
(3) Building coverage: 45%, maximum.
(4) Impervious surface: 65%, maximum.
(5) Front yard: 10 feet.
(6) Rear yard: 35 feet.
(7) Side yard: 10 feet on one side.
(8) Height: three stories or 35 feet, maximum.
A. Required off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the rear or side
yards only. In the case of parking in the rear yard, the distance between
these spaces and the rear lot line shall not be more than five feet.
B. Where possible, residential developments constructed after the
adoption of this chapter shall provide access to the parking spaces at or
near the rear lot line by means of an alley.
C. The area between the parking spaces in the rear yard and the principal
building shall not be used for parking, storage, or repair of automobiles,
trucks, boats, mobile homes, trailers, or similar vehicles or
conveyances.
§ 196-13 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-15
193:490
ARTICLE IV
R-2 Residential District
§ 196-16. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-2 District is to provide for medium-high-density
residential development. The regulations are designed to stabilize and
protect the residential characteristics of the district and to encourage
a suitable environment for residential activities. The district also allows
selected nonresidential uses, provided that they are permitted by
conditional use permit.
§ 196-17. Uses permitted by right.
Land, buildings, or premises shall be used by right for only one or more of
the following uses:
§ 196-18. Conditional uses.
The following uses shall be permitted by conditional use permit only, subject
to the applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Procedure and Standards for
Conditional Uses:
§ 196-19. Accessory uses and structures.
§ 196-20. Dimensional regulations.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Single-family semidetached dwelling (twin).
C. Single-family attached dwelling (townhouse or rowhouse).
D. Family-based community residence facility, subject to § 196-112.
E. Recreational, park, or play area.
A. Community center or similar municipal or civic use, subject to
§ 196-134.
B. Cemetery.
C. Religious use, subject to § 196-135.
A. All accessory uses and structures permitted in the R-1 District.
B. Any accessory use or structure on the same lot with and customarily
incidental to any of the uses permitted above in the R-2 District and not
detrimental to the neighborhood.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
(1) Lot area: 4,000 square feet.
§ 196-16 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-20
193:491
(2) Lot width: 40 feet.
(3) Building coverage: 35%, maximum.
(4) Impervious surface: 50%, maximum.
(5) Front yard: 10 feet.
(6) Rear yard: 35 feet.
(7) Side yards: 18 feet aggregate and eight feet minimum.
(8) Height: three stories or 35 feet, maximum.
B. Single-family semidetached (twin).
(1) Lot area: 3,000 square feet per dwelling.
(2) Lot width: 30 feet.
(3) Building coverage: 50%, maximum.
(4) Impervious surface: 70%, maximum.
(5) Front yard: 10 feet.
(6) Rear yard: 35 feet.
(7) Side yard: eight feet on one side.
(8) Height: 35 feet or three stories, maximum.
C. Single-family attached dwelling (rowhouse/townhouse).
(1) Lot area: 1,800 square feet.
(2) Lot width: 20 feet.
(3) Building coverage: 55%, maximum.
(4) Impervious surface: 75%, maximum.
(5) Front yard: 10 feet.
(6) Rear yard: 20 feet.
(7) Side yard: 10 feet at ends of row.
(8) Height: 35 feet or three stories, maximum.
§ 196-20 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-20
193:492
ARTICLE V
R-3 Residential District
§ 196-21. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-3 District is to provide for high-density residential
development. The regulations are designed to stabilize and protect the
residential characteristics of the district and to encourage a suitable
environment for residential activities. The district also allows selected
nonresidential uses, provided that they are permitted by conditional use
permit.
§ 196-22. Uses permitted by right.
Land, buildings, or premises shall be used by right for only one or more of
the following uses:
§ 196-23. Conditional uses.
The following uses shall be permitted by conditional use permit only, subject
to the applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Procedure and Standards for
Conditional Uses:
§ 196-24. Accessory uses and structures.
§ 196-25. Dimensional regulations.
A. Single-family semidetached dwelling (twin).
B. Single-family attached dwelling (townhouse or rowhouse).
C. Multifamily dwelling (apartment building).
D. Family-based community residence facility, subject to § 196-112.
E. Recreational, park, or play area.
A. Conversion, subject to § 196-139.
A. All accessory uses and structures permitted in the R-1 District.
B. Any accessory use or structure on the same lot with and customarily
incidental to any of the uses permitted above in the R-3 District and not
detrimental to the neighborhood.
A. Single-family semidetached dwelling. Single-family semidetached
dwellings in this district shall comply with the dimensional standards of
the R-2 District as per § 196-20B.
B. Single-family attached dwelling (rowhouse/townhouse). Single-family
attached dwellings in this district shall comply with the dimensional
standards of the R-2 District as per § 196-20C.
§ 196-21 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-25
193:493
C. Multifamily dwelling.
(1) Lot area: 1,500 square feet per unit.
(2) Lot width: 100 feet.
(3) Front yard: 10 feet.
(4) Side yards: 35 feet aggregate and 15 feet minimum.
(5) Rear yard: 20 feet.
(6) Impervious surface: 75%, maximum.
(7) Height: 40 feet or four stories.
§ 196-25 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-25
193:494
ARTICLE VI
R-4 Planned Residential District
§ 196-26. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide for planned medium-density
development in the form of single-family detached, semidetached, and
attached dwellings. Sufficient area is provided to construct dwellings with
modern conveniences and amenities. Provisions are included to promote
innovative features of traditional neighborhood development.
§ 196-27. Development type.
Development in this district shall be on the basis of an overall plan
applicable to the tract in question. Development of individual lots shall
not be permitted. A development may include more than one permitted
residential use.
§ 196-28. Uses permitted by right.
Land, buildings, or premises shall be used by right for only one or more of
the following uses:
§ 196-29. Conditional uses.
The following uses shall be permitted by conditional use permit only, subject
to the applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Procedure and Standards for
Conditional Uses: none.
§ 196-30. Accessory uses and structures.
§ 196-31. Dimensional regulations.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Single-family semidetached dwelling.
C. Single-family attached dwelling (townhouse or rowhouse).
D. Family-based community residence facility, subject to § 196-112.
E. Open space, park, or play area.
A. All accessory uses and structures permitted in the R-1 District.
B. Any accessory use or structure on the same lot with and customarily
incidental to any of the uses permitted above in the R-4 District and not
detrimental to the neighborhood.
A. Area. The overall development shall have an area of not less than three
acres.
B. Overall development regulations.
§ 196-26 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-31
193:495
(1) Density. The maximum net density for the entire development shall
not exceed 10 units per acre.
(2) Setbacks.
(a) From tract boundary: 40 feet.
(b) From exterior road: 50 feet.
C. Single-family detached dwelling.
(1) Lot area: 5,000 square feet.
(2) Lot width: 50 feet.
(3) Building coverage: 30%, maximum.
(4) Impervious surface: 45%, maximum.
(5) Front yard: 10 feet.
(6) Rear yard: 35 feet.
(7) Side yards: 20 feet aggregate and eight feet minimum.
(8) Height: three stories or 35 feet, maximum.
D. Single-family semidetached dwelling (twin).
(1) Lot area: 3,000 square feet.
(2) Lot width: 30 feet.
(3) Building coverage: 45%, maximum.
(4) Impervious surface: 65%, maximum.
(5) Front yard: 10 feet.
(6) Rear yard: 35 feet.
(7) Side yard: 10 feet on one side.
(8) Height: three stories or 35 feet, maximum.
E. Single-family attached dwelling (townhouse).
(1) Lot area: 2,000 square feet.
(2) Lot width: 20 feet.
(3) Distance between buildings: 40 feet.
(4) Units in row: six, maximum.
(5) Front yard: 10 feet.
(6) Rear yard: 30 feet.
§ 196-31 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-31
193:496
§ 196-32. Special development regulations.
(7) Side yard: 15 feet at ends of row.
(8) Building coverage: 50%, maximum.
(9) Impervious surface: 70%, maximum.
(10) Height: 35 feet, maximum.
A. Development objectives. The developer shall demonstrate adherence to
the following objectives throughout the period of development:
(1) An orderly and creative arrangement of uses with respect to each
other and the entire community.
(2) A planned system of roadways, bicycle paths, and lanes and/or
pedestrian walkways.
B. Open space.
(1) Not less than 35% of a development shall be devoted to common
open space. Common open space shall consist of central open
space and peripheral open space.
(2) Central open space shall consist of a green area at or near the
center of the development or along the sides of an entrance road or
boulevard and a green area at the entrance to the development.
(3) Peripheral open space shall consist of fields, streams, woodlands,
and other vegetation at or in the vicinity of the tract boundaries.
The preservation of undeveloped open space/woodland in its
natural state is encouraged.
(4) Where possible, peripheral open space shall be improved as trails
devoted to walking, bicycling, jogging, picnicking, and similar
recreational activities.
(5) The location of structures shall take into account natural and manmade
environmental features, including streams and woodlands.
C. Bicycle and pedestrian standards.
(1) Where possible, pedestrian and bicycle pathways shall link
residential areas with public open spaces and other destinations.
(2) Bicycle trails shall be not less than six feet wide. Sidewalks and
other pedestrian pathways shall be not less than four feet wide.
D. Parking.
(1) Parking may be permitted in a number of arrangements:
(a) In rear yards behind the principal building not more than five
feet from the rear lot line.
§ 196-31 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-32
193:497
(b) For groupings of townhouses, in specially designated parking
areas behind the townhouses.
(c) The area between the parking spaces in the rear yard and the
principal building shall not be used for parking, storage, or
repair of automobiles, trucks, boats, mobile homes, trailers, or
similar vehicles or conveyances.
(2) On-street.
E. Screening. A planted visual screen as defined in Article II shall be
placed and maintained between the dwellings and the railroad.
F. Landscaping. Applicable provisions of § 196-121 shall apply.
G. Buffer. A riparian buffer within which parking, buildings, and storage
shall be prohibited shall extend for 100 feet as measured from the
center line of Marcus Hook Creek.
§ 196-32 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-32
193:498
ARTICLE VII
Central Retail District
§ 196-33. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to create a mixed use area that consists of
pedestrian-oriented retail, service, and office uses to serve both regional
and neighborhood customers and apartments above the street-level
commercial uses. Uses having greater impacts are permitted by conditional
use permit.
§ 196-34. Uses permitted by right.
Land, buildings, or premises shall be used by right for only one or more of
the following uses:
§ 196-35. Conditional uses.
The following shall be permitted as conditional uses only, subject to the
applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Procedure and Standards for
Conditional Uses:
A. Retail store, including general merchandise, hardware, department or
variety store, clothing store, gift shop, bookstore, or pharmacy.
B. Food store, including grocery store, bakery, confectionery, and
convenience store where goods are sold at retail.
C. Personal service shop, including barbershop, beautician, shoe repair,
tailor, fitness salon or spa, laundry/laundromat, or similar service
establishment.
D. Eating or drinking establishment, including standard eat-in restaurant,
pizza shop, delicatessen, or similar use and take-out establishment, but
excluding drive-through establishment.
E. Bank or other financial institution.
F. Theater.
G. Apartment, provided that it is located on the second or third floor.
H. Municipal building, library, or similar municipal or public use, except
high impact public uses such as storage or repair of municipal trucks or
other heavy equipment.
I. Park, plaza, or similar recreational area or meeting place.
J. Office or office building.
K. Medical or dental office or physical therapy clinic.
L. Private club, subject to § 196-122.
§ 196-33 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-35
193:499
§ 196-36. Accessory uses and structures.
§ 196-37. Dimensional regulations.
Unless stated otherwise, the following shall be minimum requirements:
A. Child day-care center, subject to § 196-137.
B. Video game arcade.
C. Any use of the same general character as those permitted in §§ 196-34
and 196-35. Such use shall be permitted by Borough Council upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall be consistent with
the purposes of the district, comply with the performance standards in
Article XX, and not be detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood. To
determine if a proposed use is of the same general character as any of
the listed permitted uses, Borough Council and the Planning
Commission shall evaluate its impacts against the compatibility
standards in Article XVII.
A. Outdoor storage shall be in the rear yard only, provided that such
storage area is completely screened from the street and sidewalk by an
opaque fence or planted visual screen and shall comply with the
screening requirements in Article XVII. Only those materials, items, or
products generated by or directly related to the business conducted on
the property shall be stored. There shall be no storage of items from
sources other than the subject property.
B. Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article XV.
C. Signs, subject to Article XVI.
D. Any accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the uses permitted above and not detrimental to the area.
A. Lot area: 3,000 square feet.
B. Lot width:
(1) Thirty feet for detached structures.
(2) Twenty feet for attached structures with 30 feet at the end of a row.
C. Building coverage: 60%, maximum.
D. Impervious surface: 70%, maximum.
E. Front yard: conforming to that of the established street setback line or
10 feet.
F. Rear yard: 20 feet.
G. Side yard: eight feet on each side of a building with attached units. Five
feet on each side of individual, detached buildings.
§ 196-35 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-37
193:500
§ 196-38. Special development regulations.
H. Height: 35 feet or three stories, maximum.
A. Each permitted use shall provide and maintain attractively landscaped
grounds and include screening necessary to protect adjacent
residential properties and obscure storage areas from streets or
residences.
B. Screening and landscaping shall comply with Article XVII.
C. Any new construction or addition to the building, and especially to its
facade, shall be in harmony with the architectural character of the
adjacent area in terms of style, size, proportion, and materials.
D. All signs, lighting, benches, and similar structures and amenities shall
be designed and built in keeping with the architectural character and
theme of the Central Retail District, as recommended in the most
recently adopted Marcus Hook Comprehensive Plan.
E. All principal uses shall be completely enclosed in a building, and no
drive-in restaurant, drive-in bank, or similar drive-in establishment
shall be permitted.
F. No goods, articles, or equipment shall be stored, displayed, or offered
for sale beyond (in front of) the front line of a building, except for
temporary sales or promotions lasting not more than three days. Any
event or sale including display or sale beyond the front building line of a
building that exceeds three days' duration shall require a permit from
the Borough.
G. In a restaurant that serves alcoholic beverages, not more than 20% of
the floor area shall be devoted to the bar or drinking section.
H. All applicable provisions of Article XVI, Signs, shall be followed.
§ 196-37 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-38
193:501

ARTICLE VIII
Planned Business Park District
§ 196-39. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide for selected, modern nonnuisance
business, laboratory, and light industrial uses, with a view toward
encouraging attractive, large site, moderate lot coverage development. The
intent is also to allow only those types of light industrial uses that would
not constitute a hazard or nuisance to nearby residents and not provide for
higher impact industrial uses.
§ 196-40. Uses permitted by right.
Land, buildings, or premises shall be used by right for only one or more of
the following uses:
§ 196-41. Conditional uses.
The following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses only, subject to
the applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Procedure and Standards for
Conditional Uses:
A. Office and office building.
B. Financial establishment such as bank, financial company.
C. Electronic data processing, telecommunications, or similar facility.
D. Medical or dental clinic (outpatient only).
E. Amusement venue such as movie theater, bowling alley, video game
arcade, or miniature golf course.
F. Health club or spa.
G. Motion picture or television filming, production, or broadcasting.
H. Business school, trade school such as beauty school, computer training,
auto repair, other vocational training, college or similar post secondary
institution, provided that no schools shall be permitted that require or
employ outdoor instruction or operation (e.g., truck driving school) or
those that exceed any limits for noise, smoke, or similar impacts as
controlled by Article XX, Performance Standards.
I. Mail order facility.
J. Wholesale showroom.
A. Parking area or parking garage, provided that no long-term parking
exceeding 24 continuous hours shall be permitted.
B. Laboratory, research, development, or testing, subject to § 196-140.
§ 196-39 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-41
193:503
§ 196-42. Accessory uses and structures.
§ 196-43. Area and bulk regulations.
Unless stated otherwise, the following shall be minimum requirements:
C. Light industry, as defined in Article II.
D. College, public elementary school, or secondary school.
E. Child day-care center, subject to § 196-137.
F. Uses of the same general character as those permitted by right or as
conditional uses, provided that no resource recovery, waste treatment,
landfill, or other use having a negative impact on the environment shall
be permitted. To determine if a proposed use is of the same general
character as any of the listed permitted uses, Borough Council and the
Planning Commission shall evaluate its impacts against the
compatibility standards in Article XVII.
A. Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article XV.
B. Signs, subject to Article XVI.
C. Storage buildings.
D. Restaurant, cafeteria, or snack bar for employees or customers of any
use permitted in this district.
E. Recreational area for employees.
F. Living quarters for a watchman or caretaker.
G. Commercial dropoff and pickup boxes, stations for letters or packages,
or newspaper vending machines, provided that such boxes shall not be
located within a right-of-way of a public street.
H. Any accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
the principal use on the property and not detrimental to the area.
A. Tract: five acres.
B. Perimeter yards (front, side, and rear yards): 30 feet on all sides,
increased to 50 feet when abutting a residential district.
C. Interior yards: 15 feet between a building and an interior street.
D. Distance from parking area: 10 feet between a parking area and the
principal building.
E. Distance between buildings: 40 feet.
F. Impervious surface: 65%, maximum.
G. Height: 40 feet, maximum.
§ 196-41 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-44
193:504
§ 196-44. Special development regulations.
A. In any area where a new building or an addition to an existing building
is proposed, a buffer, as defined in Article II, Definitions, shall be
provided at the boundary line with all residential districts. The buffer
shall be not less than 40 feet wide at the proposed building or addition
as measured from the district boundary line or from the near street line
where the street serves as the district boundary line. Buffers may be
part of side or rear yards. Buffer area requirements shall not be
applicable to existing structures or to any change in use relating to an
existing structure.
B. Screening requirements shall not be applicable to existing structures or
uses or to any change in use relating to an existing structure. A planted
visual screen, as defined in Article II, or a privacy fence shall be
provided and continually maintained where a principal new building or
addition is proposed. Planted visual screens shall comply with the
requirements of Article XVII, General Regulations, and shall be
provided along the property lines with any residential district.
C. Landscaping requirements shall not be applicable to existing structures
or uses or to any change in use relating to an existing structure.
Landscaping, as per Article XVII, shall apply only to areas where a new
principal building or addition to an existing principal building is
proposed.
D. No outdoor storage shall be permitted in this district.
E. Where a building contains storage and/or assembly areas and another
permitted use, the storage and assembly areas shall be placed farthest
from the street.
F. In instances where the regulations set forth in the most recent adopted
version of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code cannot be met
with regard to fire safety, walls, separations, and isolation of
incompatible uses, a separation distance of 50 feet shall be maintained
between uses.
G. Assembly and/or storage areas shall not occupy more than 75% of the
building area, exclusive of the basement area.
H. In order to limit negative impacts in the area, particularly residential
areas, no deliveries or other trips shall be made by trucks with more
than a single rear axle.
I. All public utility lines and similar facilities servicing the proposed
development shall be installed underground, and electric transformers
shall be either placed underground or enclosed by a planted visual
screen.
J. All exterior lighting shall be arranged so that no direct glare from it
shall extend beyond the property line of the tract.
§ 196-44 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-44
193:505
§ 196-45. Group development.
K. Freestanding light poles shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
L. All rooftop equipment or other projections shall be completely screened
from public streets or adjacent lots.
M. No products or items or portions thereof shall be processed, assembled,
or packaged which shall exceed 15 cubic feet.
A. A proposed group development shall be constructed in accordance with
an overall plan and shall be designed as, or as part of, a single
architectural and landscaping scheme. All buildings on the tract for
which the plan is submitted shall be arranged in groups, and, where
applicable, the group of buildings as a unit shall comply with the area
and yard regulations of the district.
B. The tract of land on which each permitted use is conducted shall be
owned and operated as a single or common management and
maintenance unit, with common open space, parking, utility, and
maintenance facilities.
§ 196-44 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-45
193:506
ARTICLE IX
Recreational Business Campus District
§ 196-46. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to allow for an office campus setting among
active and passive open space and recreational uses along Marcus Hook
Creek. Some of the uses permitted are offices, research and development,
limited retail, hotel/condominiums, and recreational uses such as multi-use
trails, parks or playgrounds, and other open space and recreational uses.
§ 196-47. Uses permitted by right.
Land, buildings, or premises shall be used by right for only one or more of
the following uses:
§ 196-48. Conditional uses.
The following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses only, subject to
the applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Procedure and Standards for
Conditional Uses:
§ 196-49. Accessory uses and structures.
A. Office or office building.
B. Walking, biking, hiking, or multi-use path or trail.
C. Park, play field, court, playground.
D. Field or woodland.
A. Parking garage, subject to § 196-142.
B. Child day-care center, subject to § 196-137.
C. Laboratories.
D. Any use of the same general character as those permitted in §§ 196-47
and 196-48. Such use shall be permitted by Borough Council upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall be consistent with
the purposes of the district, comply with the performance standards in
Article XX, and not be detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood. To
determine if a proposed use is of the same general character as any of
the listed permitted uses, Borough Council and the Planning
Commission shall evaluate its impacts in relation to the compatibility
standards in Article XVII.
A. Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article XV.
B. Signs, subject to Article XVI.
C. Storage building.
§ 196-46 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-49
193:507
§ 196-50. Area and bulk regulations.
Unless stated otherwise, the following shall be minimum requirements:
§ 196-51. Special development regulations.
D. Restaurant, cafeteria, or snack bar for employees or customers of any
use permitted in this district.
E. Recreational area for employees.
F. Commercial dropoff and pickup boxes, stations for letters or packages,
or newspaper vending machines, provided that such boxes shall not be
located within a right-of-way of a public street.
G. Any accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
the principal use(s) on the property and not detrimental to the area.
A. Lot area: one acre.
B. Lot width: 150 feet.
C. Front yard: 10 feet.
D. Side yards: 20 feet on each side.
E. Rear yard: 60 feet.
F. Impervious surface: 35%, maximum.
G. Height: 40 feet, maximum.
A. There shall be a buffer area between Marcus Hook Creek and the
principal buildings in the district. This buffer shall extend for 100 feet
from the center line of Marcus Hook Creek. There shall be no principal
or accessory buildings, storage, or parking within this buffer area.
B. Landscaping requirements shall not be applicable to existing structures
or uses or to any change in use relating to an existing structure.
Landscaping, as per Article XVII, shall apply only to areas where a
principal new building or addition to a principal existing building is
proposed.
C. No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
D. No deliveries or other trips shall be made by trucks having more than
one rear axle.
E. All public utility lines and similar facilities servicing the proposed
development and its area shall be installed underground, and electric
transformers shall be either placed underground or enclosed by a
planted visual screen.
§ 196-49 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-51
193:508
F. All exterior lighting shall be arranged so that no direct glare from it
shall extend beyond the property line of the tract.
G. Freestanding light poles shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
H. All rooftop equipment or other projections shall be completely screened
from the public street or adjacent lots.
§ 196-51 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-51
193:509

ARTICLE X
Downtown Mixed Use District
§ 196-52. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to combine several compatible uses and
activities into an integrated development by allowing for the mixing of
residential, commercial, service, cultural, institutional, amusement, and
recreational uses.
§ 196-53. Uses permitted by right.
Land, buildings, or premises shall be used by right for only one or more of
the following uses:
§ 196-54. Conditional uses.
The following uses shall be permitted only by conditional use permit,
subject to the applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Procedure and
Standards for Conditional Uses:
§ 196-55. Accessory uses and structures.
A. Apartment.
B. Municipal or community center.
C. Financial services.
D. General office and medical office.
E. Retail sales.
F. Restaurant, cafeteria, or snack bar.
G. Personal service establishment.
H. Business support service.
I. Business school.
J. Amusement, theater, cultural, or arts facility.
K. Recreational area designed to serve employees and residents of the
uses on the site.
A. Child day-care center, subject to § 196-137.
B. Independent living facility, subject to § 196-136.
A. Parking area or parking garage, subject to Article XV.
B. Signs, subject to Article XVI.
C. Recreational area.
§ 196-52 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-55
193:511
§ 196-56. Dimensional regulations.
Unless specifically indicated, the following shall be minimum requirements:
§ 196-57. General project design objectives.
The developer shall demonstrate the achievement of the following
objectives on the land development plan and throughout the period of
development:
§ 196-58. Special development regulations.
D. Plazas, courtyards.
E. Any accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
the principal use(s) on the property and not detrimental to the area.
A. Lot area: 21,780 square feet (1/2 acre).
B. Lot width: 100 feet.
C. Building coverage: 50%, maximum.
D. Impervious surface: 70%, maximum.
E. Distance between buildings: 50 feet.
F. Distance from property line: 40 feet.
G. Distance from interior road: 25 feet.
H. Distance from exterior road: 50 feet.
I. Height: 50 feet, maximum.
A. An orderly and creative arrangement of all land uses with respect to
each other and the community.
B. The location of structures to take maximum advantage of the natural
and man-made environment and opportunities for energy efficiency.
C. The provision of meaningful employment opportunities within the
Borough for its residents.
D. The provision of adequate and well-designed open space/recreational
areas for use by residents and employees.
A. Apartment entrances shall be screened from nonresidential loading and
service areas.
B. Outdoor storage shall be effectively screened on all sides.
C. There shall be no outdoor display of goods or merchandise.
§ 196-55 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-58
193:512
D. All lighting shall be sufficient for the safe use of the facilities and shall
not create a traffic hazard or glare for any surrounding residential
areas.
E. Water towers, storage tanks, processing equipment, skylights, fans,
cooling towers, communication equipment, and other structures that
rise above the roofline shall be architecturally compatible with
surrounding structures or effectively shielded from view from public
streets or sidewalks, interior walkways, or residential areas.
F. Pedestrian access and circulation shall be provided by sidewalks and
walkways between all buildings and between parking areas and
buildings. Sidewalks shall be provided along the 10th Street district
frontage. Streetscape improvements such as sidewalks, benches, trash
receptacles, lighting fixtures, trees, signs, and plazas shall be provided
as shown on the development plan.
G. The tract of land on which each permitted use is conducted shall be
owned and operated as a single or common management and
maintenance unit, with common open space, parking, utility, and
maintenance facilities.
H. Uses proposed to be located on any given floor shall be of the same
class of uses and have similar impacts. For example, residential uses
shall not be on the same floor as retail, business, personal service, or
educational uses.
I. Residential uses shall be located above nonresidential uses, unless the
applicant for a nonresidential use demonstrates to the Zoning Officer
and Borough Engineer that sufficient soundproofing and other
protective measures will allow the nonresidential uses to be located
above the residential use without impacts of noise, vibration, glare, or
other similar impacts on the residential use.
J. In cases where there is a dispute about whether a proposed use is of the
same class or same general character as existing uses on the same
floor, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make this determination after
considering the compatibility standards in Article XVII, General
Regulations.
K. The various residential and nonresidential uses shown on the overall
development plan shall be located so as to ensure mutual ease of
access, as well as separation and privacy for residential locations.
L. Peripheral areas between the residential and nonresidential uses shall
be designed to ensure attractive transitions with buffering and
screening provided where necessary to protect the distinctive
character of each area.
M. The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with a
development plan and shall be designed as, or as part of, a single
architectural and landscaping scheme. All buildings on the tract for
§ 196-58 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-58
193:513
which the plan is submitted shall be arranged in a group of buildings,
and where applicable, the group of buildings as a unit shall comply with
the area and yard regulations of the district.
N. The development plan shall be in accordance with the provisions of
§ 196-75 of Article XII.
§ 196-58 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-58
193:514
ARTICLE XI
Waterfront Mixed Use District
§ 196-59. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to utilize the unique characteristics and
opportunities of the Delaware River waterfront and Market Square
Memorial Park by protecting the river bank, limiting the size and scope
of development, preserving scenic views and areas, maintaining and
diversifying recreational opportunities, and providing for marina/boat
docking, as well as limited commercial and community-related activities.
Standards are provided to assure well-balanced development that is limited
in size and scope, to limit impacts such as those of traffic and noise, to
preserve historic and natural features, and to protect adjoining residential
neighborhoods.
§ 196-60. Uses permitted by right.
Land, buildings, or premises shall be used by right for only one or more of
the following uses:
§ 196-61. Conditional uses.
The following uses shall be permitted only by conditional use permit,
subject to the applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Procedure and
Standards for Conditional Uses: none.
§ 196-62. Accessory uses and structures.
A. Community center or civic facility such as a senior recreational center.
B. Waterfront restaurant, bar, or similar eating place, sit-down or take-out.
C. Waterfront retail or service establishment, as defined in Article II.
D. Historic or environmental learning center or similar cultural or
educational facility.
E. Museum.
F. Park or recreational area.
G. Boat docking, provided that boat launching shall take place at another
location.
H. Ferry service.
A. Monuments.
B. Piers, floats, docks, pilings, or similar structures.
C. All accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to the
permitted uses and not detrimental to the area.
§ 196-59 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-63
193:515
§ 196-63. Area and bulk regulations.
Unless noted otherwise, the following shall be minimum requirements:
§ 196-64. Special development regulations.
§ 196-65. Views.
A. Lot area: no minimum required.
B. Lot width: no minimum required.
C. Building coverage: 20%, maximum.
D. Impervious surface: 30%, maximum.
E. Front yard: 50 feet.
F. Side yards: 25 feet.
G. Rear yard: 25 feet.
H. Height: 30 feet, maximum.
A. Buildings may be constructed in a detached or attached fashion.
B. No new principal building shall be erected within 50 feet of Market
Square Memorial Park.
A. The Borough shall identify view corridors toward the Delaware River, as
defined in Article II.
B. In cases where proposed structures would obstruct or obscure the view
in defined view corridors, the owner or applicant shall modify the
location, height, or other feature of such proposed structure to prevent
or mitigate potential obstructions of view.
C. Structures shall not be placed at the riverfront terminus of public
streets.
§ 196-63 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-65
193:516
ARTICLE XII
Transit-Oriented Development District
§ 196-66. Purposes.
The purposes of this district are to promote well-integrated residential,
commercial, and other development close to regional transit stations, to
support public transit by locating higher density, mixed use development
adjacent to or near transit stops, to reduce automobile dependency and
roadway congestion by combining trips and locating destinations within
walking or biking distance, and to provide an alternative to conventional
development by emphasizing pedestrian-oriented mixed use development.
§ 196-67. Conflicts.
Where the provisions of this district do not agree with the standards of
another provision of this chapter, the provisions of this district shall control.
§ 196-68. Uses permitted by right.
The following uses and no others shall be permitted as part of a unified
development plan:
§ 196-69. Conditional uses.
The following uses shall be permitted as individual (detached) buildings
fronting on major streets only when authorized as a conditional use, subject
to the applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Procedure and Standards for
Conditional Uses:
A. Residential uses.
(1) Multifamily dwelling (apartment or condominium).
(2) Single-family attached dwelling (townhouse).
(3) Single-family semidetached dwelling (twin).
(4) Two-family dwelling (duplex).
B. Nonresidential uses.
(1) Retail store or shop, including pharmacy.
(2) Food store, restaurant, or coffee shop.
(3) Personal service shop, such as barber, dry cleaner.
(4) Child day-care center, subject to § 196-137.
C. Arrangement of uses. In mixed use buildings having two or more
stories, retail and other commercial uses shall be located on the ground
floor while multifamily units and/or offices shall be located above the
ground floor.
§ 196-66 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-69
193:517
§ 196-70. Accessory uses and structures.
§ 196-71. Dimensional standards.
Unless specifically stated otherwise, the following shall be minimum
requirements:
A. Office building and office, subject to § 196-141.
B. Hotel and/or entertainment establishment (excluding adult
entertainment), subject to § 196-143.
C. Any use of the same general character as those permitted in §§ 196-68
and 196-69. Such use shall be permitted by Borough Council upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, be consistent with the
purposes of the district, comply with the performance standards in
Article XX, and not be detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood. To
determine if a proposed use is of the same general character as any of
the listed permitted uses, Borough Council and the Planning
Commission shall evaluate its impacts in relation to the compatibility
standards in Article XVII.
A. Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article XV.
B. Signs, subject to Article XVI.
C. Recreational area.
D. Commercial dropoff and pickup boxes, stations for letters or packages,
or newspaper vending machines, provided that such boxes shall not be
located within a right-of-way of a public street.
E. Plazas, courtyards.
F. Neighborhood parks and green areas.
G. Any accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
the principal use(s) on the property and not detrimental to the area.
A. For mixed use buildings or multifamily buildings:
(1) Density: between 20 and 30 units per acre.
(2) Setback from interior street: 15 feet.
(3) Setback from parking area: 15 feet.
(4) Distance between buildings: 45 feet.
(5) Height: 45 feet or four stories, maximum.
B. For single-family and two-family dwellings:
(1) Density (minimum):
§ 196-69 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-71
193:518
§ 196-72. Development standards.
(a) Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses): 15 units/acre.
(b) Single-family semidetached dwellings: 10 units/acre.
(c) Two-family (duplex): 10 units/acre.
(2) Setback from street: 10 feet.
(3) Landscaping: 25% for the portion covered with single-family and
two-family dwellings.
(4) Height: 35 feet, maximum.
C. For individual nonresidential buildings:
(1) Setback from exterior street: 30 feet.
(2) Setback from parking area: 15 feet.
(3) Height: 35 feet, maximum.
A. Building facades.
(1) While architectural styles shall be compatible throughout the
development, building facades should be visually interesting and
diverse.
(2) Where practicable, buildings shall have at least one main entrance
on the facade nearest to or facing a transit station or street leading
to a transit station, except in the case of single- and two-family
dwellings.
(3) Unscreened, flat, blank walls shall be avoided to provide a pleasant
pedestrian experience by connecting activities within a structure to
the adjacent sidewalk and/or transit stop.
(4) At the street level of mixed use buildings, not less than 75% of the
length and 40% of the wall surface must be in public entranceways
and windows or retail/service display windows.
B. Pedestrian system and building orientation.
(1) Sidewalks shall be required in front of and/or adjacent to mixed use
or residential buildings as necessary to connect with the pedestrian
walkway system and to provide connection to a transit station.
(2) Walkways that cross parking, loading, or driveway areas must be
clearly identifiable through the use of elevation changes, speed
bumps, different paving materials, or other similar method.
(3) Buildings shall be oriented toward the pedestrian by providing a
direct link between the building and the pedestrian walkway
§ 196-71 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-72
193:519
network, with emphasis on directing people toward transit stops/
stations.
(4) Lighting shall be provided for parking areas and pedestrian paths
to ensure safety and convenience.
(5) Plazas shall be provided in the development. Not less than one
seating space for each 250 square feet of plaza area shall be
provided. Seating shall be at least 16 inches high and 30 inches
wide. Ledge benches shall have a minimum depth of 30 inches.
C. Blocks.
(1) Blocks shall be walkable and shall not exceed 600 feet in length,
and pedestrian linkages shall be provided at least every 200 feet.
D. Parking lots and garages.
(1) Surface parking shall preferably be located at the rear of the
building or, if not feasible, at the side.
(2) Surface parking lots and parking garages shall not dominate the
development site.
(3) Surface parking areas with 50 or more spaces shall be divided into
separate areas by landscaped islands not less than 15 feet in width.
Such parking areas shall have not more than 20 continuous parking
spaces.
(4) Surface parking areas shall be screened along all sidewalks by a
three-foot-high masonry wall, fence, or similar treatment that is
compatible with adjacent structures.
(5) Shared parking is encouraged. Where applicable, a shared parking
plan must be approved by the Borough. Shared parking and off-site
parking shall comply with § 196-94.
(6) Parking garages shall include pedestrian walkways and connection
to the sidewalk/pedestrian system. These walkways shall be clearly
marked and continuous in design.
(7) Not less than 20% of the parking lot shall be landscaped.
(8) Parking lots and garages should include one bicycle parking space
per 20 vehicle spaces with a minimum of two.
E. Bicycle controls.
(1) Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided for all office and
multifamily structures and freestanding commercial uses.
(2) The number of bicycle parking spaces required for each use shall
be as follows:
(a) Multifamily residential: one space/dwelling unit.
§ 196-72 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-72
193:520
§ 196-73. Open space and landscaping.
Except for areas devoted to single-family and two-family dwellings, not less
than 25% of the project area shall be landscaped, and not less than 15%
shall be devoted to hard surfaced areas such as courtyards, plazas, and
pedestrian walkways. If hard surfaced, the area must contain pedestrian
amenities such as benches, courts, drinking fountains, planters, etc., and
be separated from parking or maneuvering areas by tire stops, hedges,
fences, or other devices. Landscaping must meet the standards in Article
XVII, General Regulations.
§ 196-74. Walls and hedges.
§ 196-75. Conceptual plan/development plan.
(b) Retail: one space per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(c) Office: one space per 4,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(d) Park and ride facilities: 10 spaces per acre or four spaces
minimum, whichever is greater.
(3) Bicycle parking facilities must be located in a secure, lockable, and
well-lighted area.
(4) All bicycle racks, lockers, or other facilities shall be compatible
with modern design standards and securely anchored to the ground
or to the structure.
A. Except for areas with single-family and two-family dwellings, no wall or
hedge shall exceed four feet in height.
B. Decorative walls or fences are encouraged.
A. A conceptual plan (CP) shall be prepared for each proposed
development in the TOD District and shall be submitted to Borough
Council to advise it of the general scope and characteristics of the
proposed development.
(1) The CP shall depict the following proposed development features in
a general fashion: building layout, land uses, bicycle and
pedestrian pathways, parking, and other similar items.
(2) After Borough Council reviews the CP and advises the applicant/
developer of any desired revisions, the applicant shall submit a
development plan (DP) to the Borough Planning Commission.
B. The DP shall first be submitted to the Borough Planning Commission,
then, after review by the Planning Commission, to Borough Council.
C. The DP shall provide for the physical design of the proposed
development relative to public improvements, development standards,
urban design criteria, and public incentives.
§ 196-72 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-75
193:521
D. The preparation of the DP shall include major stakeholders, including,
but not limited to, major property owners, neighborhood organizations,
local officials, and other interested parties. These individuals shall
serve as an advisory committee that will work with Borough Council,
the Planning Commission, the Borough Manager, other Borough
officials, consultants, and other appropriate parties to prepare the DP.
E. The DP shall include the following components:
(1) Existing land use, property ownership, development character, and
related characteristics.
(2) Real estate market analysis of the development potential. The
analysis shall consider potential demand for commercial (retail,
service, and office), hotel, entertainment, and residential
development (multifamily owner and renter occupied, single-family
semidetached and single-family attached dwellings, and duplexes).
(3) Analysis of potential impacts of the development and projected
infrastructure needs.
(4) A traffic study.
(5) Final plan indicating development pattern by use, density, and
similar characteristics; supporting infrastructure; pedestrian and
bicycle system; urban design guidelines; and implementation
timetable.
(6) An incentive package that includes public improvements to streets,
traffic signals, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, streetlights, water and
sewer infrastructure, and park and recreational facilities.
(7) The DP shall include any other information required by the
Borough, as well as all of the information required by the latest
County Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance for the
preparation of land development plans.
§ 196-75 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-75
193:522
ARTICLE XIII
Industrial Transition District
§ 196-76. Purpose.
§ 196-77. Uses permitted by right.
Land, buildings, or premises shall be used by right for only one or more of
the following uses:
§ 196-78. Conditional uses.
The following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses only, subject to
the applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Procedure and Standards for
Conditional Uses:
§ 196-79. Accessory uses and structures.
A. The purpose of this district is to provide for and regulate a variety of
light and medium impact industrial uses in order to establish an area of
transitional industrial uses between the high impact petroleum-related
structures and residential neighborhoods and other light impact uses.
B. Sufficient regulations regarding buffering, screening, access, and
landscaping are required to minimize adverse impacts on adjacent
residential neighborhoods and assure sound development and
appearance. Hazardous or noxious uses or activities shall not be
permitted.
A. All uses permitted in the Planned Business Park District.
B. Low and medium impact petroleum-related operations and facilities.
C. Manufacturing, fabricating, processing, packaging, assembly, and
repair of materials or products where these operations will not create
significant negative impacts on the residential areas.
D. Distribution and/or freight facility.
E. Warehouse or similar storage facility.
F. Tradesman's shop, such as electrician, carpenter.
G. Auto repair or auto body/collision shop.
H. Existing uses may be continued and improved when shown to be in
compliance with relevant provisions of Articles XIX and XX. High
impact uses exerting a negative influence on adjacent residential
districts are not permitted.
A. Below-ground petroleum storage.
B. Gasoline service station, subject to § 196-138.
§ 196-76 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-79
193:523
§ 196-80. Area and bulk regulations.
Unless stated otherwise, the following shall be minimum requirements:
§ 196-81. Special development regulations.
A. Pipelines for the continuation or improvement of existing operations.
B. Office/storage trailers, subject to Article II, Definitions, and § 196-126.
C. Cellular communications facility, only on or as part of an existing
building or structure.
A. Lot area: 25,000 square feet.
B. Lot width: 100 feet.
C. Setbacks:
(1) For buildings: 50 feet on front, side, and rear yards, increased to 75
feet abutting residential districts.
(2) For towers, stacks, vessels, steeples, tanks, and other similar
structures: not less than twice their height as measured from the
property line from U.S. Route 13 (10th Street) and from any other
zoning district in Marcus Hook other than the Heavy Industrial
District.
D. Distance between buildings: 50 feet.
E. Impervious surface: 70%, maximum.
F. Height:
(1) For buildings: 50 feet, maximum.
(2) For towers, stacks, steeples, vessels, tanks, and other similar
structures: 75 feet, maximum.
A. Access shall be prohibited to or from:
(1) Green Street except at the existing entrances located at Delaware
Avenue and Green Street, 4th Street and Green Street, and at the
existing railroad crossing. Additional access at other locations may
be permitted only if necessary to extinguish, contain, or otherwise
control emergency situations.
(2) Church Street except at the existing entrances located at Delaware
Avenue and Church Street and 4th Street and Church Street.
B. A planting area not less than 25 feet in width shall be provided along
each property line or right-of-way line that is opposite or adjacent to a
residential district.
§ 196-79 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-81
193:524
C. All spaces between buildings and all parking, loading, and unloading
spaces and service areas shall be adequately illuminated at night. Such
lighting, including sign lighting, shall be provided for security and
arranged to protect the surrounding streets and properties from direct
glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
D. Nothing herein shall prohibit the continuation of any lawful
nonconforming conditions existing at the time of adoption of these
regulations, subject to the provisions of Article XIX, Nonconforming
Uses, Structures and Lots.
§ 196-81 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-81
193:525

ARTICLE XIV
Heavy Industrial District
§ 196-82. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide for certain manufacturing,
assembly, and fabricating activities, including large-scale petroleum or
other specialized industrial operations, that may generate large volumes of
truck and/or rail traffic and whose external physical effects will be felt to
some degree by surrounding areas.
§ 196-83. Uses permitted by right.
Land, buildings, or premises shall be used by right for only one or more of
the following uses:
§ 196-84. Conditional uses.
The following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses only, subject to
the applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Procedure and Standards for
Conditional Uses:
§ 196-85. Accessory uses and structures.
A. All uses permitted in the Industrial Transition District and the Planned
Business Park District.
B. Petroleum refining and aboveground storage of crude oil, hydrocarbon
fractions, chemical derivatives, or petroleum products.
C. Loading and unloading of ships.
A. Below-ground storage of petroleum, petroleum products, and other
flammable liquids and gases.
B. Power generation plants that are powered by natural gas. Coal powered
plants are not permitted.
C. Heavy industrial uses, including manufacturing, processing, servicing,
and testing of materials or products not injurious to occupants of
adjacent and nearby uses.
D. Gasoline service station, subject to § 196-138.
E. Cellular communications towers and facilities, subject to § 196-144.
F. Uses of the same general character as those permitted in §§ 196-83 and
196-85, except for those listed in § 196-86 below, provided that no
resource recovery, waste treatment, landfill, or similar use shall be
permitted. To determine if a proposed use is of the same general
character as any of the listed permitted uses, Borough Council and the
Planning Commission shall evaluate its impacts in relation to the
compatibility standards in Article XVII.
§ 196-82 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-85
193:527
§ 196-86. Prohibited uses and activities.
The handling, processing, landfilling, composting, incinerating,
transferring, and/or recovery and storage of hazardous wastes, municipal
solid wastes and sewage sludge, infectious or chemotherapeutic wastes,
construction or demolition waste, or contaminated soil is prohibited.
§ 196-87. Area and bulk regulations.
Unless stated otherwise, the following shall be minimum requirements;
provided, however, that nothing herein shall prohibit the continuation of any
lawful nonconforming conditions existing at the time of adoption of these
regulations, subject to the provisions of Article XIX, Nonconforming Uses,
Structures and Lots:
A. Pipelines, whether above or below ground, for the transfer of crude oil,
hydrocarbon fractions, chemical derivatives, or petroleum products
while being refined or otherwise processed.
B. Office/storage trailers, subject to Article II and § 196-126.
C. Cellular communications facilities attached to an existing structure,
subject to § 196-144.
A. Lot area: none required.
B. Lot width: none required.
C. Setbacks:
(1) For buildings: 60 feet for front, side, and rear.
(2) For towers, stacks, steeples, vessels, tanks, and other similar
structures: not less than twice their height as measured from the
property line from U.S. Route 13 (10th Street).
D. Distance between buildings: 60 feet.
E. Impervious surface: 70%, maximum.
F. Height:
(1) For buildings: 60 feet, maximum.
(2) For towers, stacks, vessels, steeples, tanks, and other similar
structures:
(a) One hundred twenty-five feet, within 400 to 1,000 feet from
any residential district.
(b) One hundred fifty feet, within 1,000 to 1,500 feet from any
residential district.
§ 196-85 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-87
193:528
§ 196-88. Special development regulations.
(c) Two hundred feet within 1,500 to 2,500 feet from any
residential district.
(d) A maximum of 350 feet beyond 2,500 feet from any residential
district, south of U.S. Route 13 (10th Street) and 250 feet north
of U.S. Route 13 (10th Street).
A. All uses shall be in full compliance with Article XX, Performance
Standards.
B. All uses established in this district after adoption of these regulations
shall be demonstrated by the applicant not to be materially injurious to
adjacent uses or to the Borough as a whole by the emission or creation
of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, or other toxic or noxious materials,
particulates, odors, fires, explosive hazards, heat, or glare in excess of
the standards provided in Article XX.
C. Screening and landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Article
XVII.
D. All uses, processes, and activities shall also comply with any applicable
standards of federal, state, and county regulatory agencies.
§ 196-87 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-88
193:529

ARTICLE XV
Parking Regulations
§ 196-89. Purposes.
The purposes of this article are to adequately provide for the parking
needs of all uses in the Borough, to reduce traffic congestion on public
streets by getting parking off streets, and to allow faster emergency access.
The secondary purposes include providing for special parking needs of
handicapped drivers and providing flexibility in meeting the Borough's
parking needs by methods such as common parking arrangements.
§ 196-90. Applicability.
§ 196-91. General regulations for off-street parking.
A. Basic requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements in § 196-92 below. All such off-street parking
areas shall be provided on the same parcel of land as the use or building
they serve, except as modified by § 196-94, Off-site and shared parking.
Also, the minimum off-street parking requirements in § 196-92 shall not
apply to the Central Retail District.
B. Existing structures and uses. No building or use of land lawfully in
existence prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be subject to
the requirements of § 196-92, so long as the kind or extent of use is not
changed so as to require additional parking.
C. Provision and retention of facilities. All required parking facilities shall
be provided and maintained so long as the use exists which the facilities
were designed to serve. Off-street parking facilities shall not be
reduced in total extent except when such reduction is in conformity
with this article.
D. Change or extension of use. Except in the Central Retail District,
whenever a structure is altered or a use is changed or extended which
increases the parking requirements of § 196-92, then the total
additional parking required for the alteration, change, or extension
shall be provided in accordance with § 196-92.
A. Where a use is not specifically listed in this chapter, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall apply the standards of the most similar use listed to
determine the number of parking spaces required.
B. If the computation of the parking ratios listed in § 196-92 results in a
fraction, an additional parking space shall be required.
C. All parking areas of five spaces or more, loading areas, and driveways
shall be graded and surfaced with bituminous paving or equivalent
surfacing and graded to properly dispose of all surface water
accumulation within the parking area in conformance with municipal
standards.
§ 196-89 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-91
193:531
§ 196-92. Required parking ratios.
Use Off-Street Parking Requirements
Residential Uses
Single- and two-family
dwelling
Two spaces for every dwelling unit
Townhouse Two spaces for every dwelling unit
Multifamily dwelling Two spaces per dwelling unit, plus one
space for every four dwelling units for
guests in developments/buildings of 12 or
more units
Conversion Two spaces per unit
D. In industrial districts, materials such as stone, gravel, or other
permeable material may be used for covering parking areas, provided
that, if the parking area abuts a residential or commercial district,
those permeable materials shall be confined within the parking area of
the industrial district.
E. On off-street parking areas with five or more spaces, each space shall
be clearly line-striped and maintained.
F. Freestanding establishments located within shopping centers shall
have adequate parking as required in § 196-92 and will not rely on
common parking to meet the aforementioned requirements, except
where the conditions of § 196-94 are met.
G. All parking areas with five or more spaces shall be adequately lighted
so as to assist in the safe maneuvering of motor vehicles and to provide
security for users of the lot. All lighting shall be arranged to avoid glare
on adjacent properties.
H. No commercial motor vehicle with more than a single rear wheel axle
may be stored on a lot in a residential district, unless such vehicle is
stored in a private garage.
I. Parking or storage of disabled, partially dismantled, or junk cars,
trucks, boats, or other vehicles shall be permitted on a lot for a
continuous period of not more than five days.
J. No front yard parking shall be permitted.
K. Where off-street parking spaces are provided in the rear yard of a lot in
a residential district, such spaces shall not be situated more than five
feet from the rear lot line and shall be paved in compliance with
impervious surface standards.
L. Where possible, residential developments constructed after the
adoption of this chapter shall provide access to the parking spaces at or
near the rear lot line by means of an alley.
§ 196-91 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-92
193:532
Use Off-Street Parking Requirements
Community residence facility One space for every two bedrooms, plus
one for each employee
Public or Private Recreational Uses
Private clubs One space for every 100 square feet of
floor area
Bowling alley Four spaces for each lane
Gymnasium, stadium One space for every four seats
Outdoor commercial
recreation
One space for every 2,000 square feet of
area devoted to such use
Indoor recreation One space for every 150 square feet of
gross floor area
Governmental, Institutional, and Educational Uses
Auditoriums, churches, and
other places of public
assembly
One space for every five seats plus one
space for every 150 square feet of meeting
room area
Community center, municipal
building, library, or similar
use
One space for every 300 square feet of
gross floor area
Child day-care center One space for every 500 square feet of
gross floor area, plus one space for each
adult attendant. This shall be in addition to
the parking requirements of the primary
use, such as a school or church, if
applicable.
Secondary, primary, and
nursery schools
One space for each faculty member or
other full-time employee plus two spaces
for each classroom and one space for every
12 students aged 16 years or older.
Retail, Commercial, and Other Business Uses
Retail store or shop One space for every 200 square feet of
gross floor area
Furniture or appliance store One space for every 400 square feet of
gross floor area
Convenience store One space for every 125 square feet of
gross floor area
Supermarket One space for every 125 square feet of
gross floor area
Personal service businesses
such as barber shops, tailors,
shoe repair, etc.
One space for every 150 square feet of
gross floor area
§ 196-92 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-92
193:533
Use Off-Street Parking Requirements
Shopping center One space for every 250 square feet of
gross leasable floor area
Professional and other office
area
One space for every 250 square feet of
gross floor area
Banks, credit unions, and
savings and loans
One space for every 200 square feet of
gross floor area
Medical, dental, and
veterinary offices or clinics
One space for every 100 square feet of
waiting room space, plus two spaces for
each practitioner.
Restaurant
Sit-down One space for every 150 square feet of
gross floor area, plus one space for every
two employees on the shift of greatest
employment
Restaurant with drive
through
One space for every 75 square feet of gross
floor area, plus one space for every two
employees on the shift of greatest
employment
Bar, tavern One space for every 150 square feet of
gross floor area
Movie theater or amusement
venue
One space for every three seats, plus one
space for every employee on the greatest
shift of employment
Funeral home One space for every 75 square feet of floor
area in viewing rooms or parlors, plus one
space for each official funeral car and one
space for every two employees exclusive of
the resident family members
Hotel, motel, or inn One space for every guest room, plus one
space for every two full-time employees,
plus the required parking for accessory
uses such as restaurants and bars
Car wash
Standard 10 spaces per bay for stacking, plus four
spaces for standing between the exit of the
facility and the street, plus one space for
each employee on the shift of greatest
employment
Self-service Four spaces per bay for stacking, plus one
space for standing between the exit of the
facility and the street.
Laundromat, self-service One space for every two washing machines
§ 196-92 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-92
193:534
Use Off-Street Parking Requirements
Automobile service and repair Two spaces, either within or outside of the
structure, for every 200 square feet of floor
or ground area devoted to repair or service
facilities and, in addition, such space as is
necessary for vehicles purchasing gasoline
or being stored. In no case shall the spaces
for permitted motor vehicle storage in
conjunction with a service station be fewer
than five.
Repair or tradesman shop,
e.g., carpenter, plumber, etc.
One space for every 400 square feet of
gross floor area
Temporary uses such as sales
of Christmas trees, flowers,
produce, and other goods
One space for every 200 square feet of
sales area
Industrial and Other Related Uses
Research and development,
light manufacturing and
assembly, air freight
One space for every 750 square feet of
gross floor area, plus one space for every
employee on the shift of greatest
employment
Storage, manufacturing,
warehousing, distribution,
wholesale, heavy industry
One space for every 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area, plus one space for every
employee on the shift of greatest
employment
§ 196-93. Design regulations.
A. The size of a standard parking space shall be nine feet wide by 18 feet
long, an area of 162 square feet.
B. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be 12 feet wide by 18 feet
long, an area of 216 square feet. Parking spaces for the handicapped
must be located as close as possible to public entrances and ramps to
buildings. Each space must be clearly marked with proper signage.
C. Handicapped spaces shall be provided in the amounts required below:
Total Parking Spaces
Number of Required
Handicapped Spaces
10 - 25 1
26 - 50 2
51 - 75 3
76 - 100 4
D. All parking areas for five or more vehicles shall be designed so that
vehicles need not back directly into a public street but can enter and
leave the parking area in a forward motion.
§ 196-92 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-93
193:535
§ 196-94. Off-site and shared parking.
§ 196-95. Design of off-street loading facilities.
E. All parking shall be accessible from a street or driveway.
F. Every parking lot or area with 10 or more off-street spaces shall be
separated from the street or highway by a raised curb, planting strip,
wall, or other suitable barrier against unchanneled motor vehicle
entrance or exit, except for necessary accessways or exits.
G. Drive-through establishments such as fast order and pickup, automatic
bank teller, and similar uses shall provide no fewer than five waiting
spaces for each drive-through lane. This is in addition to the space for
the car being serviced.
A. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the collective offsite
parking facilities for two or more nonresidential buildings or uses.
However, the total of such off-site parking spaces shall be not less than
the sum of the requirements for the various uses compiled separately,
and provided that such off-site parking is not farther than 500 feet from
the use farthest from the parking area. Borough Council must approve
off-site facilities.
B. Two or more nonresidential uses may provide for required parking in a
shared parking area, provided that such area is on or adjacent to such
uses. The number of spaces required in such a shared parking area may
be reduced below the sum of the total requirements if it can be
demonstrated to the Zoning Officer that the hours or days of peak
parking demand for the uses are so different that a lower overall total of
parking spaces will adequately provide for the uses to be served. In
such case, sufficient parking shall be provided to meet the minimum
needs of the use that requires the greater parking area.
A. The minimum size loading space shall be 50 feet long by 12 feet wide,
with an overhead clearance of 14 feet, exclusive of drives and
maneuvering space, and located entirely on the lot being served. Any
overhead canopy should extend a minimum of four feet beyond a
loading dock.
B. All loading spaces shall have adequate access from a street or way that
does not block or interfere with required parking as specified in
§ 196-92. This required space will be provided in addition to established
requirements for patron and employee parking.
C. Every building or use of land consisting of over 5,000 square feet of
gross floor area designed or used for commercial or industrial uses
shall be provided with a loading space as follows:
§ 196-93 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-95
193:536
§ 196-96. Screening and landscaping requirements.
Total Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Number of Loading Spaces
Required
Up to 15,000 1 space
15,000 to 50,000 2 spaces
50,000 to 100,000 3 spaces
Each additional 100,000 1 additional space
D. In no case shall public rights-of-way be used for loading or unloading of
materials. Furthermore, no loading dock or space shall be located or
arranged in such a way that it is necessary to back any vehicle into or
off any public right-of-way or require the use of any public right-of-way
for maneuvering space.
E. All accessory driveways and entrance ways shall be graded, paved, and
drained to Borough standards to the extent necessary to prevent
nuisance of dust, erosion, or excessive water flow across streets and
adjoining properties.
F. All off-street loading berths shall be provided on either the side or rear
of the lot. In no case shall off-street loading berths be provided in the
front of the lot.
G. Such facilities shall be designed and created to constitute, at no time, a
nuisance, hazard, or impediment to traffic.
A. Screening between any parking area and the street line shall be
effective at the time of occupancy, subject to the following provisions:
(1) All off-street parking areas that provide more than five parking
spaces shall be screened from any abutting property in a more
restrictive zoning classification.
(2) Effective screening may be accomplished through the use of the
following: plant materials, fencing, or walls and/or mounding
through the use of an earthen berm forming a continuous visual
buffer.
(3) The area for planting and fencing, walls, or earthen berms shall not
extend beyond the street line.
(4) When planted visual screens are employed, the following shall
apply:
(a) A buffer planting strip shall be provided. It shall be a minimum
of five feet in width unless specifically required otherwise in
this chapter.
§ 196-95 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-96
193:537
(b) Planted visual screens shall be of sufficient height and density
to constitute a continuous visual screen six feet in height at the
time of planting except as provided below.
(5) Whenever fencing or walls are employed, the effective height of the
continuous visual screen shall be not less than five nor more than
six feet.
(6) Whenever earthen berms are employed, the effective height of the
continuous visual screen shall be not less than five feet.
B. Landscaping within any parking area which provides 20 or more
parking spaces shall be subject to the following provisions:
(1) Off-street parking areas shall be landscaped to reduce wind and air
turbulence, heat, noise, and the glare of automobile lights; to
reduce the level of carbon dioxide; to provide shade; to improve
stormwater drainage problems; to replenish the groundwater
table; and to provide for a more attractive setting.
(2) The interior of each parking lot constructed or enlarged after the
effective date of this chapter shall have at least one three-inchcaliper
deciduous shade tree for every 15 parking spaces if there
are no existing shade trees to satisfy this requirement. Shrubs and
other plant materials are encouraged to be used to complement the
trees but shall not be the sole contribution to the landscaping.
These trees shall be in addition to those required as an effective
screen. Trees selected for landscaping in parking areas shall be of a
species proven to be salt and dust resistant.
(3) Landscaped areas at least five feet wide shall be provided around
the periphery of parking areas. Such areas shall, at a minimum,
extend the full length for necessary accessways to prevent the
encroachment of moving vehicles into parking areas.
(4) Planted landscaped islands between every 20 parking spaces or at
the end of each parking row, whichever is less, shall be provided
and shall be the length and width of the parking spaces.
(5) Existing plant material and trees with a caliper of six inches or
more shall be preserved wherever possible during construction.
Such existing plants may be credited toward the amount of
required plantings.
§ 196-96 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-96
193:538
ARTICLE XVI
Signs
§ 196-97. Purposes.
The purposes of this article are to provide for and control the type,
dimensions, and other features of signs, to recognize the commercial
communication needs of the business community, to protect the public
from damage or injury attributable to distractions and obstructions from
improperly designed or located signs, to safeguard property values, and to
assure that signs are consistent and harmonious in relation to the scale,
appearance, and character of buildings where they are placed and
neighboring areas.
§ 196-98. Scope and applicability.
§ 196-99. Determination of size of signs.
The size of any sign shall be determined in accordance with the provisions
of this article and the following:
A. Any sign hereafter erected shall conform to the provisions of this article
and any other ordinance or regulations of the Borough relating thereto.
Any sign not specifically authorized by the provisions of this article shall
not be erected in the Borough.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, alter,
rebuild, enlarge, extend, or relocate signs listed in § 196-102 without
first obtaining a permit from the Borough, except for those signs listed
specifically in § 196-101.
C. Application for such permits shall be made in writing to the Borough in
accordance with § 196-105.
D. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to revoke any permit issued by
the Borough upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with any
provision of this article.
E. The provisions of this article shall not apply where signage is erected
and maintained by the Borough for Borough purposes, provided that all
other required governmental permits are obtained by the Borough prior
to such use.
A. When a sign consists of letters, numbers, and/or logos and not a
lettered board and such sign is erected on or attached to a building
wall, petroleum storage tank, or other similar surface, the size of such
sign shall be measured by the geometric shape formed by the extreme
outside edge of the largest letters, numbers, or logos contained in the
sign.
B. When a sign consists of a lettered board and such sign is erected on or
attached to a building wall, petroleum storage tank, or other similar
§ 196-97 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-99
193:539
§ 196-100. Sign restrictions and standards.
surface, the size of such sign shall be determined by calculating the
area of the lettered board.
A. Prohibited signs. It is unlawful to erect or maintain the following signs:
(1) Flashing, blinking, spinning, animated, inflatable, aerial, or lighted
moving signs, including automatic color-changing and rotating
lamps and other moving objects that call attention to the sign. The
use of rotating searchlights for advertising is allowed after
obtaining a permit from the Borough.
(2) Advertising cloth or banner or signs of any similar character
suspended or hung on any property. However, banners and
pennants shall be permitted along 10th Street and Market Street,
after obtaining the required Borough permit as per § 196-105.
(3) Wall bulletins or any other signs painted directly on the facade of a
building or other structure.
(4) Curb or sidewalk signs or signs painted, attached, or suspended
from any outdoor bench, chair, or similar structure.
(5) Swinging and hanging signs.
(6) Signs, letters, posters, and advertisements which are tacked,
pasted, tied, or otherwise affixed to poles, posts, buildings, fences,
bus shelters, or other structures located on public property or
within public street lines.
(7) Signs pasted, tied, pulled, or otherwise attached to a vehicle that
refer to a business or activity unrelated to the purpose or activity
for which the vehicle is used.
(8) Signs placed, inscribed, or supported upon the roofline or any
structure that extends above the roofline of any building.
(9) Signs on petroleum tanks that do not advertise or refer to the
refinery's owner.
(10) Signs that state or imply that the property on which they are placed
is used for purposes or activities not permitted by this chapter.
(11) A-frame, sandwich board, or similar temporary signs.
(12) Neon signs.
(13) Billboards.
B. Projecting signs prohibited. No new projecting signs shall be erected
after the date of enactment of this chapter. Projecting signs in existence
at the enactment of this chapter shall be considered nonconforming
signs and shall be allowed to continue.
§ 196-99 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-100
193:540
C. Standards and restrictions. The following standards and restrictions
shall apply to all permitted signs:
(1) General.
(a) No sign shall be located, arranged, or placed in a position
where it will cause danger to traffic or will interfere with traffic
through glare; block required sight lines for streets, sidewalks,
or driveways; or cause confusion with a traffic control device
by reason of color, location, shape, or other characteristics or
through any other means.
(b) Where not inconsistent with this article, all signs constructed
or erected under the provisions of this article shall comply with
the standards set forth in the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code most recently adopted by the Borough.
(c) Except for traffic signs, no sign shall be erected within the
right-of-way lines of any public street except in the Central
Retail District, nor shall any such sign be closer than six feet to
the right-of-way line of a public street, unless specifically
authorized by other ordinances and regulations of the Borough
of Marcus Hook or other governmental bodies or agencies
having jurisdiction or regulatory authority in the matter. Also,
no portion of a sign in the front yard shall be less than six feet
from a public sidewalk.
(d) No illuminated sign shall be lighted on days when the business
or permitted use is not open for business.
(e) All signs must be constructed of durable materials and shall be
solidly and firmly attached, supported, and/or anchored to the
supports or framework. A professional sign company shall
construct all permanent signs over four square feet.
(f) Every sign must be kept in good condition and repair. Any sign
that is allowed to become dilapidated or abandoned shall be
removed by or at the expense of the landowner or lessee of the
property on which it is located.
(g) Where applicable, the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation in relation to signs shall be
followed.
(h) Except for traffic signs, incidental signs, directional signs, or
wayfinding signs, all permanent signs shall be located on the
property to which their text or message applies.
(i) Freestanding signs, canopy signs, and awning signs shall have
a clearance of not less than eight feet between the ground and
the bottom of the sign.
§ 196-100 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-100
193:541
(j) Where a business ceases to operate and vacates the premises,
the owner/operator must remove all signs and sign structures
within 90 days after ceasing business operations. However, the
sign structure may remain if the owner or occupant can
demonstrate that a subsequent owner or occupant will utilize a
sign or sign structure.
(2) Area of multifaced signs. The sign area for a sign with more than
one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign
faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces that
are part of the same sign structure are placed back to back so that
both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and
when such sign faces are not more than 42 inches apart, the sign
area shall be computed by the measurement of one of these faces.
(3) Freestanding signs.
(a) The bottom or lowest edge of any freestanding sign shall be no
closer to the ground than eight feet. No more than two feet
above the ground level can be devoted to and maintained for
plantings. If such plantings are installed, they shall be
maintained at the maximum height of two feet and shall be free
of weeds, debris, and other undesirable material.
(b) All single-post freestanding signs shall be made of metal,
except for those used in residential districts which may be
made of pressure-treated timbers. All such posts shall be
embedded in the ground at least three feet six inches unless
otherwise directed by the Zoning Officer.
(c) Freestanding signs will be permitted in residential areas only
when set back a minimum distance of six feet behind the front
property line.
(d) No portion of such sign shall be less than six feet behind the
front property line.
(e) Freestanding signs shall be illuminated only by concealed or
indirect lighting.
(f) There shall be a distance of not less than 75 feet between
freestanding signs.
(4) Ground signs.
(a) The top edge of a ground sign shall be a maximum of five feet
above ground level.
(b) Ground signs shall be supported and permanently placed by
embedding, anchoring, or connecting the sign in such a
manner as to incorporate it into the landscape or architectural
design scheme.
§ 196-100 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-100
193:542
§ 196-101. Signs not requiring a permit.
The following signs are exempt from the need to secure a permit but are
subject to all other applicable provisions of this article:
(c) No portion of such sign shall be less than six feet behind the
front property line.
(d) Illumination shall be by concealed or indirect lighting.
(5) Window signs. A maximum of 20% of the total window area may be
used for permanent signs that are etched, painted, or permanently
affixed to the window.
(6) Temporary signs.
(a) The use of any temporary sign, except for sales or price change
signs and signs exempt by § 196-101, shall require a permit
which shall be effective for not more than 30 days.
(b) Temporary signs shall be placed so as not to obstruct vehicular
or pedestrian traffic or create a safety hazard.
(c) Such signs shall not obstruct access to or from any door,
window, fire escape, or ventilating equipment, nor be attached
to any standpipe or fire escape.
(d) Temporary signs shall be removed immediately upon
expiration of the permit.
(e) The size of these signs shall not exceed 1/3 square foot of sign
area for each linear foot of building width.
(f) Temporary commercial advertising signs shall not be attached
to fences.
A. Public notice, warning, or official traffic sign required by a federal,
state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance.
B. Any sign inside a building not attached to a window or door that is not
legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the
property on which such sign is located.
C. Building markers that only include building name, date of construction,
or historical data on an historical site, provided that there is only one
per building with a maximum area of six square feet.
D. Flags of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, foreign
nations having diplomatic relations with the United States, or any other
flag adopted or sanctioned by an elected legislative body of competent
jurisdiction, provided that such flag does not exceed 60 square feet in
area and shall be flown from a pole not more than 40 feet in height.
E. Decorative flags, not exceeding 12 square feet.
§ 196-100 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-101
193:543
§ 196-102. Signs requiring a permit.
The following signs, as described under each zoning district or group of
districts, are permitted, provided that they meet the conditions in § 196-100
and a sign permit has been obtained:
F. Incidental signs containing no commercial message of any kind,
provided that such signs do not exceed eight square feet.
G. Signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises or lot upon which
they are erected, provided that there is not more than one such sign per
street frontage. Such sign shall be neither illuminated nor exceed eight
square feet in residential districts and 32 square feet in nonresidential
districts. All such signs shall be removed on or before the date of
settlement.
H. Signs advertising the development of the premises where they are
erected. Such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in residential
districts and 40 square feet in nonresidential districts. All such signs
shall be removed on or before the date of settlement.
I. Nameplate signs on private residences, provided that they do not
exceed 144 square inches.
J. Decorations for a recognized officially designated holiday, provided that
they do not create a traffic or fire hazard.
K. Yard sale or garage sale signs, provided that they do not exceed two
square feet and are removed within 24 hours after such sales.
L. Signs announcing educational, charitable, civic, religious, or similar
campaigns or events, provided that such signs are erected for a period
not to exceed 30 days or more than four times in any calendar year for a
maximum annual total of 120 days. Such signs shall not exceed eight
square feet.
M. Changeable copy signs for churches, schools, and other uses which by
their nature require changeable copy signs, provided that only one such
sign shall be permitted. However, in the case of a corner property, one
additional sign is permitted on the side of the property. The size of such
signs shall not exceed 16 square feet.
N. Directional signs.
O. Freestanding signs of an official nature identifying a civic event.
P. Signs for the Industrial Heritage Parkway and East Coast Greenway.
These signs shall be consistent with the Delaware County Route 291/13
Industrial Heritage Parkway and Greenway Landscape and Signage
Guidelines Manual of 2005.
§ 196-101 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-102
193:544
A. Signs in residential districts. The following types of signs that require a
permit and no others shall be permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4
Residence Districts:
(1) Identification signs for apartment buildings or complexes,
residential developments, schools, churches, and similar permitted
uses other than individual dwellings, provided that:
(a) Such signs shall be freestanding signs, ground signs, or wall
signs only.
(b) Not more than one wall sign and one freestanding or ground
sign shall be permitted for each frontage.
(c) The size of freestanding, ground, and wall signs shall not
exceed 16 square feet.
(2) Signs identifying nonresidential uses permitted as valid
nonconforming uses, provided that they meet the same
requirements as Subsection A(1), above.
(3) Signs identifying no-impact home-based businesses.
(a) Types of signs permitted shall be wall signs.
(b) These wall signs shall be nonilluminated and not exceed two
square feet.
(4) Illumination of signs in Subsection A above shall be by external
white light only.
B. Signs in the Central Retail District. The following signs and no others
shall be permitted in the Central Retail District, subject to the following
requirements:
(1) Any sign permitted in a residential district with the requirements in
that district, as noted in Subsection A.
(2) Wall signs, canopy/awning signs, window signs, and freestanding
signs.
(3) Freestanding signs that do not advertise a business shall be
permitted, provided that they do not exceed six square feet.
(4) There shall be not more than one wall sign for each frontage.
However, for buildings that have a front width of 100 feet or more,
two wall signs shall be permitted at that frontage. In this case, a
special exception shall be required.
(5) The size of wall signs shall not exceed one square foot of sign area
for each linear foot of building width.
(6) On corner lots, signs fronting on side streets along the long side of
a building shall not exceed 1/2 square foot of sign area for each
§ 196-102 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-102
193:545
linear foot of building width. However, where the side street is an
arterial street, the size of the wall sign shall be the same as on the
front street.
(7) Awning or canopy signs may be substituted for wall signs with the
same requirements as noted in Subsection B(5).
(8) The awning or canopy on which a canopy or awning sign is depicted
or placed shall not extend more than five feet from the front wall of
the building.
(9) Where there is a business on the second floor, one additional wall
sign, not greater than eight square feet, shall be permitted. Such
signs shall be located on the second story.
(10) Signs identifying individual tenants in a multitenant building, as
defined in Article II, shall be wall signs permitted in addition to the
principal permitted wall sign. Such additional wall signs shall not
exceed four square feet.
(11) Applications for proposed signs shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer who shall have the option of referring the permit request to
the Planning Commission for its evaluation as to whether the
proposed sign complies with the purposes of the Central Retail
District, as stated in Article VII and in the most recently adopted
Marcus Hook Comprehensive Plan. The Planning Commission may
offer suggestions to modify the proposed sign so that it is in
accordance with the goals for the retail shopping area as noted in
the Comprehensive Plan.
(12) Any illuminated sign lit by any means other than neon.
C. Signs in the Planned Business Park District. The following signs and no
other shall be permitted in the Planned Business Park District:
(1) Wall signs, awning signs, freestanding signs, and ground signs.
(2) Wall signs identifying individual establishments.
(a) Not more than one wall sign shall be permitted.
(b) The size of wall signs shall not exceed 1/2 square foot of sign
area for each linear foot of frontage of the establishment.
(c) Wall signs shall not be placed within one foot of the edge of the
front wall of the building.
(d) Awning signs may be substituted for wall signs with the same
requirements as noted in Subsection C(2)(b) directly above.
(3) Freestanding signs or ground signs identifying developments.
(a) Not more than one freestanding sign or ground sign identifying
the development shall be erected at the principal exterior road.
§ 196-102 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-102
193:546
(b) Individual establishments may be identified on the same sign
structure as that listing the name of the development.
(c) The size of the sign identifying the development shall not
exceed 60 square feet along the principal exterior road.
(d) The size of the signs identifying individual establishments shall
not exceed 10 square feet.
(e) Not more than one freestanding sign or ground sign identifying
the development may be placed along an interior road. Names
of the individual establishments may be placed on the same
sign structure.
[1] The size of the sign identifying the development shall not
exceed 50 square feet.
[2] The size of signs identifying individual establishments
shall not exceed six square feet.
D. Signs in the Recreational Business Campus District.
(1) Permitted signs shall include only wall signs, canopy signs,
freestanding signs, and ground signs.
(2) Wall signs identifying individual establishments that occupy an
entire principal building shall not exceed one square foot of sign
area for each foot of building width.
(3) Wall signs identifying an establishment that is only a part of an
existing building shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for
each foot of the establishment width.
(4) Awning signs may be substituted for wall signs, in accordance with
the requirements for wall signs per Subsection D(2) above.
(5) Freestanding signs or ground signs identifying the
establishment(s) on the parcel shall be permitted along the exterior
road. Such signs shall be placed behind the right-of-way line.
(6) Only one such freestanding sign or ground sign, the size of which
shall not exceed 30 square feet, shall be permitted along the
exterior road.
E. Signs in the Downtown Mixed Use District.
(1) Permitted signs shall include only wall signs, canopy signs, and
freestanding signs.
(2) Wall signs identifying individual nonresidential establishments may
be placed on not more than two sides of a principal building.
§ 196-102 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-102
193:547
(3) The size of such wall signs identifying an individual establishment
shall not exceed 1/2 square foot of sign area for each foot of
establishment frontage.
(4) Awning signs and canopy signs shall be permitted in place of wall
signs, in accordance with the requirements for wall signs in
Subsection E(3) above.
(5) Not more than one freestanding sign or ground sign identifying the
commercial and/or residential development shall be placed along
the exterior roadway.
(6) The size of such freestanding signs or ground signs shall not
exceed 50 square feet; however, signs identifying individual
establishments may be placed on the freestanding sign structure.
These signs identifying the establishment shall be not larger than
10 square feet. This area for the individual establishments shall be
in addition to the size allotted for identifying the development.
F. Signs in the Waterfront Mixed Use District.
(1) Permitted signs shall include only wall signs, awning signs, canopy
signs, freestanding signs, and ground signs.
(2) With the exception of permitting canopy signs, all other provisions
of the Recreational Business Campus District shall apply to the
Waterfront Mixed Use District.
G. Signs in the Transit-Oriented Development District. Same as the
regulations in Subsection C relating to the Planned Business Park
District.
H. Signs in the Industrial Transition District and the Heavy Industrial
District.
(1) Any sign permitted in a Planned Business Park District with the
requirements noted in Subsection C.
(2) Wall signs, freestanding signs, ground signs, awning or canopy
signs, and window signs.
(3) There shall be not more than one wall sign for each frontage.
(4) The size of wall signs shall not exceed 1 1/2 square feet of sign area
for each foot of building width.
(5) Not more than one freestanding sign or ground sign for each 350
feet of frontage shall be permitted.
(6) The size of freestanding signs and ground signs shall not exceed 60
square feet in the Heavy Industrial District and 40 square feet in
the Industrial Transition District.
§ 196-102 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-102
193:548
§ 196-103. Nonconforming signs.
Signs that are nonconforming or identify nonconforming uses shall be
governed by the following requirements:
§ 196-104. Amortization of nonconforming signs.
§ 196-105. Permits and inspections.
(7) Awning or canopy signs may be substituted for wall signs with the
requirements noted in Subsections D(3) and (4) above.
(8) Window signs shall be permitted in accordance with § 196-100C(5).
A. A sign which is nonconforming at the effective date of this chapter may
be continued although such sign does not conform with the provisions
of this chapter, but the size of any such nonconforming sign shall not be
enlarged, except as permitted in § 196-147.
B. A nonconforming sign may be changed to or replaced by another
nonconforming sign, provided that the degree of nonconformity is not
greater than that of the original sign. Whenever a nonconforming sign
has been changed to a more restricted nonconforming sign, such sign
shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted nonconforming sign.
C. Where the name of the establishment is changed, any nonconforming
sign at such establishment must be removed, and any new sign must
conform to the provisions of this chapter.
D. No nonconforming sign which has been damaged to more than 50% of
its value or has been removed or discontinued for 90 days shall be
repaired, rebuilt, or replaced, except as a conforming sign.
E. If a nonconforming use of a building ceases or is discontinued for a
continuous period of one year or more and such nonconforming use is
deemed to be abandoned as per § 196-150 of this chapter, any
nonconforming sign on the premises shall also be considered
abandoned, and any subsequent signs erected or maintained on the
premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Temporary, sidewalk, sandwich or A-frame signs, movable freestanding
signs, banners, pennants, and similar types of signs shall be abated,
removed, or brought into compliance within 90 days after enactment of
this chapter.
B. Signs painted on walks, fences, or benches shall be removed, abated, or
brought into compliance within one year after enactment of this
chapter.
C. Wall signs and projecting signs shall be removed, abated, or brought
into compliance within five years after the enactment of this chapter.
§ 196-102 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-105
193:549
A. Except as otherwise provided in § 196-101 relating to exempt signs, no
sign shall be erected in the Borough until a permit has been obtained in
the following manner:
(1) An application in writing shall be made to the Zoning Officer (ZO)
by the person desiring the permit.
(2) The application submitted to the ZO shall give full particulars
regarding the size, shape, material, and support of the sign as well
as a sketch or sketches showing the location of the sign on the
building or lot, the distance from the curbline, and the height of the
sign. The application shall be sufficiently specific to enable the ZO
to determine if the sign complies with this chapter as well as any
other ordinance or regulation of the Borough relating thereto. Such
application shall be accompanied by a fee as Borough Council may
establish from time to time by resolution.
(3) If the person submitting the application is not the owner of the
property upon which the sign is to be erected, the written consent
of the owner of the property on which the sign is to be erected shall
accompany the application.
B. Whenever any sign or sign face is replaced by another sign, enlarged in
any manner, or altered, dismantled, damaged, or otherwise destroyed, a
permit shall be required as provided in Subsection A above before the
sign is replaced, enlarged, altered, or repaired.
C. If the ZO shall find that any sign or other advertising structure
regulated herein is unsafe or insecure, is a menace to the public, or has
been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, he shall give written notice thereof to the
permittee. If the permittee fails to remove or alter the structure so as to
comply with the standards set forth herein within 10 days after such
notice, such sign or other advertising structure may be removed or
altered to comply by the ZO at the expense of the permittee or owner of
the property upon which it is located. The ZO shall refuse to issue a
permit to any permittee or owner who refuses to pay costs so assessed.
The ZO may cause any sign or other advertising structure that causes
immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and
without notice.
D. Inspections and fees. The ZO may cause a routine inspection of all signs
in the Borough to be made at least once every three years and at any
other times when he deems such inspection necessary.
§ 196-105 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-105
193:550
ARTICLE XVII
General Regulations
§ 196-106. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to identify certain regulations and standards
that are either common to all zoning districts or applicable to more than one
district.
§ 196-107. Overall requirements.
§ 196-108. Projections into required yards.
No principal building, or part thereof, shall be erected within, or shall
project into, any required yard in any district, except for unenclosed
porches, decks, one-story bay windows, eaves, chimneys, balconies, fire
escapes, buttresses, cornices, or steps, and none of these, except
unenclosed decks or similar projects, shall encroach more than three feet
into any required yard. In residential districts, such unenclosed decks may
extend not more than seven feet into required rear yards.
§ 196-109. Visibility at corner lots.
§ 196-110. Accessory uses and structures.
A. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, or altered, and no new use or change shall be made or
maintained of any building, structure, land, or part thereof, except in
accordance with this chapter.
B. Every principal building shall hereafter be built on a lot with frontage
on a public or private street.
C. No lot or premises shall hereafter be subdivided or reduced in area or
size in any manner so as to violate the provisions of this chapter.
A. On any corner lot, no wall, fence, or other structure shall be erected or
maintained, and no hedge, tree, shrub, or other growth shall be
planted, grown, or maintained which may cause danger to vehicular
traffic by obscuring the view or in any other way be a source of danger.
B. Where a lot is located at the intersection of two streets, no obstruction
of any kind whatsoever of a height greater than 24 inches shall be
maintained or permitted within a sight triangle, the legs of which shall
be 15 feet measured from the intersection of the curblines at the corner.
C. The Borough shall have the right to declare any obstruction to vision
within the line of the sight triangle a safety hazard and shall direct the
owner of the property to have it removed. If the owner fails to do so
within 30 days after written notice, the Borough shall remove the
obstruction and bill the owner and lien the property for the expense
involved.
§ 196-106 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-110
193:551
§ 196-111. No-impact home-based businesses.
§ 196-112. Community residence facilities, family-based.
Family-based community residence facilities shall be permitted by right in
all residential districts in accordance with the requirements below:
A. Except for industrial districts, no accessory structures may be placed in
front of the principal building.
B. On corner lots, accessory structures shall be placed no closer to the
side street than the principal building.
C. Except for decks and sheds, there shall be a distance of not less than
three feet between an accessory structure and a side or rear lot line.
D. Except in industrial districts, accessory structures shall not exceed 15
feet in height.
E. In a residential district, not more than one storage shed shall be placed
on a lot. No storage shed shall exceed 100 square feet. Sheds shall be
placed near the rear of the lot not less than five feet from the rear lot
line.
F. Accessory structures shall not be used for permanent or temporary
human habitation.
G. No storage shall be allowed in front yards in nonindustrial zoning
districts.
A. No-impact home-based businesses shall be permitted as an accessory
use in all residential districts.
B. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property.
C. The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
D. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling of
inventory.
E. The business activity may not use any process or equipment which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical or electronic
interference with radio or television reception.
F. The business activity may not discharge any solid waste or sewage
discharge which is not normally associated with residential use.
G. The business activity may not occupy more than 25% of the lot area and
not more than 33% of the gross floor area of the dwelling.
A. No facility shall be located within 400 feet of an existing facility.
§ 196-110 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-112
193:552
§ 196-113. Family day-care homes.
Family day-care homes shall be permitted as an accessory use in all
residential districts, subject to the following requirements:
B. There shall be not more than two residents per bedroom, and this is not
to exceed a maximum number of seven residents per facility, not
including staff.
C. There must be a twenty-four-hour-a-day on-duty supervisor who is
qualified for the position.
D. Parking shall comply with Article XV.
E. Any alterations or additions to the exterior of a community residence
facility shall be compatible with the existing structure and in keeping
with the neighborhood character, excluding safety modifications.
F. Each facility must receive all pertinent approvals and/or licenses from
the appropriate state agencies.
G. All other applicable requirements of this chapter, the building code, fire
code, and all other applicable Borough codes and ordinances and state
regulations must be met.
H. All community residence facilities will be available for reasonable
periodic inspections by the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO).
I. The operator of the facility must register the facility annually with the
CEO and provide the following information:
(1) Name of operator.
(2) Profit or nonprofit status of the facility.
(3) The registration of the facility with the Department of Public
Welfare (DPW).
(4) The name of each resident currently residing on the premises.
(5) Other information as may be reasonably requested by the Borough.
A. Any outdoor play area must be enclosed with a fence that shall be not
less than four feet high and shall extend to the ground to prevent
children from crawling underneath the fence.
B. Outdoor play activities shall be limited to the hours between 9:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m.
C. The area for pickup and discharge of children must be free from traffic
hazards.
D. The appearance and exterior design of the facility shall be compatible
with the surrounding dwellings.
§ 196-112 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-113
193:553
§ 196-114. Decks.
E. There shall be screening and planting consistent with the character of
the surrounding uses.
F. The facility shall display no sign that is inconsistent with the residential
character of the neighborhood and shall be subject to Article XVI
relating to signs.
G. No portion of the facility shall be within 200 feet of a gasoline service
station, underground gasoline storage tanks, heavy industrial
operations, truck loading areas, or other hazardous uses or activities.
H. Each facility must have the appropriate certificates as required by the
Pennsylvania DPW that shall be prominently displayed in the main
entrance of the facility. All day-care homes must meet all current DPW
regulations and any applicable federal, state, or local laws, ordinances,
and regulations, including building and fire safety codes.
I. The operator of the facility shall allow the Borough CEO to enter the
property at reasonable times, subject to twenty-four-hour notice, to
inspect the facility for compliance with this section and other applicable
ordinances or regulations.
A. Decks or porches located at the rear or side of a dwelling shall be
placed not less than seven feet from the lot line or from the line of a
common driveway or alley at the side or rear of the dwelling, which line
is closest to the principal building.
B. The deck shall be placed not less than one foot from the party wall of a
twin or row dwelling. This setback is needed for access and
maintenance.
C. Decks or porches more than three feet above ground level shall adhere
to the following requirements:
(1) Must have a hand railing not less than 36 inches high around the
entire deck or porch with spindles not more than four inches apart.
(2) Must have a hand railing on any stairway.
D. In an area where motor vehicles may park or drive, decks or porches
shall have support posts constructed of concrete-filled steel columns
which shall be at least four inches wide and fastened into footings not
less than six inches wide.
E. After a zoning permit is issued for a deck or porch, no change in plans
regarding setbacks, dimensions, or heights is permissible without first
receiving written permission from the Zoning Officer.
F. Prior to constructing a deck or porch, a zoning permit must be obtained
from the Zoning Officer, and a building permit must be obtained from
the CEO.
§ 196-113 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-114
193:554
§ 196-115. Satellite antennas.
§ 196-116. Swimming pools, private.
G. All materials used in the construction of a deck or porch shall comply
with the most recently adopted Uniform Construction Code.
A. Satellite antennas shall be permitted in all zoning districts.
B. All wiring for ground-based antennas shall be underground.
C. The satellite antenna shall be of a color that blends with the
surrounding landscape.
D. The satellite antenna should have an open mesh surface in order to
blend with the surrounding landscape.
E. Satellite antennas shall be located and designed to minimize the visual
impact on the surrounding properties and public schools.
F. All satellite antennas shall be adequately grounded for protection
against a direct strike of lightning.
G. Where possible, roof-mounted antennas should be located on the
portion of the roof sloping away from the front of the lot.
H. The installation of satellite antennas shall meet all other local, state, or
federal codes where possible.
I. The total height of a roof-mounted antenna shall not extend more than
six feet above the roofline.
A. All swimming pools shall be located in the rear yard. In the case of a
corner lot, no pool shall be placed closer to the side street than the
principal building.
B. All swimming pools shall be located not less than three feet from any
property line and six feet from the principal building.
C. For safety purposes, a fence not less than four feet high must surround
all swimming pools. However, the house or other building may serve as
the safety barrier on one or more sides of the pool.
D. All fences surrounding pools shall have a self-locking gate and shall be
of a design and quality to adequately prevent unauthorized children or
animals from entering the pool area.
E. The drainage of a pool shall not be onto a neighboring property or into a
sanitary sewer.
F. No swimming pool shall be located under electric lines.
G. Pool lighting fixtures shall be placed, directed, or shielded to protect
neighboring properties from light or glare.
§ 196-114 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-116
193:555
§ 196-117. Fences and walls.
§ 196-118. Refuse.113
H. A permit must be obtained from the Zoning Officer prior to construction
or placement of a swimming pool.
A. Except as specifically noted otherwise, no wall, fence, hedge, or similar
growth in a residential district shall exceed six feet in height at the side
of the principal building and six feet in height behind the principal
building. No fence shall be constructed in front of the principal
building. [Amended 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-1, approved
4-7-2014]
B. In all other zoning districts, no wall, fence, hedge, or similar growth
shall exceed six feet in height, except a fence in an Industrial Transition
District and a fence in a Heavy Industrial District which shall not
exceed eight feet in height, including one foot of barbed wire, and if
located along a public street shall be uniform in appearance and height
and black in color. [Amended 5-1-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-2,
approved 5-1-2017]
C. Fences between properties shall be erected or placed inside the
property line of the person erecting the fence.
D. Except in industrial districts, no barbed wire or similar fence shall be
permitted in the Borough, unless the applicant demonstrates a clear
and compelling need for security prior to obtaining a building permit.
E. The fence shall be installed so that the finished side faces toward the
outside of the property.
F. Hedges and other plantings, whether or not they constitute a fence,
shall be trimmed so as not to grow out over sidewalks, streets, or
adjoining properties.
G. Before erecting a fence, a permit must be obtained from the Zoning
Officer, as required in Article XXI, Administration and Enforcement.
A. Unless specifically stated otherwise for a particular district, all refuse
shall be placed in closed, vermin-proof containers.
B. In the case of multifamily buildings, all refuse receptacles shall be
effectively screened from the view of residents and from public streets
and sidewalks by means of a fence, wall, or plantings. All such
receptacles shall be placed on the property responsible for the refuse.
113. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 106, Garbage and Rubbish.
§ 196-116 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-119
193:556
§ 196-119. Lighting.
Multifamily dwellings and nonresidential buildings shall be properly lighted
to assure safe driving conditions at night as well as security and safety of
residents and patrons. All lighting shall be designed to protect neighboring
properties from glare.
§ 196-120. Planted visual screen.
§ 196-121. Landscaping.
A. A planted visual screen, as defined in Article II, shall be provided and
maintained under the following circumstances. In case of conflict
between a regulation in this article and that in any individual district,
the regulation in the individual district shall prevail.
(1) When a commercial or industrial structure is constructed or
extended adjacent to an existing residential use or district.
(2) When a multifamily or townhouse structure or addition thereto is
proposed to abut an existing single-family detached dwelling.
(3) Where any proposed institutional use or an expansion of an existing
industrial use abuts an existing residential use or residential
district.
(4) Any other instance where screening is required by this chapter, by
the Borough, or by the Zoning Hearing Board.
B. A privacy fence may be substituted for a planted visual barrier only
when there is insufficient area to provide a planted visual screen.
C. Screening shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) The planted visual screen shall consist of species indigenous to the
area so as to provide a year-round visual barrier.
(2) Such screens shall incorporate earthen mounds or berms, where
possible, to improve sound as well as visual buffering.
(3) Plants shall be at least six feet high when planted, and no plantings
shall be placed closer than five feet to the property line.
(4) Placement of screening material shall not obscure sight lines at
intersections.
(5) All mechanical equipment not enclosed in a structure shall be fully
and completely screened and landscaped in a manner compatible
with the style of the buildings on the site.
D. Upon a recommendation of the Planning Commission, an opaque
privacy fence or wall may be substituted for the planted screen
required above. Such alternate screening must be constructed and
placed so as to clearly provide an effective visual screen.
§ 196-119 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-121
193:557
A. General regulations.
(1) Any part or portion of a site which is not used for buildings or other
structures, loading and parking spaces, aisles, sidewalks, and
designated storage areas shall be planted and maintained with
landscaping. Maximum advantage shall be taken of existing trees
and shrubs in landscaping.
(2) All landscaped planting areas shall be planted with grass seed, sod,
or other ground cover and shall be maintained and kept clean of all
debris, rubbish, weeds, and tall grass; provided, however, that if
such land is naturally wooded, it may continue in its natural state.
(3) Unless otherwise specified, landscaped planting areas may be part
of the required front, side, and rear yards.
(4) Except for single-family and two-family dwellings, any part or
portion of a site which is not used for loading and parking spaces,
aisles, sidewalks, and designated storage areas shall be landscaped
according to an overall plan prepared and approved as part of the
development plan or shall be left in its natural state. A replacement
program for nonsurviving plant material should be included.
B. Landscaping plans.
(1) Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in accordance with a
landscape plan approved by Borough Council. The landscape plan
shall depict all proposed plantings which relate to, complement,
screen, or accentuate buildings, roads, parking areas, sidewalks,
walkways, sitting areas, service or maintenance structures,
courtyards, and other site features.
(2) The landscaping plan shall be coordinated with the development
plan and shall show the location, type, size, height, and other
characteristics of the proposed landscaping.
(3) The plan shall be accompanied or shall include information
regarding the continued maintenance of plantings indicating that
all plantings will be replaced, if damaged, diseased, or dead, in
locations shown on the approved plan.
C. Specific requirements.
(1) For every new building or alteration or expansion erected after the
effective date of this chapter, landscaping shall be provided as
noted below.
(2) Unless specifically stated otherwise in the specific zoning district,
landscaping shall be provided as required below:
§ 196-121 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-121
193:558
§ 196-122. Private clubs.
Private clubs shall be permitted by right in the Central Retail District,
subject to the following requirements:
§ 196-123. Condominiums.
In the event that multifamily dwellings are converted or developed as
condominiums, such condominiums shall be owned and operated in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980, as
amended.114
Zoning District or Use
Minimum Landscaping
Requirements
Central Retail One tree and/or two shrubs that
may be placed in the ground or
in planters for every 20 feet of
building width
Downtown Mixed Use Same as for Central Retail
Planned Business Park Five-foot-wide landscaped area
in front of and at one other side
of principal buildings. Also, fivefoot-
wide landscaped area along
all road frontages.
Recreational Business Campus Same as for Planned Business
Park
Waterfront Mixed Use Same as for Planned Business
Park
Transit-Oriented Same as for Planned Business
Park and in accordance with
§ 196-73
Apartment buildings and
nonresidential buildings in
residential districts
Same as for Central Retail
A. Private clubs shall be operated for civic, cultural, educational, social, or
recreational purposes.
B. The activity shall be noncommercial, nonprofit, and clearly not one
carried on as a business.
C. Each building or facility shall be devoted to members and their guests
only.
D. No private club shall provide for eating or dining except on an
incidental basis.
114. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 196-121 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-124
193:559
§ 196-124. Compatibility standards for uses of the same general
character.
In determining if a proposed use is of the same general character as the
listed uses, Borough Council and the Planning Commission shall consider
the compatibility standards listed below:
§ 196-125. Airport zoning.
No structure shall exceed the maximum height as calculated by reference
to the Height Limitation and Zoning District Map for Marcus Hook Borough
and the Model Airport Zoning Ordinance to Limit the Height of Objects
Around Airports. The calculation of maximum heights for municipalities in
A. Type and volume of sales, retail or wholesale activity, size and type of
items sold, and nature of inventory on the premises.
B. Extent of processing, assembly, warehousing, shipping, and distribution
of any dangerous, hazardous, toxic, or explosive materials done on the
premises.
C. The nature and location of storage and outdoor display of merchandise
and the predominant items stored.
D. The type, size, and nature of buildings and structures supporting the
use.
E. The number of employees and customers in relation to business hours
and employment shifts.
F. The business hours the use is in operation or open for business, ranging
from seven days a week, 24 hours a day to several times a year, such as
sport stadiums or fairgrounds.
G. The transportation requirements for people and freight, by volume,
type, and characteristics of traffic generation to and from the site, trip
purposes, and whether trip purposes can be shared with other uses on
the site.
H. Parking characteristics, turnover and generation, ratio of the number of
spaces required per unit area or activity, and potential for shared
parking with other uses.
I. The tendency for attracting or repelling criminal activities to and from
or on the premises.
J. The amount and nature of nuisances generated on the premises, such
as noise, smoke, odor, glare, vibration, radiation, and fumes.
K. Any special public utility requirements for serving the use, such as
water supply, wastewater output, pretreatment of wastes, and
emissions recommended or required, and significant power structures
and communication towers or facilities.
§ 196-124 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-125
193:560
airport hazard areas is required by Pennsylvania Act 164 of 1984.115 Marcus
Hook Borough falls within the airport hazard area affected by Philadelphia
International Airport.
§ 196-126. Trailers.
A. Construction/office trailers, as defined in Article II, shall be temporarily
placed at or near a work or construction site only after acquiring a
permit from the Borough that shall be effective for not more than 90
days. The applicant may then apply for another permit.
B. Trailers shall be prohibited in residential and commercial districts
except for those used at new construction sites.
C. Trailers shall be removed from the site within five days after completion
of the construction or other work activity that was the basis for
permitting the placement of the temporary trailer.
D. In industrial districts, office/storage trailers shall require a permit from
the Borough only if they are placed or intended to be placed within 200
feet of the right-of-way line of a public street. Such permits shall be
effective for one year.
E. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the parking of
recreational trailers or similar vehicles in private garages or driveways.
115. Editor's Note: See 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5911 et seq.
§ 196-125 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-126
193:561

ARTICLE XVIII
Procedure and Standards for Conditional Uses
§ 196-127. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide conditions and standards for
conditional uses. In these cases, Borough Council may attach reasonable
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this article, as
it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter and those
of the Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.116
§ 196-128. General requirements.
In any instance where Borough Council is required to consider a request
for a conditional use permit, Council shall consider the provisions of this
article.
§ 196-129. Standards for review of conditional uses.
A. In any instance where Council is required to consider a request for a
conditional use, Council shall consider the following factors where
appropriate:
(1) That the proposed use is appropriate for the site in question in
terms of size, topography, natural features, drainage, sewage
disposal, water supply, accessibility and availability of public
services and that adequate provisions will be made to protect
sensitive environmental features such as streams, wetlands, slopes,
and mature trees.
(2) That the proposed use is compatible with the character of the
surrounding neighborhood and will not interfere with or detract
from legitimate uses and adjacent properties, and that adequate
measures will be provided through building design, site layout,
landscaping, planting, and operational controls to minimize any
adverse impacts caused by noise, lights, glare, odors, smoke,
fumes, traffic, parking, loading, and signage.
(3) That the proposed conditional use will serve the best interest of the
Borough, convenience of the community, and the public health,
safety, and welfare.
(4) That the proposed use is consistent with the most recently adopted
Marcus Hook Comprehensive Plan.
(5) That the proposed use promotes orderly development, proper
population density, and the provision of adequate community
facilities and services, including police and fire protection.
116. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 196-127 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-129
193:563
§ 196-130. Requirements for review where standards are not
provided.
In cases where this article does not provide specific standards for
conditional uses, the following dimensional requirements will be applied by
Borough Council:
(6) That the proposed use is suitable in terms of its effect on highway
safety and traffic circulation, and that access, on-site circulation,
and parking are adequate in view of anticipated traffic.
(7) That the proposed use will provide for adequate off-street parking,
as required in Article XV.
B. In cases where conditional uses are not accompanied by specific
standards listed below in this article, the regulations in § 196-130 below
shall apply.
C. Financial hardship shall not be construed as a basis for granting
conditional uses.
D. In granting any request for a conditional use, Council may attach
reasonable conditions and safeguards in addition to those expressed in
this article as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the
Planning Code and this chapter, which conditions and safeguards may
relate to, but not be limited to, screening, lighting, noise, safety,
aesthetics, and the minimization of noxious, offensive, or hazardous
elements. Such conditional use shall be clearly authorized by a
provision in this chapter and shall, where applicable, comply with the
more specific standards relating to such use contained in appropriate
sections of this article.
A. In residential districts, the area, bulk, and any other applicable
requirements shall be no less stringent than those for single-family
dwellings in the district where the use is proposed.
B. In nonresidential districts, the area, bulk, and any other applicable
requirements shall be no less stringent than those for the use which
requires the greatest dimensions in the applicable nonresidential
district.
C. Borough Council may require reasonable requirements in addition to
those in Subsection A or B above, provided that Council makes one or
more of the following determinations:
(1) That the requirements of Subsections A and B above are clearly:
(a) Insufficient to accommodate the proposed building, facility, or
use.
(b) Insufficient to provide adequate area for parking and loading,
as required by Article XV.
§ 196-129 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-130
193:564
§ 196-131. Standards of proof.
An applicant for a conditional use permit shall have the burden of
establishing both:
§ 196-132. Impact on the public interest.
In determining whether the allowance of a conditional use permit is
contrary to the public interest, Council shall consider whether the
application, if granted, will:
§ 196-133. Expiration of conditional use permits.
Unless otherwise specified by Council, a conditional use permit shall expire
if the applicant fails to obtain a building permit within six months from the
date of authorization thereof, unless the applicant can show that there were
permitting delays beyond his control.
§ 196-134. Community center or municipal use.
In the R-1 and R-2 Residential Districts, a community center or other
municipal use shall be permitted only as a conditional use, subject to the
requirements listed below:
(c) Insufficient to provide for lot areas and dimensions necessary
to protect the adjacent area from the potential adverse impacts
of the proposed use, such as noise, vibration, air pollution, and
similar impacts.
A. That his application falls within the provisions of this chapter, which
affords to the applicant the right to seek a conditional use permit; and
B. That the allowance of a conditional use permit will not be contrary to
the public interest.
A. Adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare due to changes in
traffic conditions, drainage, air quality, noise levels, neighborhood
property values, natural features, and neighborhood aesthetic
characteristics.
B. Be in accordance with the most recently adopted Marcus Hook
Comprehensive Plan.
C. Provide required parking in accordance with Article XV.
D. Adversely affect the logical, efficient, and economical extension or
provision of public services and facilities such as public water, sewers,
refuse collection, police, fire protection, and public schools.
E. Otherwise adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare.
A. The lot area shall be not less than 15,000 square feet in the R-1 District
and 10,000 square feet in the R-2 District.
§ 196-130 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-134
193:565
§ 196-135. Religious use.
In the R-1 and R-2 Residential Districts, religious buildings and uses shall
be permitted only as a conditional use, subject to the dimensional
requirements listed below:
§ 196-136. Independent living facility.
In the R-1 Residential District and the Downtown Mixed Use District,
independent living facilities shall be permitted only as a conditional use,
subject to the dimensional requirements listed below:
§ 196-137. Child day-care centers.
In the Central Retail District, Planned Business Park District, Recreational
Business Campus District, and the Downtown Mixed Use District, child daycare
centers shall be permitted only as a conditional use, subject to the
following requirements:
B. There shall be a planted visual screen along the side and rear lot lines
where they form the boundary with a lot containing a residential
structure or residential district.
A. Minimum lot area: 10,890 square feet (1/4 acre).
B. Building coverage: 70%, maximum.
C. Front yard: 15 feet.
D. Rear yard: 15 feet.
E. Side yard: 15 feet.
A. Minimum lot area: two acres.
B. Maximum height: three stories or 35 feet.
C. Building coverage: 60%, maximum.
D. Front yard: 25 feet.
E. Rear yard: 25 feet.
F. Side yard: 25 feet.
A. Day-care centers shall be permitted as part of a church, school, or other
similar institution or as an independent use.
B. A fence not less than four feet high shall be placed around all outdoor
play areas. The bottom end of such fence must reach the ground to
prevent children from crawling underneath.
C. Outdoor play activities shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m.
§ 196-134 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-137
193:566
§ 196-138. Gasoline service stations.
In the Heavy Industrial District and Industrial Transition District, gasoline
service stations shall be permitted only as a conditional use, subject to the
following requirements:
D. Parking shall be in accordance with Article XV.
E. Signs shall be in accordance with Article XVI.
F. Each facility shall provide for the discharge and pickup of children on a
driveway, approved parking area, or directly in front of the facility.
Whenever possible, the dropoff area shall be located immediately
adjacent to the facility. The area selected for discharge and pickup must
be free from traffic hazards to children.
G. No part of a facility may be located within 200 feet of gasoline pumps or
underground storage tanks or any other storage area for explosive or
hazardous materials.
H. A planted visual screen shall be provided to protect the day-care center
from an adjacent use or to protect a less intense adjacent use from the
activity of the day-care center. Planted visual screens, where required,
shall comply in accordance with Article II. Opaque fences or walls may
be used in place of planted screens.
I. When located in a mixed use building, day-care center entrances and
exits shall provide direct access to the child care center so that walking
through other significant portions of the building is avoided.
J. When streets of different classifications are involved, access shall be
provided to the street of lesser functional classification, if possible.
K. Each operator of a newly established day-care center shall notify the
Borough in writing at least 30 days prior to the initiation of a day-care
center for the purpose of allowing the Borough to establish a record of
such use.
L. All facilities shall comply with the requirements of the district in which
they are located.
M. The operator of any day-care center will allow the Zoning Officer to
enter the property at reasonable times to inspect for compliance with
the requirements of this section and all other applicable municipal and
state ordinances or regulations.
N. A permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Officer.
O. All facilities must be licensed by the Pennsylvania DPW and any other
appropriate agencies.
A. All pumps and principal buildings shall be located not less than 30 feet
from all property lines.
§ 196-137 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-138
193:567
§ 196-139. Residential conversions.
Conversions of single-family detached dwellings and single-family
semidetached dwellings to two-unit dwellings shall be permitted only as
a conditional use in the R-3 Residential District, subject to the following
requirements:
B. All pumps shall be located outside of buildings.
C. All fuel containers in excess of 100 gallons shall be located
underground.
D. No service station shall be located within 200 feet of a school, church,
day-care center, or place of public assembly having a capacity of more
than 50 persons. The required 200 feet shall be measured in the
shortest distance between the service station property and any of the
above-noted uses.
E. Hydraulic hoists, pits, and all lubrication, greasing, washing, and repair
equipment shall be entirely enclosed within a building.
F. Exterior lighting shall be shielded so that it is deflected from adjacent
or nearby properties and from motorists on public streets.
G. Gasoline service stations shall also comply with all applicable state and
federal laws and regulations.
A. In order to be eligible for conversion from one to two units, a dwelling
shall have a floor area of not less than 1,500 square feet, excluding
basement space.
B. Two off-street parking spaces shall be required for each unit created by
the conversion. Such parking spaces shall be paved and have direct
access to a street or alley. The stacking of parking spaces (where it is
necessary to move a given vehicle before another vehicle can enter or
exit) is prohibited.
C. No external alterations inconsistent with the residential use and
architectural character of the neighborhood shall be permitted.
D. Each unit shall be a complete, separate housekeeping unit that is
independent of any other unit.
E. The maximum number of units created shall be two.
F. Conversions on lots where there is currently no sidewalk shall install a
sidewalk along the frontage of the property.
G. Prior to conversion, the applicant shall obtain a permit from the Zoning
Officer.
H. All utility connections shall meet utility company standards.
I. Applications for conversions shall contain the following items:
§ 196-138 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-139
193:568
§ 196-140. Laboratories.
In the Planned Business Park District and the Recreational Business
Campus District, laboratories shall be permitted only as a conditional use,
subject to the following requirements:
§ 196-141. Office buildings.
In the Transit-Oriented Development District, individual office buildings
shall be permitted only as a conditional use, subject to the following
requirements:
(1) Floor plan showing the layout, including all dimensions of each
unit.
(2) Site development plan showing and locating the dwelling and other
existing buildings; all property lines; any proposed additions;
building setback lines; location, size, and extent of all underground
utilities; length, width, and function of all rights-of-way and
easements; required parking spaces; and the one-hundred-year
floodplain.
(3) All plans shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals
four feet for the floor plans and one inch equals 20 feet for the site
development plans.
A. All laboratory operations, including storage, shall be carried out in an
enclosed building.
B. There shall be a distance of 50 feet between a laboratory and any other
principal building.
C. The distance between the principal building and a parking area shall be
not less than 25 feet.
D. The front yard shall be not less than 40 feet.
E. No products or goods shall be publicly displayed on the exterior of the
premises.
F. The facility shall strictly comply with the performance standards in
Article XX.
A. There shall be a distance of not less than 50 feet between an office
building and any other principal building.
B. Office buildings shall be linked to other buildings and the train station
by pedestrian and bicycle paths in the development.
§ 196-139 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-142
193:569
§ 196-142. Parking garage or lot.
In the Planned Business Park District and the Recreational Business
Campus District, a parking garage shall be permitted only as a conditional
use, subject to the following requirements:
§ 196-143. Hotels.
In the Transit-Oriented Development District, hotels developed as individual
buildings shall be permitted only as a conditional use. Hotels that are part
of a unified development plan shall be permitted by right. In both cases,
hotels shall comply with the following requirements:
§ 196-144. Cellular communications facilities.
A. A parking garage may be the principal use on the lot.
B. The height of the parking garage shall not exceed 50 feet.
A. The applicable dimensional standards for mixed use buildings and
multifamily buildings per § 196-71A, the development standards in
§ 196-72, as well as any other applicable provisions of Article XII shall
apply to hotels.
A. Except for antennas attached to existing buildings or structures,
antennas and antenna support structures shall be permitted only as a
conditional use in the Heavy Industrial District.
B. An antenna that is mounted on an existing structure shall be permitted
by right only in the Heavy Industrial District.
C. The following regulations shall control both facilities applicable:
(1) An antenna that is attached to an existing support structure shall
not exceed the height of the support structure by more than 10
feet.
(2) An antenna that is not attached to an existing support structure but
to its own support structure shall have a tower height not in excess
of that required in the district in which it is located.
(3) Setbacks from the base of any new antenna support structure to
any property line, street line, or zoning district boundary shall not
be less than 100 feet.
(4) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed antenna and
antenna support structure are designed and constructed in
accordance with all applicable national building standards for such
facilities and structures, including, but not limited to, the standards
developed by the Electronics Industry Association, Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Telecommunications Industry
Association, American National Standards Institute, and the
Electrical Industry Association.
§ 196-142 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-144
193:570
(5) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed antenna and
antenna support structure are safe and that the surrounding
properties will not be negatively affected by support structure
failure, falling ice or other debris, electromagnetic fields, or radio
frequency interference. All support structures shall be fitted with
anticlimbing devices, as approved by the manufacturers.
(6) In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures
needed in the Borough in the future, the proposed antenna support
structure shall be required to accommodate, where possible, other
users, including other cellular communications providers and local
police, fire, and ambulance services.
(7) The applicant must demonstrate that it is licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission to provide wireless communications,
cellular communications, and/or personal communications
services.
(8) A security fence eight feet in height shall be required around the
cell site unless the antenna is mounted on an existing structure.
(9) The cell site shall be fully automated and not require any
maintenance workers to be present on a full-time basis.
(10) Not less than two parking spaces shall be provided.
(11) The cell site shall be kept in good repair as required by Federal
Law H.R. 6180/s. 2882, the Telecommunications Authorization Act
of 1992, as amended, and all Borough ordinances not inconsistent
therewith.
(12) Prior to the construction or installation of an antenna on an
existing structure or the construction or placement of an antenna
support structure, the applicant shall obtain a permit from the
Borough Zoning Officer.
(13) When the antenna and antenna support structure have ceased to
function and have been abandoned, such structures shall be
removed from the site within 60 days after official abandonment.
Also see the definition of "abandonment" in Article II, Definitions,
and § 196-150 relating to abandonment of nonconforming uses.
§ 196-144 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-144
193:571

ARTICLE XIX
Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
§ 196-145. Purpose.
Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments thereto,
there exist certain uses, structures, and lots which were lawful before
this chapter was enacted or amended but which do not conform to the
provisions of this chapter or amendment thereto. These uses, structures,
or lots are referred to as "nonconformities." The regulations governing
existing nonconforming uses, structures, and lots are set forth in this article
and are intended to provide a gradual remedy for the undesirable conditions
resulting from such nonconformities. While such nonconformities are
generally permitted to continue, these regulations are intended to restrict
further investment in such nonconformities and to bring about their gradual
reduction.
§ 196-146. Continuation.
All structures, lots, uses of structures, and uses of land that do not conform
to the regulations of the district in which they are located after the effective
date of this chapter or amendment thereto shall be regarded as
nonconforming and may be continued so long as they remain otherwise
lawful, including subsequent sales of property. Such uses must comply with
all safety related and other applicable regulations.
§ 196-147. Enlargement.
A nonconforming use or structure may be extended, enlarged, or altered
when so authorized as a conditional use, provided that the following
conditions are met and a permit is obtained as per Article XXI:
A. It is clear that such enlargement or extension is not materially
detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the surrounding area.
B. The proposed enlargement or extension only occurs on the tract where
the nonconformity is currently located.
C. The area devoted to the nonconforming use shall not be increased by
more than 25%. The nonconforming structure shall not be increased by
more than 25% of its cubic content.
D. Any extension or enlargement of a building shall conform to the area,
height, and setback regulations of the district in which it is located. In
determining cubic content, that portion of a stack or projection above
the highest point of the principal building shall be excluded from the
calculation.
E. Not more than one extension or enlargement to a nonconforming use or
structure shall be granted.
§ 196-145 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-148
193:573
§ 196-148. Change of use.
Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be permitted
to revert to a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may be changed to
another equally restrictive or more restrictive nonconforming use when so
determined by the Borough Council, subject to the following conditions:
§ 196-149. Enclosure.
Where a nonconforming use is conducted entirely on unenclosed premises,
no structure to house or enclose such use, whether or not such structure
would otherwise conform to zoning regulations, shall be permitted to be
erected on the premises.
§ 196-150. Abandonment.
If a nonconforming use of a building or land is abandoned for 12 consecutive
months or more, whereby the owner discontinues the use, the subsequent
use of such a building or land shall conform to the regulations of the district
in which it is located, unless another nonconforming use is approved by
Borough Council. Such approved use shall be initiated within 120 days after
the approval of Council.
§ 196-151. Reconstruction.
A nonconforming structure, a conforming structure devoted to a
nonconforming use, or a structure that has been legally condemned or
destroyed by fire or other cause to less than 75% of the current value of the
structure may be reconstructed and used for the same nonconforming use,
provided that:
A. The applicant shall show that the nonconforming use cannot be
reasonably changed to a conforming use.
B. The applicant shall show that the proposed change will be no more
objectionable in external effects than the existing nonconforming use or
will be more appropriate than the existing nonconforming use with
regard to:
(1) Traffic generation and congestion.
(2) Parking.
(3) Noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, heat, odor, glare, or
vibration.
(4) Outdoor storage.
(5) Sanitary sewage disposal.
C. A permit is obtained from the Borough.
§ 196-148 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-151
193:574
§ 196-152. Repairs and maintenance.
§ 196-153. Displacement.
No nonconforming use shall displace a conforming use.
§ 196-154. Nonconforming lots.
A lot held in single and separate ownership on the effective date of this
chapter which does not contain the required minimum area or width may
be used for the construction, alteration, or reconstruction of a building or
may be otherwise used if the construction, alteration, reconstruction, or
other use is in compliance with the use, yard, and setback provisions of this
chapter.
§ 196-155. Reduction of lot area.
No lot area shall be so reduced that the area of the lot or the dimensions of
the open space shall be smaller than herein prescribed.
§ 196-156. Nonconforming signs.
Regulations for nonconforming signs are in Article XVI relating to signs.
A. The reconstructed structure shall not exceed the height, area, and
volume of the building destroyed or condemned.
B. Reconstruction of the structure shall commence within 12 months from
the date the structure was destroyed or condemned, unless Borough
Council shall authorize a conditional use for an extension of this time
limit. However, an extension may be granted if delays related to
permitting delay construction.
A. On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of six consecutive
months on ordinary repairs or on repair or replacement of nonbearing
walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, provided that the cubic content
existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased.
B. If a nonconforming structure becomes physically unsafe due to lack of
repairs and maintenance and is declared by the Zoning Officer to be
unsafe by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be
restored or repaired except to conform to the regulations of the district
in which it is located.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared
to be unsafe by the Zoning Officer.
§ 196-151 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-157
193:575
§ 196-157. Registration of nonconforming uses.
Every five years, the Zoning Officer may prepare, or cause to be prepared,
a complete list of all nonconforming uses, structures, lots, and signs in the
Borough.
§ 196-158. Ownership.
Whenever a lot is sold to a new owner, a previously lawful nonconforming
use may be continued by the new owner.
§ 196-159. Violations.
A nonconforming structure altered or a nonconforming use created in
violation of any previous provisions in this article shall be regarded as
continuing in such violation and shall not enjoy the privilege of legal
continuance conferred by § 196-146 upon other nonconforming structures
and uses.
§ 196-157 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-159
193:576
ARTICLE XX
Performance Standards
§ 196-160. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to ensure adequate protection for the residents
of the Borough against the possible negative effects of certain uses,
processes, or activities applicable to all districts but particularly to
commercial and industrial districts.
§ 196-161. Administration.
A. Interpretation and application of standards.
(1) The performance standards contained herein shall be the minimum
standards to be met and maintained by all uses established after
the effective date of this chapter. Standards established by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, the United
States Environmental Protection Agency, or other applicable state
or federal agencies shall apply where those standards are more
restrictive than the standards set forth below.
(2) If any existing use or building or other structure is extended,
enlarged, or reconstructed, the performance standards herein shall
only apply to such extended, enlarged, or reconstructed portion or
portions of such use, building, or other structure.
B. Application submittal.
(1) Applications for industrial uses shall be accompanied by a
certification from a professional engineer registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that the proposed use can meet the
performance standards set forth in this chapter. All applications
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following informational
items:
(a) Plans of existing and/or proposed construction and
development;
(b) A description of existing or proposed machinery, processes,
and products;
(c) Specifications for the mechanisms and techniques used or
proposed to be used in restricting possible dangerous or
objectionable conditions as set forth in this chapter; and
(d) Measurement or estimate of the amount or rate of emission of
any dangerous or objectionable elements as set forth in this
chapter.
C. Application review. All applications for industrial uses shall be reviewed
by the Borough Engineer for compliance with the performance
standards listed in § 196-162. No application for an industrial use shall
§ 196-160 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-161
193:577
§ 196-162. Performance standards enumerated.
be approved until it is certified in writing by the Borough Engineer that
the proposed use can meet these performance standards.
D. Enforcement and costs.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall investigate any purported violation of the
performance standards noted below. Enforcement procedures shall
be in accordance with Article XXI, Administration and
Enforcement.
(2) If violations as alleged are found, costs of such determinations shall
be charged against those responsible for the violations, in addition
to such other penalties as may be appropriate. If, however, it is
determined that no violation exists, the Borough shall pay for the
costs of the determination.
A. Air quality. There shall be no emission of smoke, ash, dust, fumes,
vapors, gases, or other matter, toxic or noxious, to air which violates the
Pennsylvania Air Pollution Control Laws, including the standards set
forth in Chapter 123 (Standards for Contaminants) and Chapter 131
(Ambient Air Quality Standards), Article 111, Title 25, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, Rules and Regulations.
B. Fire and explosive hazards. All activities and all storage of flammable
and explosive material at any point shall be provided with adequate
safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion, adequate fire
fighting and fire suppression equipment, and devices as detailed and
specified by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All
buildings and structures and activities within such buildings and
structures shall conform to the latest adopted Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code, the National Fire Code, and any applicable Borough
ordinances. Any explosive material shall conform to the requirements of
Chapter 211, Title 25, Rules and Regulations, Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection, for storing, handling, and use of
explosives.
C. Glare and heat. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from
floodlights or high temperature processes such as combustion, welding,
or otherwise, visible at the lot line shall be permitted, except for
customary or emergency industrial operations and safety purposes.
These regulations shall not apply to signs or floodlighting of parking
areas. There shall be no emission or transmission of heat or heated air
discernible at the lot line.
D. Liquid and solid waste. There shall be no discharge at any point into any
public or private sewage system or watercourses or into the ground of
any materials in such a way or such a nature as will contaminate or
otherwise cause the emission of hazardous materials in violation of the
ordinances of Marcus Hook Borough and the laws of the
§ 196-161 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-162
193:578
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, specifically of Chapters 73, 75, 95,
and 97, Title 25, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
Rules and Regulations.
E. Noise. No person shall operate or cause to be operated on private or
public property any source of continuous sound (any sound which is
static, fluctuating, or intermittent with a recurrence greater than one
time in any fifteen-second interval) in such a manner as to create a
sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in the following table
when measured at or within the property boundary of the receiving
land use.
Receiving Land Use
Category Time
Sound Level
Limit
(dBA)
Residential, public space,
open space, or institutional
7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 60
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(including Sundays and
legal holidays)
50
Commercial or business 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 65
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(including Sundays and
legal holidays)
60
Industrial At all times 70
(1) For any source of sound that emits a pure tone, the maximum sound
level limits set forth in the above table shall be reduced by five dBA.
For any source of sound which emits an impulsive sound (a sound of
short duration, with an abrupt onset and rapid delay and an
occurrence of not more than one time in any fifteen-second
interval), the sound pressure level shall not exceed 20 dBA over the
ambient sound level, regardless of time of day or night of receiving
land use, using the "fast" meter characteristics of a Type II Meter,
meeting the ANSI specifications S1.4.-1971.
(2) The maximum permissible sound levels as listed in the above table
shall not apply to any of the following noise sources:
(a) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to
the existence of an emergency or associated practice drills.
(b) Emergency work to provide electricity, water, or other public
utilities when public health or safety is involved.
(c) Public celebrations specifically authorized by the Borough.
§ 196-162 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-162
193:579
(3) Motor vehicle operations shall not exceed the noise levels
established in Chapter 157 of Title 67 of the Pennsylvania Code of
Regulations, Subchapter B, Established Sound Levels.
F. Odors. No uses shall emit odorous gases or other odorous matter in
such quantities so as to be offensive at any point on or beyond its lot
lines. The guide for determining such quantities of offensive odors shall
be the 50% response level of Table 1 (Odor Thresholds in Air),
"Research of Chemical Odors: Part I — Odor Thresholds for 53
Commercial Chemicals," October 1986, Manufacturing Chemists
Association, Inc., Washington, D.C.
G. Vibration. No vibration shall be produced which is transmitted through
the ground and is discernible without the aid of instruments at or at any
point beyond the lot line.
H. Radioactivity or electrical disturbances. There shall be no activities that
emit dangerous radioactivity at any point. There shall be no radio or
electrical disturbances adversely affecting the operation of equipment
belonging to someone other than the creator of the disturbance. If any
use is proposed which incorporates the use of any radioactive material,
equipment, or supplies, such use shall be in strict conformity with
Chapters 221, 223, 225, 227, and 229, Title 25, Article V, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, Rules and Regulations.
I. Public health and safety. No use shall create any other objectionable
condition in an adjoining area that will endanger public health and
safety or be detrimental to the public use of the surrounding area.
§ 196-162 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-162
193:580
ARTICLE XXI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 196-163. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to set forth procedures for the administration
and enforcement of this chapter, in accordance with the Municipalities
Planning Code.
§ 196-164. Administration.
A. The administration, enforcement, and amendment of this chapter shall
be in accordance with the provisions of Article VI and any other
applicable sections of the Pennsylvania MPC, Act 247, as amended,
hereinafter referred to in this article as the "Planning Code."
B. There shall be a Zoning Officer who shall be appointed by Borough
Council. The powers and duties of the Zoning Officer listed in this
article may be exercised by the Borough Manager. All employees
engaged in the administration and enforcement of this chapter shall
report to the Borough Manager.
C. The Zoning Officer and Borough Manager shall not hold any elective
office in the Borough.
D. The Zoning Officer shall administer this chapter in accordance with its
literal terms and shall not have the power to permit any construction,
use, or change of use that does not conform to this chapter.
E. The Zoning Officer may be authorized to institute civil enforcement
proceedings as a means of enforcing this chapter.
F. Duties. The following duties shall be performed by the Zoning Officer:
(1) Enforce all provisions of this chapter and all amendments thereto.
(2) Receive, examine, record, and file all applications and fees for
zoning permits and issue zoning permits only for any structure or
use which conforms to this chapter.
(3) Issue permits for uses and construction by conditional use, special
exception, or variance only after such uses or buildings are
approved by Borough Council or the Zoning Hearing Board, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Permits requiring
approval by Borough Council shall be issued only after receipt of an
authorization from the Council.
(4) Receive all required fees.
(5) Regularly inspect all areas of the Borough to determine if there are
any violations of this chapter and review the validity of any
reported zoning violations.
§ 196-163 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-164
193:581
§ 196-165. Enforcement.
§ 196-166. Permits.
(6) Issue all necessary stop orders and order in writing correction of all
conditions found to be in violation of this chapter. It shall be
unlawful for any person to violate any such order lawfully issued by
the Zoning Officer, and any person violating such order shall be
guilty of a violation of this chapter.
(7) Maintain, or cause to be maintained, a map or maps showing the
current zoning classification of all land in the Borough.
(8) Upon request of the Council, Planning Commission, or Zoning
Hearing Board, present facts, records, and any similar information
to such body on specific requests to assist these bodies in reaching
their decisions.
G. Appeal from decisions of the Zoning Officer. An appeal from a decision
or action of the Zoning Officer shall be made directly by a party in
interest to the Zoning Hearing Board, and such appeal shall be made
within 30 days after notice of the decision is made, or if no decision is
made, 30 days after the date when a decision is deemed to have been
made, in accordance with the Planning Code, as amended.
H. Violations. Whenever a violation of this chapter is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a written and signed complaint. Such
complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with
the Zoning Officer who shall record such complaint promptly and
immediately investigate and take action thereon as provided in this
chapter.
A. Enforcement notice. If it appears to the Borough that a violation of this
chapter has occurred, the Borough shall initiate enforcement
proceedings by sending an enforcement notice to the owner of record of
the parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has
filed a written request to receive an enforcement notice regarding that
parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of
record. An enforcement notice shall include the minimum components
required in Section 616.1(c) of the Planning Code.117
B. Causes of action. See Section 617 of the Planning Code.118
C. Enforcement remedies. See Section 617.2 of the Planning Code.119
D. Jurisdiction. District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction over
proceedings brought under Section 617.2 of the Planning Code.
117. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10616.1(c).
118. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10617.
119. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10617.2.
§ 196-164 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-166
193:582
A. Requirement for zoning permits. A zoning permit shall be required
prior to the erection or alteration of any building, structure, or portion
thereof, including signs and fences; prior to the use or change in use of
a building or land; and prior to the change or extension of a
nonconforming use or structure.
B. Application for zoning permits. Application for zoning permits shall be
made to the Zoning Officer or, in the case of occupancy permits, to the
Code Enforcement Officer on such forms as may be furnished by the
Borough. Each application shall contain all information necessary to
ascertain whether the proposed erection, alteration, use, or change in
use complies with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Issuance of permits.
(1) No building or use permit shall be issued until the Zoning Officer
has certified that the proposed building or alteration and the
proposed use of the property comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) Permits shall be granted or refused within 45 days after the date of
application. In case of refusal, the applicant shall be informed of his
right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board.
D. Permits for trailers or other temporary structures. Prior to the
placement or location of a trailer or other temporary structure on a site,
a permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Officer as noted above in
this section except as modified by § 196-126D. Such temporary permit
shall be effective for not more than 90 days and may be renewed.
However, the total continuous time for which temporary permits may be
issued shall not exceed one year.
E. Expiration of permits. Permits for the erection, razing, change,
alteration, or removal of a building shall be valid or effective for a
period of not more than six months from the date of issuance thereof
and shall thereafter be void, unless the work authorized by such permit
shall have been substantially commenced within that period and
continues with due diligence from that time forward. In no event shall a
zoning permit be construed to authorize the development activities for
more than a one-year period of time, after which time a new permit
must be sought. If, however, the applicant has been delayed in
proceeding with the work for which the permit was granted for reasons
beyond his or her control and demonstrably not due to his or her own
negligence, at the discretion of the Zoning Officer the permit may be
renewed without additional costs to the applicant.
F. Occupancy permits.
(1) Applicability. An occupancy permit shall be deemed to authorize
and is required for both initial and continued occupancy and use of
the building or land to which it applies. Such a permit shall certify
that the premises has been inspected and complies with all
§ 196-166 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-166
193:583
previously approved plans and all conditions or safeguards
attached to the issuance of a zoning permit. It shall also certify that
the premises complies with all other applicable requirements of the
Borough of Marcus Hook. The following shall be unlawful until an
occupancy permit shall have been applied for and issued by the
Code Enforcement Officer:
(a) Occupancy and use of a building erected, reconstructed,
restored, altered, moved, or any change in use of an existing
building;
(b) Any change in ownership in residential structures.
(2) Applications.
(a) Application for an occupancy permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Borough after the building or part thereof has
been erected, the change in use has been completed, or the
land placed in use. In the case of a change in ownership of an
existing residential building, an occupancy permit shall be
applied for by the owner of such a building upon the sale.
(b) Application for an occupancy permit shall be accompanied by a
payment of the required fee.
(3) Action by the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO).
(a) The CEO shall, within 15 days of application filing, inspect the
premises and either certify its compliance with the previously
approved plans and all conditions and safeguards stated upon
issuance of an occupancy permit or deny such certification. In
the case of a change in occupancy or use of an existing building
or vacant land (when no zoning permit is required), the CEO
shall verify compliance with the applicable zoning regulations.
(b) If the certification of the occupancy permit form is denied, the
CEO shall state in writing the reasons for such denial.
G. Fees.
(1) Borough Council shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees,
charges, expenses, and collection procedures for zoning permits,
occupancy permits, conditional uses, variances, appeals,
amendments, and other matters pertaining to this chapter.
(2) A schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning Officer
and may be altered or amended by Borough Council only.
(3) The cost of permits shall be based on a fee schedule as established
from time to time by Borough Council.
(4) No action shall be taken on any application for any conditional use,
variance, appeal, or other similar matter pertaining to this chapter
§ 196-166 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-166
193:584
§ 196-167. Amendments.
until all application fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in
full.
H. Enforcement remedies. Persons found to be in violation of this chapter
shall pay a judgment of no more than is allowed by statute or Act 247
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Borough. See Section 617.2 of the Planning Code.120
A. Power to amend. The regulations, restrictions, boundaries, and
requirements set forth in this chapter may be amended, supplemented,
changed, or repealed by Borough Council by amending this chapter in
accordance with Sections 609, 609.1, and 609.2 of the Planning
Code.121
B. Procedure for amendment.
(1) An ordinance amending, supplementing, or changing the district
boundaries (Zoning Map) or the regulations established herein may
be initiated:
(a) By Borough Council, upon its own initiative or upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission.
(b) Upon a petition to Borough Council signed by the owners of
50% or more of the frontage of any area which shall be
between two streets wherein a change of zoning regulations is
being sought.
(c) By a landowner requesting an amendment or repeal. In the
case of a curative amendment, the special requirements of
Section 609.1 of the Planning Code122 shall apply.
(2) Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, Borough Council
shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice. If the
proposed amendment involves a map change, notice of said public
hearing shall be conspicuously posted along the perimeter of the
tract at least one week prior to the hearing.
(3) Borough Council shall submit each proposed zoning amendment,
other than one prepared by the Planning Commission, to the
Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to any hearing which is
to be held on the proposed amendment to provide the Planning
Commission with an opportunity to submit its recommendations
prior to final action.
120. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10617.2.
121. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609, 10609.1 and 10609.2, respectively.
122. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.1.
§ 196-166 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-167
193:585
(4) If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is revised or further revised to include land previously
not affected by it, Borough Council shall hold another public
hearing as required by law pursuant to public notice before
proceeding to vote on the amendment.
(5) As required by the Planning Code, a copy of any proposed zoning
amendment shall also be sent to the County Planning Commission
at least 30 days prior to any hearing on the proposed amendment in
order to provide the County Planning Commission an opportunity
to submit its recommendations prior to final action on the
amendment.
(6) The Borough may offer a mediation option as an aid in completing
proceedings authorized in this section. In exercising such an
option, the Borough and mediating parties shall meet the
stipulations of Section 908.1 of the Planning Code.123
(7) Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this
chapter shall be forwarded to the Delaware County Planning
Department.
123. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.1.
§ 196-167 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-167
193:586
ARTICLE XXII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 196-168. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to list and describe the powers, procedures,
composition, and standards for the Zoning Hearing Board, as required by
the Planning Code.
§ 196-169. Administration and procedure.
A. Creation of the Zoning Hearing Board. A Zoning Hearing Board for the
Borough of Marcus Hook shall be appointed by Borough Council and
shall be authorized to administer all procedures charged to such boards
in accordance with the provisions of Article IX of the Pennsylvania MPC,
as amended.124 Hereinafter, as used in this article, the term "Board"
shall refer to the Zoning Hearing Board, and the term "Planning Code"
shall refer to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247,
as amended.125
B. Membership of the Board. The Board shall consist of five residents of
the Borough. Their terms of office shall be five years and shall be so
fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire each year. The
Board shall promptly notify the Borough of any vacancies. Appointment
to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term.
Members of the Board shall hold no other office in the Borough and
shall not be employees of the Borough.
C. Removal of members. Any member may be removed for malfeasance,
misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a
majority rule of Borough Council taken after the member has received
15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall
be held in connection with the vote if the member requests it in writing.
D. Organization of the Board.
(1) The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who
shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For
the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum
shall be not less than the majority of all members of the Board, but
where a majority of members are disqualified to act in a particular
matter, the remaining members may act for the Board. As provided
for in the Planning Code, the Board may appoint a hearing officer
from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf, and
the parties may waive further action by the Board, as provided in
Section 908 of the Planning Code.126
124. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
125. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
126. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
§ 196-168 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-169
193:587
§ 196-170. Powers of Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) The Board shall adopt rules and forms for its procedure in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the
Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other
times as the Board may determine. Such Chairman or, in his
absence, the Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be
open to the public.
(3) The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote
of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicate such fact, and shall keep records of its examination and
other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the
Office of the Borough Manager and shall be a public record.
(4) The Board shall submit a report of its activities to Borough Council
as requested.
E. Expenditures for services. Within the limits of funds appropriated by
Borough Council, the Board may employ or contract for secretaries,
clerks, legal counsel, consultants, and other technical and clerical
services. Members of the Board may receive compensation for the
performance of their duties as may be fixed by Borough Council, but in
no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to
members of Borough Council.
A. Appeals from the Zoning Officer. The Board shall hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged that the Zoning Officer has failed to follow
prescribed procedures or has misinterpreted or misapplied any
provision of this chapter or the Zoning Map or any valid rule or
regulation governing the action of the Zoning Officer.
B. Applications. Applications for variances or special exceptions shall
include as a minimum the following information:
(1) A sketch plan, at scale, showing the layout of the property, the
proposed improvements and alterations thereto, and the
relationship of the tract to adjacent properties.
(2) A reference to the section(s) of this chapter under which the
variance or special exception is requested.
C. Variances. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship
on the applicant. In granting a variance, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of the Planning Code and this chapter.
D. Special exceptions. The Board shall hear and decide requests for
special exceptions authorized by this chapter in accordance with the
standards and criteria set forth in § 196-174 below. The Board may
§ 196-169 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-170
193:588
§ 196-171. Hearings and decisions.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
the provisions of Section 908 of the Planning Code.128
§ 196-172. Notice of requirements.
Notice of hearing. In any case where the Board shall hold a public hearing,
the Board shall, at a minimum, give notice of such hearing as follows, which
notice shall state the time and the place of the hearing and the particular
nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing:
§ 196-173. Elements of decisions of Board.
Decisions of the Board shall include the following elements:
attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of the Planning Code and this
chapter.
E. Challenge to the validity of the ordinance or map. The Board shall
conduct hearings and make decisions and findings in connection with
challenges to the validity of any provision of this chapter as authorized
by Section 909.1 of the Planning Code.127
A. By publishing a notice thereof once each week for two successive weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough, provided that the
first publication shall be not more than 30 days and the second
publication shall be not less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.
B. By mailing or delivering due notice thereof to the applicant and other
parties in interest, who shall be at least those persons whose properties
adjoin the property in question or are within a two-hundred-foot radius
of the property in question.
C. By mailing or delivering notice thereof to Borough Council and the
Zoning Officer.
D. By conspicuously posting notice of said hearing on the affected tract of
land at least one week prior to the hearing.
A. Findings of fact, including a brief summary of relevant testimony and
information entered during the proceedings of the Board.
B. Citation by quotation or by reference to the specific sections of the local
ordinances and/or the Planning Code which are relevant to the case in
question.
127. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10909.1.
128. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
§ 196-170 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-173
193:589
§ 196-174. Standards for Zoning Hearing Board action.
In any instance where the Zoning Hearing Board is required to consider a
variance or special exception, the Board shall, among other things, consider
the following standards:
C. Conclusions of the Board, enumerating the reasons why such
conclusions are deemed appropriate in light of the facts found.
D. Ruling of the Board, indicating in writing any stipulations or conditions
attached to the ruling.
A. Planning Code criteria for variances.
(1) The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that
the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship on the
applicant.
(2) A variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by
the Board unless and until a written application for a variance is
submitted by the applicant who shall have the burden of
establishing the presence of all of the following conditions where
relevant in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not to the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or district in
which the property is located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that
the authorization of the variance is, therefore, necessary to
enable the reasonable use of the property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
§ 196-173 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-174
193:590
(3) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of the Planning Code and this chapter.
B. Standards for review of special exceptions.
(1) In any instance where the Board is required to consider a request
for a special exception, the Board shall consider the following
factors where appropriate:
(a) That the proposed use is appropriate for the site in question in
terms of size, topography, natural features, drainage, sewage
disposal, water supply, accessibility, and availability of public
services and that adequate provisions will be made to protect
sensitive environmental features such as streams, lakes,
wetlands, slopes, and mature trees.
(b) That the proposed use is compatible with the character of the
surrounding neighborhood and will not interfere with or
detract from legitimate uses and adjacent properties, and that
adequate measures will be provided through building design,
site layout, landscaping, planting, and operational controls to
minimize any adverse impacts caused by noise, lights, glare,
odors, smoke, fumes, traffic, parking, loading, and signage.
(c) That the proposed special exception will serve the best interest
of the Borough, convenience of the community, and the public
health, safety, and welfare.
(d) That the proposed use is consistent with the most recently
adopted Marcus Hook Comprehensive Plan.
(e) That the proposed use promotes orderly development, proper
population density, and the provision of adequate community
facilities and services, including police and fire protection.
(f) That the proposed use is suitable in terms of its effect on
highway safety and traffic circulation and that access, on-site
circulation, and parking are adequate in view of anticipated
traffic.
(g) That the proposed use will provide for adequate off-street
parking, as required in Article XV.
(2) In cases where uses permitted by special exception are not
accompanied by specific standards for such uses, the regulations in
§ 196-130 shall apply.
(3) Financial hardship shall not be construed as a basis for granting
special exceptions.
(4) In granting any special exception, the Board may attach reasonable
conditions and safeguards in addition to those expressed in this
§ 196-174 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-174
193:591
§ 196-175. Standards of proof.
chapter as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the
Planning Code and this chapter, which conditions and safeguards
may relate to, but not be limited to, screening, lighting, noise,
safety, aesthetics, and the minimization of noxious, offensive, or
hazardous elements. Such special exceptions shall be clearly
authorized by a provision in this chapter and shall, where
applicable, comply with the more specific standards relating to
such special exceptions contained in appropriate sections of Article
XVIII.
A. For variances. An applicant for a variance shall have the burden of
establishing both:
(1) That a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will
result in unnecessary hardship, as that term is defined by law,
including court decisions; and
(2) That the allowance of the variance will not be contrary to the public
interest.
B. For special exceptions. An applicant for a special exception shall have
the burden of establishing both:
(1) That his application falls within the provisions of this chapter which
affords to the applicant the right to seek a special exception; and
(2) That the allowance of a special exception will not be contrary to the
public interest.
C. Evaluation of the impact of an application on the public interest. In
determining whether the allowance of a variance or special exception is
contrary to the public interest, the Board shall consider whether the
application, if granted, will:
(1) Adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare due to
changes in traffic conditions, drainage, air quality, noise levels,
neighborhood property values, natural features, and neighborhood
aesthetic characteristics.
(2) Be in accordance with the most recently adopted Marcus Hook
Comprehensive Plan.
(3) Provide required parking in accordance with Article XV of this
chapter.
(4) Adversely affect the logical, efficient, and economical extension or
provision of public services and facilities such as public water,
sewers, refuse collection, police, fire protection, and public
schools.
(5) Otherwise adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare.
§ 196-174 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-176
193:592
§ 196-176. Expiration of variances and special exceptions.
Unless otherwise specified by the Board, a variance or special exception
shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a building permit within six
months from the date of authorization thereof.
§ 196-177. Time limitations and stay of proceedings.
See Sections 914.1 and 915.1 of the Planning Code.129
§ 196-178. Appeals to court.
See Article X-A of the Planning Code.130
129. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10914.1 and 10915.1, respectively.
130. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11001-A et seq.
§ 196-176 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § 196-178
193:593
Appendix
Chapter A199
CABLE FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
§ 196-178 MARCUS HOOK CODE § 196-178
193:594
ARTICLE I
Comcast Agreement
[Adopted 6-2-2014 by Res. No. R-14-6,131 approved 6-2-2014]
§ A199-1. Adoption of agreement.
The Borough Council does hereby approve the cable franchise agreement
negotiated with Comcast, including all the terms and conditions contained
therein, and does hereby authorize the execution of such agreement.132
131. Editor’s Note: This resolution superseded former Art. I, Comcast Agreement, adopted
4-2-2002 by Res. No. R-02-3, approved 4-2-2002.
132. Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
§ A199-1 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § A199-1
193:595

ARTICLE II
Verizon Agreement
[Adopted 2-5-2007 by Res. No. 07-2, approved 2-5-2007]
§ A199-2. Adoption of agreement.
The Borough Council of Marcus Hook Borough does hereby approve and
adopt the cable franchise agreement negotiated with Verizon, including all
of the terms and conditions contained therein, and does hereby authorize
the execution of such agreement.133
133. Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
§ A199-2 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § A199-2
193:597
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-04-1 5-3-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. O-08-1
O-04-2 6-7-2004 Uniform construction
codes
Ch. 84
O-04-3 7-5-2004 Property maintenance:
adoption of International
Code
Ch. 157, Art. II
O-04-4 9-7-2004 Animals Ch. 88
O-05-1 1-4-2005 Emergency and municipal
services tax
Ch. 180, Art. I
O-05-2 6-6-2005 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 84
O-05-3 6-6-2005 Employee membership in
municipal retirement
system
Repealed by Ord.
No. O-06-1
O-05-4 10-3-2005 Zoning Ch. 196
O-05-5 11-7-2005 Historical Commission Ch. 17
O-05-6 12-5-2005 Tax rate for 2006 NCM
O-06-1 1-3-2006 Employee membership in
municipal retirement
system
Repealed by Ord.
No. O-13-3
O-06-2 5-1-2006 Curfew amendment Ch. 83
O-06-3 5-1-2006 Stormwater management Ch. 174
O-06-4 6-5-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191
O-06-5 6-5-2006 Municipal parking lots
amendment
Ch. 148
O-06-6 8-7-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191
O-06-7 8-7-2006 Public library amendment Ch. 19
O-06-8 12-4-2006 Tax rate for 2007 NCM
§ A199-2 MARCUS HOOK CODE § DL-1
193:598
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-07-1 1-2-2007 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 15A
O-07-2 2-5-2007 Tax Collector fees Ch. 180, Art. IV
Res. No.
R-07-2
2-5-2007 Cable franchise agreement
with Verizon
Ch. A199, Art. II
O-07-3 4-2-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191
O-07-4 12-3-2007 Tax rate for 2008 NCM
O-07-5 12-3-2007 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 180, Art. I
Res. No.
R-08-3
2-5-2008 Police pension plan
amendment
Ch. 31, Art. I
O-08-1 8-4-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191
O-08-2 12-1-2008 Tax rate for 2009 NCM
O-08-3 12-1-2008 Multiple dwellings;
rooming houses; rental
units amendment
Ch. 135
Res. No.
R-08-16
12-1-2008 Records: public access to
records
Ch. 160, Art. I
O-09-1 4-6-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191
O-09-2 5-4-2009 Municipal parking lots
amendment
Ch. 148
O-09-3 5-4-2009 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 73
O-09-4 9-8-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191
O-09-5 11-2-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191
O-09-6 11-2-2009 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 99
O-09-7 12-7-2009 Tax rate for 2010 NCM
O-10-1 6-7-2010 Hawkers, peddlers and
solicitors: food peddlers,
vehicles peddlers and
door-to-door salespersons
amendment
Ch. 111, Art. II
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § DL-1
193:599
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-10-2 7-6-2010 Property maintenance:
adoption of International
Code amendment
Ch. 157, Art. II
O-10-3 7-6-2010 Dogs and other animals
amendment
Ch. 88
O-10-4 12-6-2010 Tax rate for 2011 NCM
O-10-5 1-4-2011 Sewer: general provisions
amendment
Ch. 167, Art. I
O-11-1 3-7-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191
O-11-2 5-2-2011 Sex offender residency
restrictions and penalties
for violations
Repealed by Ord.
No. O-12-1
O-11-3 7-11-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191
O-11-4 8-1-2011 Secondhand dealers Ch. 165
O-11-5 8-1-2011 Parks amendment Ch. 151
O-11-6 10-3-2011 Dumpsters and portable
storage containers
Ch. 90
O-11-7 12-5-2011 Tax rate for 2012 NCM
O-11-8 12-5-2011 Sewers: wastewater
treatment amendment
Ch. 167, Art. II
O-12-1 5-7-2012 Sex offender residency
restrictions and penalties
for violations repealer
Repealer only
O-12-2 8-6-2012 Intermunicipal agreement
(Delaware County Uniform
Construction Code
Appeals Board)
NCM
O-12-3 10-1-2012 Dogs and other animals:
cat control
Ch. 88, Art. II
O-12-4 10-1-2012 Stormwater management Ch. 174
O-12-5 12-3-2012 Tax rate for 2013 NCM
Res. No.
R-12-9
12-3-2012 Police pension plan
amendment
Ch. 31, Art. I
O-13-1 1-7-2013 Authorizing incurrence of
nonelectoral debt
NCM
O-13-2 2-4-2013 Municipal claims Ch. 82A
O-13-3 2-4-2013 Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement System
Ch. 31, Art. II
§ DL-1 MARCUS HOOK CODE § DL-1
193:600
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-13-4 9-3-2013 Open burning and air
pollution control
amendment
Ch. 78
O-13-5 9-3-2013 Sidewalks, curbs and
gutters amendment
Ch. 175, Art. I
O-13-6 11-4-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191
O-13-7 12-2-2013 Tax rate for 2014 NCM
O-14-1 4-7-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 196
O-14-2 6-2-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191
Res. No.
R-14-6
6-2-2014 Cable franchise
agreements: Comcast
agreement
Ch. A199, Art. I
O-15-1 5-4-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191
O-15-2 8-3-2015 Parks amendment Ch. 151
O-15-3 8-3-2015 Flood damage prevention Ch. 99
O-15-4 9-8-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191
O-15-5 9-8-2015 Recreation and Park Board
amendment
Ch. 45
O-15-6 12-7-2015 Tax rate for 2016 NCM
O-16-1 1-4-2016 Property maintenance:
abandoned real property
Ch. 157, Art. IV
O-16-2 4-4-2016 Solid waste amendment Ch. 172
O-16-3 6-6-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191
O-16-4 11-7-2016 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 178
O-16-5 11-7-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191
O-16- 11-7-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191
O-16-7 12-5-2016 Tax rate for 2017 NCM
O-17-1 1-2-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 191
O-17-2 5-1-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 196
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § DL-1
193:601
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
O-17-3 6-5-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 191
O-17-4 8-7-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 191
O-17-5 9-5-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 191
O-17-6 12-4-2017 Tax Rate for 2018 NCM
O-17-7 12-4-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 191
O-18-1 4-2-2018 Property Maintenance:
Graffiti
Ch. 157, Art. V
O-18-2 4-2-2018 Vehicles and Traffic:
Schedules Amendment
Ch. 191, Art. VIII
O-18-3 12-3-2018 Tax Rate NCM
O-18-4 12-3-2018 Building Construction
Amendment
Ch. 76
O-18-5 12-3-2018 Board of Health Repealer;
Brush, Grass and Weeds
Amendment; Dogs and
Other Animals: Cat
Control Amendment; Food
Establishments: General
Regulations Amendment;
Specific Regulations
Amendment; Enforcement
Amendment; Multiple
Dwellings; Rooming
Houses; Rental Units
Amendment; Property
Maintenance: Sanitary
Conditions Amendment;
Sewers: General
Provisions Amendment
Ch. 16; Ch. 73; Ch.
88, Art. II; Ch. 102,
Art. III; Ch. 102,
Art. IV; Ch. 102,
Art. V; Ch. 135; Ch.
157, Art. I; Ch. 167,
Art. I
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
O-19-1 2-4-2019 Recreation and Park
Board Amendment
Ch. 45 14
O-19-2 5-6-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 191 14
§ DL-1 MARCUS HOOK CODE § DL-1
193:602
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
O-19-3 9-3-2019 Parking Lots,
Municipal
Amendment
Ch. 148 14
O-19-4 11-4-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 191 14
O-19-5 11-4-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 191 14
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN § DL-1
193:603