THE CHARTER
Chapter C
CHARTER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 6.
Municipal authorities — See Ch. 16.
Defense and indemnification of officers and
employees — See Ch. 29.
Municipal Engineer — See Ch. 39.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 43.
Human relations — See Ch. 61.
Library — See Ch. 80.
Pensions — See Ch. 93.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 97.
Planning Department and Commission — See
Ch. 101.
Police personnel — See Ch. 105.
Purchasing and contracts — See Ch. 109.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 116.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 123.
C:1

ARTICLE I
Name and Boundaries
§ C-1. Name.
The Borough of Monroeville shall hereafter be a HOME RULE CHARTER
MUNICIPALITY under the name of "Monroeville." As used in this Charter,
the word, "Municipality" shall mean the Municipality of Monroeville in
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
§ C-2. Boundaries.
The boundaries of the Municipality shall be the actual boundaries of the
Borough of Monroeville at the time this charter takes effect and as they may
be lawfully changed thereafter.
§ C-1 CHARTER § C-2
C:3

ARTICLE II
Powers of the Municipality
§ C-3. Powers.
The Municipality has, and may exercise, any power, and may perform any
function not denied by the Constitution of the United States of America, the
Constitution of Pennsylvania, by this Charter, or by the General Assembly at
any time.
§ C-4. Construction.
The powers of the Municipality under this Charter shall be construed
liberally in favor of the Municipality, and the specific mention of particular
powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the
general power stated in this article. All possible powers of the Municipality,
except as limited in § C-3 above, are to be considered as if specifically and
individually set forth in this article, whether such powers are presently
available to the Municipality or may hereafter from time to time become
available.
§ C-5. Residual powers in the Municipal Council.
All powers of the Municipality, including any such power which may
hereafter be conferred on the Municipality by amendment of the
Constitution of the United States of America or of the Constitution of
Pennsylvania or of this Charter or by Act of the General Assembly,1 unless
otherwise specifically set forth in this Charter, shall be vested in the
Municipal Council. The Council shall be elected, shall organize, and shall
function as provided in this Charter.
§ C-6. Eminent domain.
A. The Municipality is hereby authorized and empowered to enter upon,
appropriate, take, use, occupy, injure or destroy, private lands, property
or material, wherever situate, for any legal and valid municipal
purpose. All such action shall be provided for by ordinance and just
compensation shall be made and secured as provided by general law.2
B. The Municipality shall have no authority to grant to others, by
franchise, contract, or otherwise, its power and right of eminent
domain.
1. Editor's Note: See the Charter References to General Law included at the end of this
Charter.
2. Editor's Note: See the Charter References to General Law included at the end of this
Charter.
§ C-3 CHARTER § C-6
C:5

ARTICLE III
Municipal Council
§ C-7. Composition.
The Municipality shall be divided into seven Wards, the boundaries of
which shall be co-terminus with the boundaries existing in the Borough of
Monroeville at the time this Charter is adopted, and as lawfully changed
thereafter. There shall be a Municipal Council of seven members, each
member to be elected by the registered electors of the Ward the member is
to represent.
§ C-8. Terms. [Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 20113]
§ C-9. Election of members of Council.
A. The terms of all members of Council shall be for four years,
commencing at 8:00 p.m. on the first Monday of January following the
year in which they were elected. They shall continue in office until their
successors assume the office.
B. No member of Council shall be eligible to serve more than two
consecutive terms. In the event that a member of Council has been
appointed to fill an unexpired term of more than a two year duration,
that appointed term shall be considered a full term. No individual who
has served two consecutive terms shall be eligible for a new term of
office until the individual has been absent from office for a full four year
term.
A. At the municipal election to be held in the year 1975, there shall be
elected three Members of Council to serve for a term of four years; the
aforesaid three Members of Council to be elected from those Wards
represented by Members of the Council of the Borough of Monroeville
whose terms expire on the first Monday of January, 1976. The three
Members of Council aforesaid, and the Members of the Council of the
Municipality of Monroeville whose terms expire on the first Monday in
January, 1978, shall constitute the Council of the Municipality until the
first Monday of January, 1978.
B. At the municipal election to be held in the year 1977, there shall be
elected four Members of Council to serve for a period of four years; the
aforesaid four Members of Council to be elected from those Wards
represented by Members of Council whose terms expire on the first
Monday of January, 1978.
C. Thereafter, Members of Council shall continue to be elected at each
municipal election for terms of four years and from the Wards
3. Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by the electorate of the Municipality of
Monroeville 5-20-1997.
§ C-7 CHARTER § C-9
C:7
§ C-10. Election procedure.
The procedure for nomination and election of Members of Council shall be
established by the general laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania4 for
municipal elections.
§ C-11. Salary. [Amended 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 19015]
§ C-12. Authority.
All of Council's authority shall be asserted by the Members of Council only.
No individual Member of Council shall have any authority whatsoever under
this Charter unless such authority is specifically delegated by the Charter
or by the Council acting as a body.
§ C-13. Organization of Council and Mayor.
represented by members whose terms expire in the January next
succeeding.
A. Each Member of Council may receive the same compensation as
received by Council Members of the Borough of Monroeville on the day
before the effective date of this Charter, or such other sum as set by
Council by ordinance from time to time. Such compensation shall not be
increased or decreased during the term for which any Member of
Council was elected or appointed. No such increase or decrease shall
be accomplished by ordinance adopted less than six months prior to
election of any Member of Council affected thereby.
B. Members of Council shall receive no other compensation, direct or
indirect, for the performance of their duties; they shall receive no
pensions, insurance or other forms of fringe benefits. When, however,
Council shall, in a public meeting, direct certain activities to be
performed, Members of Council shall be entitled to actual and
necessary documented expenses incurred in the performance of these
functions and activities, except that that shall not be construed to allow
Council to exceed any budget appropriation.
A. Council and the Mayor shall organize on the first Monday of January of
each even numbered year. If the first Monday is a legal holiday, the
meeting shall be held the first day following. However, nothing in this
Charter shall be construed to prohibit Council from reorganizing if it so
chooses.
B. The Council shall organize by the election of one of their number as
Deputy Mayor, who shall hold office until a successor is elected and
qualified.
4. Editor's Note: See the Charter References to General Law included at the end of this
Charter.
5. Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by the electorate of the Municipality of
Monroeville 11-8-1994.
§ C-9 § C-13
C:8
§ C-14. Powers and duties of the Deputy Mayor.
C. The Mayor, or if absent, the Deputy Mayor, shall preside at all meetings
of Council and perform such other duties as are specified in this
Charter or as may be prescribed by ordinance. Further succession in
the case of the absence of the Mayor and Deputy Mayor shall be
determined by the Council by ordinance.
D. If a majority of Council shall not attend at the organization meeting,
those present may adjourn the meeting from day to day until a majority
attend.
E. The organization meeting may be considered as a regular monthly
meeting for the transaction of such business as comes before Council.
A. The Deputy Mayor shall exercise the powers and duties of the Mayor
during the Mayor's temporary absence or disability; except that the
Deputy Mayor shall vote as a Member of Council, and shall not cast the
Mayor's deciding vote in cases of tie votes of Council.
B. The Deputy Mayor shall appoint all Councilmanic committees.
§ C-13 CHARTER § C-14
C:9

ARTICLE IV
Operations and Procedures of Municipal Council
§ C-15. Meetings.
It shall be the duty of Council to hold a public meeting once a month for
the conduct of their business. Council may adjourn to a stated time for
general business or for special business. Special meetings may be called
by the Mayor, and shall be called by the Mayor upon written request of
at least three of the Members of Council. Members shall have at least 24
hours' notice of such special meetings. The notice shall state whether it is
for general or special purposes, and if it is for special purposes, the notice
shall contain a statement of the nature of the business to be considered.
Presence at a meeting constitutes waiver of notice. Notice and agenda of
all meetings shall be posted at the Municipal Building 24 hours prior to a
meeting.
§ C-16. Records.
Council shall make and preserve minutes of all business and committee
meetings of Council. All records, documents and papers of the Municipality
shall be available to the public in accordance with the provisions of general
law.6
§ C-17. Public meetings.
All business meetings and committee meetings of the Council shall be open
for public attendance. All official votes of the Council shall be taken openly.
§ C-18. Operating rules.
The Council shall, by ordinance, adopt rules of procedure for its meetings.7
Such rules shall be designed so as to assure full and equal participation in
the deliberations of the Council by all of its members.
§ C-19. Quorum.
Four Members of Council shall constitute a quorum. Except as provided
in § C-124, no business shall be conducted or votes taken except in the
presence of a quorum.
§ C-20. Votes required for action.
A. No action of Council shall be effective or binding without at least three
affirmative votes.
B. No ordinance shall be adopted without at least four affirmative votes.
6. Editor's Note: See the Charter References to General Law included at the end of this
Charter.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 25, Council and Committee Rules.
§ C-15 CHARTER § C-20
C:11
§ C-21. Form of action by Council.
Official actions of Council shall be taken by adoption of an ordinance, or a
resolution, or a motion. All ordinances and resolutions must be in written
form. All actions of a legislative character shall be taken by ordinance. All
other actions of Council shall be by resolution or motion, unless otherwise
required in this Charter, or in the ordinance establishing the rules of
Councilmanic procedure. However, no such administrative action shall be
void or otherwise adversely affected if it shall have been taken by ordinance.
All final action in adopting ordinances or resolutions shall be by roll call
vote, and the vote of each Member of Council shall be entered in the
minutes of the meeting.
§ C-22. Citizens' right to be heard.
C. Actions of Council, other than ordinances, shall be effective and binding
by the affirmative vote of a majority of the votes cast, provided at least
three affirmative votes are cast.
D. In cases where the Mayor is entitled to vote, the vote of the Mayor shall
be counted in calculating votes required in this Section.
A. The Council shall schedule a regular monthly meeting solely to provide
an opportunity for interested citizens to address the Council on matters
of general or special concern. Minutes shall be kept of these meetings.
B. The opportunity to address Council shall also be afforded the public at
all business meetings at a time designated in the agenda by the Mayor.
C. Council may adopt reasonable rules and regulations governing the
conduct of Council Members and the public during participation in the
meeting.
§ C-20 § C-22
C:12
ARTICLE V
Ordinances and Resolutions
§ C-23. Certain specific action requiring an ordinance.
In addition to any other actions by law or by this Charter to be taken by
ordinance, those actions of the Municipal Council shall be by ordinance
which:
§ C-24. General ordinance requirements.
Every ordinance shall contain the date of its enactment, and its enactment
shall be verified by the signature of the Mayor or other Member of Council
present at the meeting where the action was taken. The official seal of the
Municipality shall be affixed to the original copy of each ordinance by the
Manager or a designate who shall also attest to the signature of the other
signatory. Failure to sign an ordinance or affix the official seal shall not in
any way invalidate an otherwise valid ordinance.
§ C-25. Penalty.
The penalties for the violation of any ordinance shall be contained in that
ordinance in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the Constitution of the United States8 and any other
provisions of this Charter.
A. Adopt or amend an administrative code or establish, alter or abolish any
municipal department, office or agency.
B. Adopt or amend a code establishing a personnel system for the
Municipality.
C. Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation for
violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed.
D. Levy taxes.
E. Grant, renew or extend a franchise.
F. Establish, alter or abolish rates charged for any utility or other service
supplied by the Municipality.
G. Authorize the borrowing of money.
H. Convey or lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands of the
Municipality.
I. Establish wages, hours or fringe benefits of any employees and
appointed officials of the Municipality.
8. Editor's Note: See the Charter References to General Law included at the end of this
Charter.
§ C-23 CHARTER § C-26
C:13
§ C-26. Publication and effective date of ordinances.
§ C-27. Recording of ordinances and resolutions.
All ordinances and resolutions of the Municipality shall be entered verbatim
in permanent separate record books for ordinances and resolutions. No
ordinance or resolution shall be considered in force until the same is
recorded in the proper book. These books shall be open and available for
public inspection at reasonable hours. These books shall be in the custody
and control of the Manager or a designate and all entries made therein shall
be at the direction of the Manager.
§ C-28. Ordinances requiring prior public notice.
No final action shall be taken on the following types of ordinances and
amendments thereto without public hearing thereon and at least 10 days'
prior public notice thereof published in a newspaper circulating generally
in the Municipality:
A. After adoption, all ordinances shall be published one time in a
newspaper circulating generally within the Municipality. The full text of
the ordinance need not be published; instead the title and a general
summary of the substance of the ordinance will be sufficient to meet
publication requirement.
B. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by an applicable law of
the General Assembly,9 ordinances shall be effective on the tenth day
after publication, or at any later date specified therein, and each
ordinance shall be prominently posted in the Municipal Building until
the next Council meeting.
A. Zoning ordinance and amendments thereto.
B. Adoption of the zoning map and amendments thereto.
C. Subdivision regulations.
D. Land development and land use regulations.
E. New taxes or increases in the rates of existing taxes. No prior public
notice shall be necessary for the reenactment of taxes levied annually at
the same rate.
F. Salaries of elected officials.
G. Changes in Ward boundaries.
H. Amendments to the budget.
I. Or as otherwise provided in this Charter.
9. Editor's Note: See the Charter References to General Law included at the end of this
Charter.
§ C-26 § C-28
C:14
ARTICLE VI
The Mayor
§ C-29. The Mayor.
The Mayor shall be recognized as the leader of the municipal government
and shall be the presiding officer of the Council. The Mayor shall have a
voice in all matters before the Council and shall have such authority and
perform such duties as are assigned under this Charter.
§ C-30. Election and term. [Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 201210]
§ C-31. Salary.
§ C-32. Veto.
A. The Mayor shall be elected at large by the voters of the Municipality for
a term of four years, at the Municipal election to be held in the year
1997 and every four years thereafter. The Mayor shall continue to serve
until a successor assumes the office.
B. The Mayor shall be ineligible to serve more than two consecutive terms.
In the event that a Mayor has been appointed to fill an unexpired term
of more than a two year duration, that appointed term shall be
considered a full term. No individual, who has served two consecutive
terms as Mayor, shall be eligible for a new term as Mayor until the
individual has been absent from the office of the Mayor for a full four
year term.
A. The Mayor shall receive the same compensation as received by the
Mayor of the Borough of Monroeville on the day before the effective
date of this Charter, or such other sum as set by Council by ordinance
from time to time. Such compensation shall not be increased or
decreased during the term for which the Mayor was elected or
appointed. No such increase or decrease shall be accomplished by
ordinance adopted less than six months prior to election of the Mayor
affected thereby.
B. The Mayor shall receive no other compensation, direct or indirect, for
the performance of duties and shall receive no pensions, insurance or
other forms of fringe benefits. The Mayor shall, however, be entitled to
actual necessary documented expenses incurred in the performance of
the duties of the office and presented to Council in public session.
C. The budget shall include a reasonable appropriation for the Mayor's
expenses, which appropriation shall not be exceeded by the Mayor.
However, such appropriation may be amended from time to time in
accordance with the provisions of this Charter.
10.Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by the electorate of the Municipality of
Monroeville 5-20-1997.
§ C-29 CHARTER § C-32
C:15
§ C-33. Tie breaking.
§ C-34. Powers and duties.
In addition to powers and duties otherwise provided for herein, the Mayor
shall exercise the powers and perform the duties as follows:
A. Every ordinance except as herein otherwise provided, passed by the
Council, shall be presented to the Mayor for approval. If approved, the
Mayor shall sign it; but if not approved, it shall be returned with the
Mayor's objections to the Council at its next business meeting occurring
at least 10 days after the meeting at which such ordinance was passed
by the Council, when the objections shall be entered upon the minutes
and the Council shall proceed to a reconsideration thereof either at the
meeting at which the vetoed ordinance was returned, or at any business
meeting held not later than 10 days thereafter. If, after such
reconsideration, five members of said Council shall vote to pass such
ordinance, it shall become of as full force and effect as if it had received
the approval of the Mayor. If any such ordinance shall not be returned
by the Mayor at the business meeting of the Council occurring at least
10 days next succeeding its presentation to the Mayor, it shall likewise
have as full force as if it had been approved.
B. The enactment of an ordinance shall be the date when the Mayor shall
approve it or the date of passage by the Council over the veto of the
Mayor, or in the case of any ordinance not returned by the Mayor at the
business meeting of Council occurring at least 10 days after the
meeting at which such ordinance was passed by the Council, the date of
enactment shall be the date of such succeeding business meeting of
Council.
A. The Mayor shall not vote on matters presented to Council except where,
by reason of a tie vote, Council shall be unable to adopt any ordinance,
resolution or motion, or declare or fill any vacancy in its membership or
other municipal office, or to take any action on any matter lawfully
before it.
B. In such cases, the Mayor may cast the deciding vote, or, request that
the matter be tabled until the matter shall be reconsidered by Council
at the next business meeting of Council and, if a tie vote still exists, it
shall be the duty of the Mayor at that time to cast the deciding vote.
C. If such a tie vote shall occur at any meeting when the Mayor is not in
attendance, the matter shall be tabled to the next business meeting of
Council, at which meeting, if a tie vote still exists, it shall be the duty of
the Mayor to cast the tie-breaking vote.
A. Be recognized as the official head of the Municipality for all ceremonial
purposes.
§ C-32 § C-34
C:16
B. Preserve the public peace, safety, health and welfare in times of
emergency and for purposes of martial law.
C. Execute or authenticate such instruments as required by this Charter,
Council, or other law.
D. Be a voting member of all Council committees.
E. Study the operations of the municipal government and report to Council
on the state of the Municipality with recommendations for measures
deemed to improve municipal affairs.
F. Have the authority from time to time to appoint and dissolve voluntary
committees of interested citizens to assist and advise the Mayor on
issues and matters pertaining to the Mayor's office.
G. Prepare and deliver an annual "State of the Municipality" report to the
citizens of Monroeville.
H. Exercise such additional powers and perform such additional duties as
shall be mutually agreed upon by the Mayor and the Council, and which
are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter.
§ C-34 CHARTER § C-34
C:17

ARTICLE VII
Municipal Manager
§ C-35. Appointment, qualifications and compensation. [Amended
1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 201311]
The Council shall appoint, by ordinance pursuant to § C-28, a Municipal
Manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the compensation. The Manager
shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative
qualifications and shall have had at least three years' experience in
governmental administration. The Manager need not be a resident of the
Municipality at the time of appointment, but must become a resident of the
Municipality within one year of appointment.
§ C-36. Powers and duties of the Municipal Manager.
A. The Municipal Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Municipality and shall be responsible to the Council for the
administration of all municipal affairs placed in the Manager's charge.
The Manager's powers and duties shall include, but are not limited to,
the following:
B. The Manager shall:
(1) Appoint, suspend or remove all municipal employees, except as
otherwise provided by law or this Charter and report any such
action at the next business meeting of Council.
(2) Appoint all administrative unit heads with the consent of Council.
(3) Collect and receive, account for, and deposit into the municipal
treasury, all taxes not collected by the Tax Collector; fees,
assessments or charges that are levied or established by the
Municipality for general or special purposes, except as otherwise
provided by this Charter, ordinance, or general law. Such deposits
shall be made not later than the first business day following the day
in which they are received.
(4) Cause appropriate records to be made, preserved and certified, as
required by law or other action of Council. The Manager shall
attest to the execution of all instruments and record all ordinances
and shall have custody of the municipal corporate seal.
(5) Direct and supervise all administrative units, offices and agencies,
except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law.
(6) Attend all Council meetings and shall have the right to take part in
discussions, but shall not vote.
11.Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by the electorate of the Municipality of
Monroeville 5-20-1997.
§ C-35 CHARTER § C-36
C:19
§ C-37. Procedural limitations on Council.
Neither the Mayor nor Council nor any of its committees or members shall
direct or request the appointment to or removal from office or employment
by the Manager of any subordinate. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the
Council and its members and the Mayor shall deal with the administrative
service solely through the Manager, and neither the Mayor nor the Council
(7) Prepare and submit an annual budget and capital expenditure
program to Council.
(8) Submit to the Council and Mayor and make available to the public a
complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the
Municipality as of the end of each fiscal year.
(9) Make such other reports as the Council or Mayor may require
concerning the operations of municipal departments, offices and
agencies subject to the Manager's direction and supervision.
(10) Have the duty to sign such papers, contracts, obligations and
documents that are properly presented as may be required by law.
(11)Keep Council and the Mayor fully advised of the financial condition
and future needs of the Municipality and make such
recommendations to the Council and the Mayor concerning the
affairs of the Municipality as he deems desirable.
(12) Administer and enforce all laws and ordinances of the Municipality
and be responsible for the proper administration of all affairs of the
Municipality.
(13) Insure that no payment is made or obligations incurred against any
appropriation except in accordance with the designated budget
appropriations.
(14) Insure that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in the
appropriate budget appropriation to meet any obligation when it
becomes due or payable.
(15) Insure that when any municipal obligation, debt or expense
becomes due and payable that sufficient funds will be available in
the treasury to pay same.
(16) Insure that all payments and obligations incurred by the
Municipality are in accordance with law, municipal contract and
the provisions of this Charter.
(17) Require each department, office, board, commission or other
municipal agency to certify from time to time that materials,
supplies or equipment have been duly received and accepted as
specified and that services contracted for have been duly rendered.
The Manager shall report on this subject twice yearly, or more
frequently as Council shall direct.
§ C-36 § C-37
C:20
nor any of its committees or members thereof shall give orders to any
subordinate of the Manager either publicly or privately.
§ C-38. Removal. [Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 201412]
The Council may, by Ordinance pursuant to § C-28, remove the Manager
at any time, with or without cause. Any such removal shall not take effect
until after the expiration of 30 days from the date of the removal action.
During such 30 day period, the Council may suspend the Manager from
the position of Manager. The Manager may, within 15 days of the date of
removal, request a public hearing before the Council. Such hearing shall be
held before the expiration of the 30 day period.
§ C-39. Acting Municipal Manager.
The Manager may designate, in writing, an employee of the Municipality to
exercise the duties of Manager during the Manager's temporary absence or
disability. During such absence or disability, the Council may revoke such
designation at any time and appoint another employee of the Municipality to
serve until the Manager shall return or the Manager's disability shall cease.
§ C-40. Vacancy.
Upon a vacancy in the office of Manager, Council shall appoint an Acting
Manager to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the office.
12.Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by the electorate of the Municipality of
Monroeville 5-20-1997.
§ C-37 CHARTER § C-40
C:21

ARTICLE VIII
Municipal Attorney
§ C-41. Appointment; promotion; dismissal.
The Municipal Attorney shall:
§ C-42. Powers and duties.
The Municipal Attorney shall:
§ C-43. Access to records.
The Municipal Attorney shall have the right of access to the records of any
officer, department, board or commission of the Municipality as necessary
in the performance of the duties of the Municipal Attorney.
§ C-44. Special counsel.
The Municipality shall provide when necessary, legal counsel for those
Boards and Commissions not permitted by law to use the Municipal
Attorney. Such special counsel shall be appointed by the Manager with the
advise and consent of Council.
A. Be appointed, promoted or dismissed by the Manager with the advise
and consent of Council.
B. Be considered an employee of the Municipality.
C. Be appointed solely on the basis of qualifications.
D. Be admitted to practice before all Appellate Commonwealth Courts and
the Federal District Court.
E. Have at least five years experience in active legal practice in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Have the status of an Administrative Unit Head.
B. Serve as Chief Legal Officer of the Municipality.
C. Represent the Municipality in all legal matters.
D. Furnish legal advice to Council, the Mayor and the Manager on matters
of municipal business.
E. Represent all Boards and Commissions except those requiring special
legal counsel.
§ C-41 CHARTER § C-44
C:23

ARTICLE IX
Administrative Units
§ C-45. General.
The work of the Municipality performed by paid employees shall be
assigned to and under the jurisdiction of an Administrative Unit. All
functions and services provided by the Municipality shall be administered
by the Municipal Manager. Whenever necessary, Council shall establish
specific Administrative Units by ordinance to perform these functions,
which shall include among others:
§ C-46. Delegation of functions.
Any function or service provided by the Municipality may by ordinance
be delegated to another governmental or nongovernmental unit or may be
performed in cooperation with other municipalities, political subdivisions or
any governmental unit under duly executed agreements.
A. Planning, land development, subdivision and zoning within the
Municipality, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, 1968,13 and for suitable codes for building,
housing and fire prevention, with enforcement by qualified personnel.
B. The laying out, construction, reconstruction and maintenance of
municipal streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, buildings, parks,
sidewalks and such other municipal facilities as are deemed necessary
for the public welfare.
C. The collection and disposal of solid waste where required by ordinance.
D. Recreational, library and other cultural services to the residents of the
Municipality.
E. The collection and analysis of data on the social problems and needs of
the Municipality and identification of programs, funding and resources
appropriate for assisting in the solution of these problems and provision
for social service referral information to the citizens.
F. Police and fire protection, and other emergency services. The
Municipality may utilize the services of Volunteer Fire Departments.14
G. Traffic planning and control.
13.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 50, Fire Departments, Volunteer.
§ C-45 CHARTER § C-46
C:25

ARTICLE X
Police
§ C-47. Appointment, promotion and reduction of force.
§ C-48. Administrative head: appointment, qualifications and
tenure.
A. Every position or employment in the Police force except that of Chief of
Police, or equivalent, shall be filled by the Manager from a list of
eligibles in accordance with the provisions and procedures of Section
1184 of The Borough Code, as now or hereafter amended, reenacted or
supplied.15
B. The list of eligibles shall be compiled after open and competitive
examinations prepared and administered in accordance with the
provisions and procedures of Sections 1181 and 1182 of The Borough
Code, as now or hereafter amended, reenacted or supplied.16
C. The number of paid employees in the Police force shall be reduced for
reasons of economy or other reasons in accordance with the provisions
of Section 1190 of The Borough Code, as now or hereafter amended,
reenacted or supplied.17
D. Wherever the aforesaid sections of The Borough Code18 confer powers
or impose duties upon the Civil Service Commission or Council, such
powers shall be exercised by and such duties performed by the
Manager.
E. Probationary periods, provisional appointments and promotions shall
be made and acted upon by the Manager in accordance with the
provisions of Sections 1186, 1187 and 1188 of The Borough Code as
now or hereafter amended, reenacted or supplied.19
A. The administrative head of the Police force shall be appointed by the
Manager with the advice and consent of Council.
B. The person appointed shall have had administrative experience and a
background of employment in the field of law enforcement and public
safety.
C. The administrative head of the Police force shall not be a member of the
Career Service, but upon resignation or dismissal without cause, shall
resume municipal employment with the highest rank, if any, held at the
time of appointment.
15.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46184.
16.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 46181 and 46182.
17.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46190.
18.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
19.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 46186, 46187 and 46188, respectively.
§ C-47 CHARTER § C-49
C:27
§ C-49. Authority.
§ C-50. Special school police.
The Municipal Manager, with the advice and consent of Council, may
appoint special school police who shall have the duty of controlling and
directing traffic and providing for the public safety at or near schools and
churches, and who shall be in uniform and when on duty shall be vested
with all of the powers of municipal police officers. Such police shall serve
at the pleasure of the Council and shall not come within the Career Service
and Personnel provisions of the Charter, nor shall they be eligible to join any
police pension fund maintained for municipal police.
§ C-51. Special police.
The Mayor may appoint special police with full police powers and
jurisdiction for the duration of an emergency in which the safety and
welfare of the Municipality and the public is endangered.
§ C-52. Auxiliary police.
Auxiliary police may be appointed by the Mayor as provided by general
law.20
§ C-53. Suspension, removal, reduction in rank or demotion.
Police officers in the Career Service shall be suspended, removed, reduced
in rank or demoted only in accordance with the provisions of Articles XV
and XVI of this Charter.
§ C-54. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the Municipality shall begin on the first day of January and
end on the last day of December of each year, unless changed by Council or
by law.
A. Police employed by the Municipality shall be ex officio constables of the
Commonwealth and shall have all the powers and prerogatives
conferred on Police officers by Acts of Assembly, including those
applicable to cities, boroughs and townships of the Commonwealth.
B. Police, when acting as constables, shall have the authority to serve and
execute all criminal process for the violation of municipal ordinances
which may be issued, and the fees and costs collected in such capacity
shall be paid into the Municipal Treasury.
20.Editor's Note: See the Charter References to General Law included at the end of this
Charter.
§ C-49 § C-55
C:28
§ C-55. Submission of budget and budget messages.
At least 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the Manager shall
submit to the Council a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an
accompanying message.
§ C-56. Budget message.
The Manager's message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and
in terms of programs. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the
Municipality for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the important features of
the budget, indicate any major changes from the current year in financial
policies, expenditures and revenues, together with the reasons for such
changes, summarize the Municipality's debt position, and include such
other material as the Manager deems desirable.
§ C-57. Budget.
The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all municipal funds
and activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by this
Charter, shall be in such form as the Manager deems desirable or the
Council may require. In organizing the budget, the Manager shall utilize
the most feasible combination of expenditure classification by fund,
organization unit, program, purpose or activity, and object. The budget shall
contain, among other things, the following:
A. A general summary of its contents.
B. In detail, all estimated income, indicating the existing and proposed tax
levies, as well as other assessments, fees and charges.
C. All proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal
year.
D. The number of proposed employees in every job classification.
E. Comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures
for the current fiscal year and actual income and expenditures of the
preceding fiscal year.
F. Proposed expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed by
offices, departments and agencies, in terms of their respective work
programs and the methods of financing such expenditures.
G. Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed
by offices, departments and agencies when practicable, and the
proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure. The total
of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated
income.
§ C-55 CHARTER § C-58
C:29
§ C-58. Public record.
The annual budget message, proposed budget and adopted budget shall be
a public record and shall be available for public inspection after submission
and prior to adoption, and after adoption, during regular business hours.
§ C-59. Publication.
§ C-60. Amendment of budget.
The Council may amend the budget by ordinance during the fiscal year for
which the budget was adopted; provided, however, that such amendment
shall not result in expenditures exceeding the estimated income determined
as of the time of the amendment.
§ C-61. Adoption of budget.
The Council shall adopt the budget as presented or amended, by ordinance
on or before the 31st day of the 12th month of the fiscal year currently
ending. If it fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated
for current operation of the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted
for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items in it
prorated accordingly, until such time as the Council adopts a budget for the
ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriations
of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated
and shall constitute a levy of the property tax therein proposed.
§ C-62. Payment of funds.
No payment of any funds of the Municipality shall be made unless provided
for in the budget and specifically approved by the Council; provided,
however, that payroll and utility expenditures may be made at the direction
of the Manager where based upon a prior ordinance or contract. All checks
A. The Council shall publish within a period of eight days of receipt from
the Municipal Manager, in one or more newspapers of general
circulation in the Municipality, a general summary of the budget and a
notice that the proposed budget is available for public view, also
stating:
(1) The times and places where copies of the budget and the message
are available to the public, and
(2) The times and places of the required public hearings on the budget
and such other public hearings as the Council may decide to hold.
B. Public hearings: The Council shall hold a minimum of two public
hearings on the budget at which time residents of the Municipality may
express their views on the proposed budget. The first such hearing shall
be not less than 14 days nor more than 21 days after the date of
publication. The second public hearing shall be not less than seven days
nor more than 14 days after the first hearing.
§ C-58 § C-62
C:30
or drafts of the Municipality shall be signed by the Manager and shall
be countersigned by the Mayor. Disbursements of payroll checks or drafts
containing imprinted signatures of the proper municipal officials or bank
officials shall be permitted in connection with use of data processing
equipment when contracted for with banking institutions; and machine
imprinted signatures of the proper municipal officials may be used for
disbursement of municipal checks or drafts provided such imprinting
machines are designed for operation only by authorized personnel.
§ C-63. Capital program.
It is the intent of this Charter that the Council adopt long range plans and
objectives to provide for the orderly growth of the Municipality. Plans and
objectives shall be prepared for public review in the form of the Annual
Capital Program Report. Such other capital expenditures for equipment
with a useful life of less than two years shall be part of the operating budget.
A. Submission to Council: The Manager shall prepare and submit to the
Council, a five-year capital program at least three months prior to the
final date for submission of the budget.
B. Contents: The capital program shall include:
(1) A clear general summary of its contents.
(2) A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be
undertaken during the five fiscal years next ensuing, with
appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such
improvements.
(3) Projects which will result in major additions or changes to the
Municipality, such as recreation and sanitation facilities or
roadways, shall be included in the program.
(4) Such other capital expenditures for equipment with a useful life of
more than two years.
(5) Cost estimates, methods of financing and recommended time
schedules for each such improvement.
(6) The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the
facilities to be constructed or acquired.
(7) The estimated annual amortization costs.
C. Publication and Council action on Capital Program:
(1) Publication. The Council shall publish the proposed Capital
Program immediately upon its receipt from the Manager.
(2) Public hearings. The Council shall hold a minimum of one public
hearing on the proposed capital program, at which time residents
of the Municipality may express their views on the proposed capital
§ C-62 CHARTER § C-63
C:31
§ C-64. Independent audit.
program. The public hearing shall be not less than 21 days nor
more than 30 days after the date of publication.
(3) Method of publication and notice of hearings. The Council shall
publish in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the
Municipality, a general summary of the Capital Program, and a
notice stating:
(a) The times and places where copies of a summary of the Capital
Program are available to the public, and
(b) The times and places where a complete copy of the Capital
Program along with accompanying maps, charts, reports, and
other data are available for inspection by the public, and
(c) The time and place of the required public hearing on the
Capital Program and such other public hearings as the Council
may decide to hold.
(4) Adoption. The Council, by resolution, shall adopt the Capital
Program with or without amendment, after the public hearing and
on or before the last day of the ninth month of the current fiscal
year.
(5) The above information may be revised and extended each year with
regard to capital improvements still pending or in the process of
construction or acquisition. Council shall annually issue a public
report on the status of the Capital Program, to be given prior to the
adoption of the annual budget.
A. Appointment and term.
(1) The Mayor with the advice and consent of Council, shall appoint an
independent auditor who shall be a certified public accountant or
firm of certified public accountants, who shall have no personal
interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the Municipality or
any of its officers.
(2) The auditor shall be appointed for a term not to exceed three years,
provided that the designation for any particular fiscal year shall be
made no later than 30 days after the beginning of the fiscal year.
B. Powers and duties of the auditors.
(1) The auditors shall audit, settle, and adjust the accounts of all
Municipal officers and other officers and persons receiving and
disbursing or authorizing the disbursement of the moneys of the
Municipality during the preceding fiscal year.
(2) The auditors shall complete their audit settlement and adjustment
and file copies thereof with the Municipal Manager and the
§ C-63 § C-64
C:32
§ C-65. Fidelity bonds.
Department of Community Affairs and the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation not later than 90 days after the end
of the fiscal year. Said report shall also show a complete statement
of the financial conditions of the Municipality, with the character
and value thereof and the date of maturity of the respective forms
of funded debt thereof.
(3) The amount of any balance or shortage, or of any expenditure of a
kind or made in a manner prohibited or unauthorized by law, which
causes financial loss to the Municipality, shall be a surcharge
against any officer against whom such balance or shortage shall
appear, or who by vote, act, or neglect has permitted or approved
such expenditure.
(4) The auditors shall cancel all orders and vouchers presented to
them which they find have been paid by writing or stamping the
word "audited" on the face thereof.
(5) The auditors shall within 10 days after completion of their audit,
publish by advertisement in at least one newspaper of general
circulation in the Municipality, a concise financial statement of
municipal fiscal matters such as to comply with the provisions of all
Acts of the General Assembly relative thereto.
(6) It shall be lawful for the Municipality or any taxpayer thereof, on its
behalf, or any officer whose account is settled or audited, to appeal
from the settlement or audit, as shown on the auditor's report, to
the Court of Common Pleas of the county, not later than 60 days
from date of publication referred to in the preceding paragraph.
(7) Whenever an appeal has been taken as aforesaid, any taxpayer of
the Municipality may intervene in such appeal to prosecute the
same on behalf of the Municipality or defend it against the appeal
of the person charged with any sum.
(8) Any balance, in any report of the auditors, against any officer of the
Municipality, shall constitute a surcharge and, unless appeal is
taken as heretofore provided, the auditors shall cause same to be
entered in the office of the Prothonotary as a judgment against
such officer in favor of the Municipality.
(9) Judgments entered by the auditors or the court, after hearing an
appeal, may be enforced by appropriate proceedings, by the party
prevailing.
A. Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices or positions,
the Municipal Manager and the Tax Collector, as well as any other
officer, agent or employee of the Municipality as Council may
determine, shall execute and file with the Municipality corporate surety
bonds in such sums as shall be fixed by the Council. Each bond shall be
§ C-64 CHARTER § C-65
C:33
joint and several, with one or more corporate sureties which shall be
surety companies authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and duly licensed by the Insurance Commissioner of said
Commonwealth.
B. Each bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the
officer, the clerks, assistants and appointees of all trusts confided in
them by virtue of their office, upon the faithful execution of all duties
required of them by virtue of their office, upon the just and faithful
accounting or payment over, according to law, of all moneys and all
balances thereof paid to, received or held by virtue of the office and
upon the delivery to the successor or successors in office of all books,
papers, documents or other official things held in right of the office. All
such bonds and sureties thereon, before being accepted by the
Municipality, shall be approved by the Municipal Attorney. The placing
of such bonds shall be determined by Council and the premium therefor
shall be paid by the Municipality. Such bonds may provide for one or
more additional obligees in the event that the officer bonded is acting in
a dual or similar capacity with other political subdivisions or
governmental or quasi-governmental entities.
§ C-65 § C-65
C:34
ARTICLE XI
Tax Collector
§ C-66. Election and term.
At the municipal election in the year 1977 and at the municipal election
every four years thereafter, the registered electors of the Municipality shall
elect an eligible person as Tax Collector.
§ C-67. Powers and duties of the Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector shall be the collector of all County, Municipal, School,
Institution District and other taxes levied within the Municipality by the
authorities empowered to levy taxes, but shall not collect any tax levied
and imposed under the Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257,21 unless the
ordinance imposing such tax shall provide that the Tax Collector be the
collector of said tax. The Tax Collector shall, in addition to the powers,
authority, duties, and responsibilities provided for by this Charter, have all
the powers, perform all the duties and be subject to all the obligations
and responsibilities for the collection of such taxes, as are now vested in,
conferred upon, or imposed upon Tax Collectors by law.22
§ C-68. Elimination of office of Elected Tax Collector.
§ C-69. Salary.
The Tax Collector shall receive such compensation as received by the Tax
Collector of the Borough of Monroeville on the day before the effective date
of this Charter, or such other sum as set by Council by ordinance from
time to time. Such compensation shall not be increased or decreased during
the term for which any Tax Collector was elected or appointed. No such
A. Council may, by ordinance, eliminate for any term or terms the office of
elected Tax Collector, provided that such ordinance require that taxes
thereafter be collected by:
(1) A municipal department or bureau.
(2) Another governmental unit.
(3) Under agreement with one or more other municipalities, political
subdivisions, school districts or governmental units.
B. The ordinance eliminating the office of elected Tax Collector shall be
adopted at least seven days prior to the first day for circulating
petitions for nomination at primary elections involving the office of Tax
Collector, and shall not be made effective prior to the expiration of the
term of any incumbent Tax Collector.
21.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
22.Editor's Note: See the Charter References to General Law included at the end of this
Charter.
§ C-66 CHARTER § C-69
C:35
increase or decrease shall be accomplished by ordinance adopted less than
seven days prior to the first day for circulating petitions for nomination
at primary elections involving the office of Tax Collector. Provided that
should Council ordain collection of taxes under the Act of December 31,
1965 (P.L. 1257),23 after the seventh day prior to circulating petitions for
nomination for Tax Collector, Council shall in said ordinance fix reasonable
compensation for the Tax Collector relative to the additional duties
imposed.
23.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ C-69 § C-69
C:36
ARTICLE XII
Treasurer
§ C-70. Appointment and term.
The Manger with the advice and consent of Council shall appoint a
Municipal Treasurer for a term not to exceed two years. The Treasurer shall
be an official of the Municipal Depository.
§ C-71. Treasurer's powers and duties.
The Treasurer shall:
§ C-72. Receipt and payment of funds.
All moneys received by any municipal officer or other person for the use
of the Municipality shall be forthwith paid to the Municipal Treasurer.
All expenditures shall be paid out of funds in the Treasury only when
authorized by the Treasurer, upon order signed by the proper municipal
officers. Such order shall not be executed unless there is money in the
Treasury available therefore.
A. Keep a just account of all receipts and disbursements and submit such
account to the Municipal Auditor.
B. Pay over all moneys remaining in the Treasury and deliver all books,
papers, accounts and other things belonging to the Municipality to any
successor.
C. Deposit all moneys received in a bank or banking institution in the
name of the Municipality.
§ C-70 CHARTER § C-72
C:37

ARTICLE XIII
Contracts
§ C-73. Competitive bids.
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, no contract for supplies,
material, labor, franchise, or other valuable consideration, to be furnished
to or by the Municipality, shall be authorized on behalf of the Municipality
except with the lowest responsible bidder after competitive bidding.
§ C-74. Bidding procedure.
§ C-75. Exceptions to competitive bidding.
A. The Municipality shall, by ordinance, establish a system of competitive
bidding, including such definitions, publication requirements, deposit
and bond requirements, conditions, terms, rules, regulations, waivers,
and exceptions, as it shall from time to time deem advisable.
B. All contracts or purchases in excess of $2,500 except those hereinafter
mentioned, shall be made only with the lowest responsible bidder after
due publication. In awarding bids, Council may take into consideration
such other factors as the availability, cost and quality of service. The
limit of $2,500 may be increased by Council to the extent of the
maximum permitted to any non-charter municipality in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as that limit is from time to time
established by the General Assembly.24
A. Labor or services rendered by any municipal officer or employee in
payment for services.
B. Contracts for labor, material, supplies or services available from only
one vendor.
C. Contracts for labor, material, supplies or services aggregating less than
$2,500 for the item in the fiscal year supplied.
D. Contracts relating to the acquisition or use of real property.
E. Contracts for insurance and professional or unique services. However,
no such contracts shall be let except after publication of notice and
requesting proposals for same.
F. Contracts for emergency repair of public works of the Municipality.
G. Contracts with other governmental entities, authorities, agencies, or
political subdivisions.
24.Editor's Note: See the Charter References to General Law included at the end of this
Charter.
§ C-73 CHARTER § C-76
C:39
§ C-76. Purchase orders. [Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 201525]
All purchase orders of the Municipality, exceeding a sum to be established
by Council by ordinance,26 shall be executed by the Manager. All other
purchase orders shall be entered into in accordance with procedures
established by the Manager.
§ C-77. Real property appraisals.
Real property shall not be purchased until appraisals from two certified real
estate appraisers have been received.
§ C-78. Maximum term of certain contracts.
The term of contracts for the purchase of supplies shall not exceed two
years.
§ C-79. Unenforceable contracts.
A. No liability shall be enforceable against the Municipality by any action
at law, in equity, or otherwise, upon any unauthorized or illegal
contract.
B. Provided, however, that Council may by ordinance authorize payment
for materials furnished or services rendered in reliance on contracts
made by Municipal officers or agents without authority or in excess of
authority when the contract is one which the Municipality could have
authorized.
25.Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by the electorate of the Municipality of
Monroeville 5-20-1997.
26.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2040, adopted 6-10-1997, set the maximum amount for purchase
orders at $1,500.
§ C-76 § C-79
C:40
ARTICLE XIV
Personnel
§ C-80. General.
It is the intent of this Charter that the personnel system of the Municipality
be built upon the best experience in the field of personnel management.
The personnel system should recognize that employees are worthy and
responsible enough to have their concerns fully heard and taken into
account and should be such as to encourage employees to identify positively
with the purposes of the organization and be motivated to give their best
efforts in support of those purposes. The policies governing this system will
seek to accommodate the views, interests and rights of the community as
well as the municipal officers and employees.
§ C-81. Principles and objectives governing the personnel system;
duty of the Manager.
The Manager shall develop policies, procedures and regulations for the
personnel system of the Municipality, which shall include but not be limited
to the following principles and objectives:
A. Providing equal opportunity for employment and for advancement of
employees without regard to political affiliation, race, color, national
origin, sex or religious creed and complying fully with all applicable
state and federal regulations in this area.
B. Recruiting and selecting employees on the basis of their respective
abilities, knowledge and skills, through open and competitive means.
C. Promoting employees on the basis of demonstrated performance and
potential for greater responsibility.
D. Providing fair and competitive compensation and benefits for all
employees, which shall be set forth in the form of a pay and benefit plan
covering all positions in the Career Service.
E. Training and developing employees to assure continuing high quality
performance.
F. Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance,
correcting inadequate performance, and separating employees whose
inadequate performance cannot be corrected.
G. Providing opportunity for employee growth and advancement through
competent and capable leadership.
H. Assuring that employees are protected against coercion for partisan
political purposes and, in return, that employees are restricted in their
political activity as set forth in this article.
I. A classification and position description system.
§ C-80 CHARTER § C-81
C:41
§ C-82. Implementation of personnel policies, rules and
regulations.
Personnel policies, rules and regulations, and any amendments thereto,
along with the establishment of other practices and procedures necessary
to the administration of the municipal personnel system, when developed
by the Manager, shall be submitted to Council which shall adopt them with,
or without, amendment. Prior to such adoption, the Council shall provide
Municipal employees with the opportunity to review and comment upon
such proposed policies, rules or regulations. The Council may delegate to
the Manager the responsibility for establishing procedures for such review
and comment.
§ C-83. Compatibility with legislative enactments.
No personnel procedures or policies established under the provisions of this
Charter shall be in conflict with Acts of the General Assembly providing for
collective bargaining and arbitration.
§ C-84. Political activity restrictions.
§ C-85. Nonmunicipality employment.
J. Rules and regulations governing reduction in manpower, discipline,
discharges, resignations, leaves of absence, and off-hour employment of
municipal employees by other agencies.
K. Rules and regulations governing the resolution of claims of unfair or
unjust treatment other than those resulting from suspension, dismissal,
demotion, or reduction in rank.
A. No municipal employee shall be an officer of a political party, or be an
elected committee person, or hold political office during employment.
B. No employee or official shall solicit any assessments, contributions, or
services, for any political party or candidate from any municipal
employee.
C. Nothing herein contained shall affect the right of the employee to hold
membership in and support a political party, to vote, to express publicly
or privately opinions on all political subjects and candidates, to
maintain political neutrality and to actively participate in political
meetings. Any such activity shall be conducted as private citizens and
during nonworking hours.
A. All Career Service employees and all heads of administrative units shall
disclose in writing to the Manager any non-Municipality employment.
B. Non-Municipality employment of the Manager or of heads of
administrative units shall require approval of Council given at a public
meeting.
§ C-81 § C-85
C:42
§ C-86. Causes for suspension, removal, demotion or reduction in
rank.
§ C-87. The career service.
The Career Service shall be a permanent service to which the provisions
of this article shall apply and shall comprise all positions in the municipal
service now existing or hereafter established, except the following:
C. Falsification of, or failure to submit, the disclosure report shall be
grounds for disciplinary action.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, no person in the
municipal Career Service shall be suspended, removed, demoted or
reduced in rank, except for the following reasons:
(1) Physical or mental disability affecting the ability of an employee to
continue in the performance of the duties of the position.
(2) Neglect or violation of any official duty or assignment.
(3) Conviction of a misdemeanor or felony.
(4) Inefficiency, neglect, intemperance, immorality, insubordination,
willful disobedience of orders, or conduct unbecoming an
employee.
(5) Intoxication while on duty.
(6) Engaging in political activity prohibited under this article.
B. Any employee in the Career Service who is suspended, removed,
demoted or reduced in rank for any of the above causes shall have the
right to appeal to the Personnel Board, except those having grievance
procedures in collective bargaining contracts, which deal with
suspension, removal, demotion or reduction in rank.
C. If, for reasons of economy, or other reasons, it shall be deemed
necessary by the municipal government to reduce the number or rank
of paid employees, such reductions shall not be subject to the
provisions of this section, but shall be accomplished in accordance with
rules and regulations promulgated by the Manager and approved by
Council.
A. Members of Council and other elected positions.
B. Members of Boards, Commissions, Authorities and heads of
administrative units.
C. Persons employed to make or conduct a temporary and special inquiry,
investigation or examination on behalf of Council or the Manager.
D. Persons employed as professional consultants or who are employed on a
retainer basis.
§ C-85 CHARTER § C-87
C:43
E. Persons whose positions are defined by Act of the General Assembly to
be of a confidential nature.
F. Part-time or occasional employees.
§ C-87 § C-87
C:44
ARTICLE XV
The Personnel Board
§ C-88. Jurisdiction.
The Personnel Board shall have jurisdiction in all cases involving Career
Service employees who have been suspended, removed, reduced in rank,
or demoted except Career Service employees represented by bargaining
units which have executed contracts with the Municipality which provide
for grievance procedures dealing with suspension, removal, reduction in
rank or demotion. Where such grievance procedures exist, it is the intent of
this Charter to exclude appeal to the Personnel Board.
§ C-89. Composition.
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of Council, shall, within 90 days
of the first organizational meeting of Council, appoint from the registered
electors of the Municipality a Personnel Board composed of five members.
§ C-90. Terms: limitation on terms.
§ C-91. Offices incompatible with membership on the Personnel
Board.
A. In making appointments to the first Board under the provisions of this
Charter, the Mayor shall designate two members to serve for a term of
three years, two for a term of two years, and one for a term of one year.
Thereafter, all appointments shall be made for terms of three years.
B. No individual shall be eligible to serve on the Personnel Board for more
than two full three year terms. After the expiration of two years, such
individual shall be eligible for another appointment to the Board.
C. Any vacancy occurring on the Personnel Board for any reason
whatsoever, shall be filled by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
Council for the unexpired term, within the period of 30 days after such
vacancy occurs. Members of the Personnel Board may be removed from
office by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council.
A. No member of the Personnel Board shall, at the same time, be a
municipal employee or hold an elective or appointive office under the
United States Government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any
political subdivision of the Commonwealth. No member of the Board
shall be a member of any local, state, or national committee of a
political party. Nor shall any member of the Personnel Board be an
officer or employee of any bargaining agency representing employees
of the Municipality.
B. The first sentence of this section shall not be construed to apply to
members of the teaching profession or to employees of any school
district.
§ C-88 CHARTER § C-92
C:45
§ C-92. Organization of the Board: quorum.
The Personnel Board first appointed shall organize within 10 days of its
appointment and shall elect one of its members as Chairman and one as
Secretary. The Board shall thereafter meet and organize on the first Monday
of January of each even-numbered year. The Secretary of the Board shall
give each member 24 hours notice of every meeting of the Board. three
members of the Board shall constitute a quorum and no action of the Board
shall be valid unless it shall have the concurrence of at least a majority of
the members present.
§ C-93. Clerical assistance, legal counsel, supplies.
The Municipality shall furnish to the Board, on its requisition, such clerical
assistance and supplies as may be necessary for the work of the Board. The
Municipality shall provide a suitable and convenient room for the use of the
Board. The Manager and Council shall provide special legal counsel upon
request of the Board in complex cases.
§ C-94. Minutes and records.
The Board shall keep minutes of the proceedings and records of other
official actions. Such records shall be kept and preserved in accordance
with general law. A stenographic record of all testimony taken at Board
hearings shall be filed with, and preserved by, the Board, which record shall
be sealed and not be available for public inspection in the event the charges
are dismissed.
§ C-95. Powers and duties of the Board.
It shall be the function and duty of the Personnel Board to grant a hearing
to an employee who has been suspended, removed, reduced in rank, or
demoted upon the request of such employee. The Board shall hear and
render a decision on every appeal properly brought before it. All parties
shall have the right of further appeal as provided in the "Local Agency
Law" Act of 1968, December 2, P.L. 1133, as now or hereafter amended,
supplemented, reenacted or supplied.27
§ C-96. Rules and procedures governing appeals to the Personnel
Board.
A. The first Personnel Board established under this Charter shall, within
90 days of its organization, set forth in writing the rules and procedures
which shall govern appeals as permitted herein. Such rules and
procedures shall provide for, but not be limited to, a due process
hearing, and shall otherwise comply with the provision of the "Local
Agency Law."28
27.Editor's Note: See 2 App., 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 105, 551 et seq. and 751 et seq.
28.Editor's Note: See 2 App., 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 105, 551 et seq. and 751 et seq.
§ C-92 § C-96
C:46
§ C-97. Decision.
B. The rules of the Board shall further provide that no order of suspension
made by the Board shall be for a period longer than one year, and that
the Board may sustain the charges or reduce the length of suspension
or dismiss the charges.
C. All hearings of appeal involving Career Service employees shall be
closed to the public unless otherwise requested by the employee taking
the appeal.
D. The rules and procedures established by the Board, and any revisions
or amendments thereto, shall, before adoption by the Board, be
approved by Council, after review by Council and the Manager.
E. The personnel procedures or policies established under the provisions
of this Charter shall not be in conflict with Acts of the General
Assembly29 providing for collective bargaining and arbitration.
A. The Board shall render its decision within 30 days of the receipt of the
transcript.
B. In the event the appellant is cleared of all charges, then the appellant
shall be reinstated to the position with full pay for the period during
which the appellant was suspended, removed, reduced in rank or
demoted.
C. Upon such acquittal and after the expiration of all time for appeal, all
references to the charge, hearing and decision shall be maintained as
confidential records of the Municipality.
29.Editor's Note: See the Charter References to General Law included at the end of this
Charter.
§ C-96 CHARTER § C-97
C:47

ARTICLE XVI
Investigative, Hearing and Subpoena Powers of Council, the Mayor,
Auditor and Personnel Board
§ C-98. Hearings.
Members of Council, the Mayor, the Auditors and the Personnel Board shall
have the power to authorize and conduct investigative hearings in aid of the
exercise of their powers and performance of their duties.
§ C-99. Rules.
The officers aforesaid, independently, may from time to time adopt rules
governing the hearing procedures.
§ C-100. Attendance.
The officers aforesaid may compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of books, papers or other evidence, at investigative hearings,
and for that purpose may issue subpoenas signed by any of the officers
aforesaid, and cause the same to be served in any part of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in accordance with general law applying to
the service of subpoenas.
§ C-101. Oaths.
The officer presiding at any hearing held pursuant to this article shall have
the power to administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses.
§ C-102. Penalty.
If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena issued by the
officer, that person shall, upon conviction thereof at a summary proceeding,
be sentenced to pay a fine as may be ordained, and in default of the payment
of such fines and costs shall be imprisoned not to exceed 30 days.
§ C-103. Subpoenas, court proceedings.
If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena issued by the
officer, the officer may apply by petition to the Court of Common Pleas for
its subpoena, requiring the attendance of such persons before the officer or
the court.
§ C-98 CHARTER § C-103
C:49

ARTICLE XVII
Boards, Commissions and Authorities
§ C-104. Authorization and appointment of members.
In addition to the Boards and Commissions established by this Charter,
the Council may from time to time establish, by ordinance, various other
Boards, Commissions and Authorities to act in advisory capacity or to
perform special functions. The members thereof shall be appointed by the
Council unless otherwise specified in this Charter. Individual members of
Council and the Mayor may make nominations for appointments to Boards,
Commissions and Authorities.
§ C-105. Qualifications of members and term restrictions.
§ C-106. Terms.
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, or general law,30 the term
of office for members of all boards, commissions and authorities shall not
exceed four years.
§ C-107. Vacancy.
A. All persons appointed to any board, commission or authority shall be
residents of the Municipality and remain such during their term of
office.
B. Persons appointed to serve on boards, commissions and authorities
after the effective date of this Charter shall not serve more than two
consecutive terms. Filling an unexpired term shall not be considered in
calculating terms for this purpose.
C. No elected official shall serve on any board, commission or authority
except in an ex officio nonvoting capacity, except as otherwise provided
in this Charter.
D. No person shall serve concurrently on more than one municipal board,
commission or authority except in an ex officio capacity or as otherwise
provided in this Charter.
A. A vacancy on any board, commission or authority shall be the subject of
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality at
least 25 days prior to nomination for the filling of the vacancy.
B. Nominations shall be made at a business meeting. At the time of
nomination, each nominating official shall publicly present to Council a
resume of the nominee's qualifications, which shall include a summary
of nominee's civic interests and contributions and special qualifications
for the proposed appointment. Nominations shall be acted on at the
30.Editor's Note: See the Charter References to General Law included at the end of this
Charter.
§ C-104 CHARTER § C-107
C:51
§ C-108. Citizen participation.
Any resident of the Municipality may submit their name or the name of
one or more other residents of the Municipality to the Manager for
consideration by the Mayor and Council as a nominee to any one or more of
the Boards, Commissions or Authorities of the Municipality.
§ C-109. Planning Commission.31
next business meeting but not sooner than 25 days after the date of
nomination.
A. The Planning Commission shall consist of seven residents of the
Municipality. The term of each of the members of the Commission shall
be for four years, or until his successor is appointed and qualified,
except that the terms of the members shall be so fixed that no more
than two shall be reappointed or replaced during any future calendar
year.32 Members of the Commission shall hold no other elective office of
the Municipality. The Commission may make and alter rules and
regulations for its own organization and procedure, consistent with the
ordinances of the Municipality and general law.33 [Amended
7-13-1993 by Ord. No. 184234]
B. The Manager shall appoint an administrative head from the
administrative unit responsible for planning as an ex officio member of
the Commission.
C. The Commission shall:
(1) Advise the Municipal Council in matters relating to planning,
zoning and development of the Municipality as required by
ordinance.
(2) Cooperate with the administrative appointee of the Manager.
(3) Hold public hearings to receive proposals, and prior to acting on
proposals as required by ordinance or general law.
(4) Require proposals for land subdivisions or other uses of land
having or likely to have environmental impact, to contain an
environmental impact statement related to the proposed
development, including but not limited to the effect of the proposed
use on public facilities, drainage systems, traffic flow, public safety,
schools, and recreation.
31.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 101, Planning Department and Planning Commission.
32.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1872, adopted 12-14-1993, provided that it was "the desire of the
Council of the Municipality that no more than one person from each ward sit as a member
of the Planning Commission," as well as providing for the increase in members to seven.
33.Editor's Note: See the Charter References to General Law included at the end of this
Charter.
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by the electors of the Municipality of
Monroeville 11-3-1993.
§ C-107 § C-109
C:52
§ C-110. Zoning Hearing Board. [Amended 8-9-1994 by Ord. No.
190235]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of either three or five residents of
the Municipality. The term of office for a three-member Board shall be three
years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire
each year. The terms of office of a five-member Board shall be five years
and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member of a five-member
Board shall expire each year. Members of the Board shall hold no other
elective office of the Municipality. All other provisions of the Municipalities
Planning Code (Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988, Act 209
of 1990 and Act 131 of 1992)36 as now or hereafter amended, reenacted
or supplied, including but not limited to the conduct of hearings and the
making of decisions, shall be applicable to the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ C-111. Library Board.37
§ C-112. Recreation and Parks Advisory Board.
(5) Require that the Comprehensive Plan in effect on the effective date
of this Charter be retained and that the Comprehensive Plan be
reviewed every 10 years or more frequently if recommended by the
Planning Commission.
A. This Board shall be composed of seven members with three-year terms.
The terms shall be so fixed that the term of office of three members
shall expire once every three years and two members shall expire each
of the other two years.
B. The Council shall appoint one of its members to serve on the Board. The
Council member's term shall be terminated should the person
appointed cease to be a Member of Council.
C. The Library Board shall:
(1) Be responsible for the operation of the Municipal Library in
accordance with the ordinances of the Municipality and general
law.38
(2) Report quarterly to Council as a whole at a public meeting
regarding the budget and activities of the Library.
A. The Recreation and Parks Advisory Board shall consist of 11 members
qualified as follows: one member residing in each of the seven Wards;
one member of the Municipal Council; one member of the Gateway
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by the electorate of the Municipality of
Monroeville 11-8-1994.
36.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
37.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 80, Library Board.
38.Editor's Note: See the Charter References to General Law included at the end of this
Charter.
§ C-109 CHARTER § C-112
C:53
§ C-113. Human Needs and Resources Advisory Board.39
Board of School Directors and a resident of Monroeville; two members
who are public or private high school students appointed by the nine
members aforesaid. Those members appointed from the Municipal
Council and Gateway Board of School Directors, and the high school
students, shall have their term as members of the Board terminate
should they for any reason cease to be members of the bodies they
represent. The Manager shall appoint an administrator involved in
recreation and parks as an ex officio member of the Board.
B. The Recreation and Parks Advisory Board shall:
(1) Advise Municipal Council in all matters relating to recreation and
parks, and all other activities appropriately identified by Council.
(2) Prepare with the administrative appointee of the Manager, and
submit to Council, the proposed budget for recreations and parks.
(3) Report quarterly to Council as a whole at a public meeting,
regarding the budget and activities of recreation and parks.
(4) Advise the administrative appointee of the Manager for recreation
and parks with regard to the recreation programs and the
allotment of funds for such programs.
(5) Make policy recommendations directly to the Municipal Council
concerning capital expenditures, staff and programming related to
the recreational requirements of the community.
A. This Board shall be composed of seven members with three-year terms.
The terms shall be so fixed that the term of office of three members
shall expire once every three years and two members shall expire each
of the other two years. The Manager shall appoint an administrator
involved in human services as an ex officio member of the Board.
B. The Board shall:
(1) Collect and assess data on social problems and needs of the
Municipality.
(2) Investigate sources of funding appropriate for assisting in the
solution of social problems.
(3) Utilize resources now existing, including increased cooperation
among community groups.
(4) Report quarterly to Council as a whole at a public meeting
regarding community needs and resources.
39.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 61, Human Relations.
§ C-112 § C-113
C:54
§ C-113.1. Ethics Board.40 [Added 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 2016;41
amended 3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 203242]
(5) Advise the administrative appointee of the Manager for human
services with regard to community needs and the allotment of
funds for such programs.
A. The Ethics Board shall be composed of three individuals who shall be
appointed in the following manner:
(1) One individual appointed by the Council of the Municipality of
Monroeville;
(2) One individual appointed by the Mayor of the Municipality of
Monroeville; and
(3) A third individual to be appointed by the Council representative
and the Mayor representative.
B. All members of the Ethics Board shall sit for a term of two years. In the
case of a vacancy on the Board, an appointment shall be made to said
vacancy by that body who made the original appointment prior to the
vacancy occurring.
C. The Board shall conduct investigations on all complaints in accordance
with the "Ethics Code" of the Municipality of Monroeville, Ordinance
No. 1697 or as otherwise established by amendment or other applicable
law.43
40.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 43, Ethics, Code of.
41.Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by the electorate of the Municipality of
Monroeville 5-20-1997.
42.Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by the electorate of the Municipality of
Monroeville 5-20-1997.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 43, Ethics, Code of.
§ C-113 CHARTER § C-113.1
C:55

ARTICLE XVIII
Succession
§ C-114. Rights and liabilities of the Municipality.
The Municipality shall continue to own, possess, and control all rights
and property of every kind and nature, owned, possessed or controlled
by it when this Charter takes effect, and shall be subject to all its debts,
obligations, liabilities and duties.
§ C-115. Authority of existing elected officers.
A. The Mayor, members of Council, and the Tax Collector in office at the
time this Charter becomes effective shall remain in office for the full
terms for which they were originally elected and shall perform the
duties and exercise the powers set forth in this Charter.
B. Auditors shall remain in office for the full terms for which they were
originally elected; however, their functions shall be performed by the
Auditor appointed under this Charter.
C. Should a vacancy in the office of elected Auditor occur, the vacancy
shall not be filled.
§ C-114 CHARTER § C-115
C:57

ARTICLE XIX
Initiative by Petition
§ C-116. Authority.
Electors of the Municipality shall have the authority to initiate action of the
municipal government by petition.
§ C-117. Form of petitions.
§ C-118. Filing.
Petitions shall be submitted to the Mayor and Council at any monthly
business meeting.
§ C-119. Council's duty to act.
Council shall act on the subject matter of the petition at the next regular
monthly meeting of Council and shall act by voting to adopt or reject
the proposed ordinance or resolution or to accept or reject the proposed
specific action.
§ C-120. Citizens' right to initiative, referendum or petition.
All rights of initiative, referendum and petition granted to the people by
the Pennsylvania Constitution and the Acts of the General Assembly shall
remain unabridged.
A. Petitions under this article shall be directed to Council and may request
adoption of an ordinance or resolution or contain a request for specific
action. The petition shall contain the exact wording of any proposed
ordinance or resolution or a concise description of the action requested.
B. Petitions shall be signed by 10% of the registered electors of the
Municipality at large, or 5% of the registered electors from each Ward
of the Municipality.
C. Every elector signing a petition shall add to the signature, the place of
residence and the date of signing.
D. Petitions shall be verified by an oath or affirmation of one or more of the
signers thereof, taken and subscribed before a person qualified under
the laws of Pennsylvania to administer an oath, to the effect that the
petition was signed by each of the signers thereof in their proper
handwriting, that the signers are to the best knowledge and belief of
the affiant, registered electors of the Municipality, and that the petition
is prepared and filed in good faith for the sole purpose of requiring
action of the Council as stated in the petition.
E. All signatures of the petition shall be obtained within a ninety-day
period prior to submission to Council.
§ C-116 CHARTER § C-120
C:59

ARTICLE XX
General
§ C-121. Qualifications of elected officials.
§ C-122. Prohibitions.
§ C-123. Vacancies. [Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 201744]
The office of an elected official shall become vacant upon death, resignation,
removal from office in any manner authorized by law or this Charter, or
forfeiture of office, or for failure to assume such office after election thereto
A. Elected officials shall be citizens of the United States and registered
electors of the Municipality throughout the officials' term. Members of
Council shall be residents of the Wards from which they are elected
throughout the Member's term.
B. No incumbent Member of Council shall be made ineligible to hold office
by reason of redistricting during a term of office, but shall continue to
represent the Ward from which originally elected for the remainder of
the term for which elected.
C. Any person otherwise eligible to hold the office of Member of Council
shall not be made ineligible by reason of redistricting but during the
term following redistricting such person may represent the Ward in
which originally eligible.
D. No person shall be eligible to seek office in more than one Ward at any
time.
A. No elected Municipal official shall hold any other elective governmental
or political office or municipal employment while serving as an elected
official. Nor shall any former elected Municipal official be employed or
appointed by the Municipality in any compensated capacity until two
years after the expiration of the term for which such official was
elected, except when such official held an office eliminated by
ordinance.
B. Elected delegates to national political conventions shall not be
considered elected officers in this section.
C. Elected officials shall not at any time authorize, approve or ratify any
payment or expenditure made in excess of any budget appropriation.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent Council, during
any fiscal year, from adopting, by ordinance, new appropriations,
supplementary appropriations and transfers from one appropriation to
another.
44.Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by the electorate of the Municipality of
Monroeville 5-20-1997.
§ C-121 CHARTER § C-123
C:61
within 45 days after the commencement of the term thereof. An Elected
Official shall forfeit office if the official:
A. Is convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude or
misbehavior in office, or
B. Lacks at any time during term of office any qualifications for this office
prescribed by this Charter or by law, or
C. Being a Member of Council or the Mayor, is absent from at least three
consecutive business meetings of the Council, unless excused by
Council. In the case of failure of attendance, the Council shall declare
such office vacant at least 10 days before the same shall be filled by
appointment, or
D. Violates any express prohibition of this Charter, or
E. Is found to have committed an act or acts which constitute malfeasance
in office, misfeasance in office, or violation of the oath of office. For
purpose of this section:
(1) "Malfeasance in Office" means an unlawful act committed willfully
by any elective public officer;
(2) "Misfeasance in Office" means fulfillment of a statutorily imposed
duty in an unlawful or improper manner by an elective public
officer;
(3) "Violation of the Oath of Office" means the neglect or failure by an
elective public officer to perform a duty imposed by law.
F. Except for alleged forfeitures of office under Subsections A, B and C,
the Ethics Board shall investigate charges pertaining to forfeiture of
office, and for that purpose shall have the power to subpoena witnesses,
administer oaths, and require the production of evidence. The Ethics
Board shall submit all resulting findings and recommendations to
Council for consideration and action as set forth in this Section. A
member charged with conduct constituting grounds for forfeiture of
office on grounds other than that set out in Subsections A, D, and E
shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand, and notice of such
hearing shall be published in one or more newspapers of general
circulation in the Municipality at least one week in advance of the
hearing. A member charged with conduct constituting grounds for
forfeiture of office shall not be permitted to participate in any Council
investigation or vote.
G. The Council shall be the judge of forfeiture of its members pursuant to
Subsections A through E. Decisions made by Council under this section
shall be subject to review by the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny
County.
H. The Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County shall have jurisdiction
and be the judge of the grounds for forfeiture of office where a
§ C-123 § C-123
C:62
§ C-124. Filling of vacancies. [Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No.
2017;45 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 203146]
complaint in writing by at lease 100 registered electors of the
Municipality filed with the Court alleging forfeiture of office under
Subsections D or E. The Court shall issue upon such officer or officers
named an order to show cause why their office or offices should not be
declared vacant and another appointed in their seat.
A. If a vacancy shall occur in any elective office in the Municipality for any
reason set forth in this Charter, except for vacancies caused by
forfeiture of office under Subsections A, D, or E of § C-123 of this
article, the remaining members of the Council shall fill such vacancy by
appointing a person eligible under the Charter to hold such office, if the
term thereof continues so long, until a successor is elected as follows:
(1) Candidates shall be selected at a special election to be held at the
next municipal or non-municipal primary election occurring more
than 60 days after the vacancy occurs.
(2) The candidates selected pursuant to Subsection A(1) shall run in
the next municipal or nonmunicipal general election and the
candidate elected shall take office on the first Monday in January
following the general election and shall serve the remainder of the
unexpired term.
B. If the Council shall fail to fill such vacancy within 45 days after the
vacancy occurs, then the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County
shall, upon petition of the Council or of any five electors of that Ward of
the Municipality whose Council seat is vacant, fill the vacancy in such
office by the appointment of an eligible resident of the Municipality for
the unexpired term of office.
C. As for vacancies caused by forfeiture of office under Subsections A, D,
or E of § C-123 of this article, the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny
County shall, upon petition of Council or of any five electors of the
Municipality fill the vacancy with an eligible resident of the
Municipality for the unexpired term of office.
D. Notwithstanding Subsections A and B above, whenever four or more
vacancies exist in Council, upon a petition of the remaining members of
Council or of any five electors of the Municipality, being filed with the
Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County in the following manner:
(1) Candidates shall be selected at a special election to held at the next
municipal or nonmunicipal primary election occurring more than
60 days after the vacancy occurs.
45.Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by the electorate of the Municipality of
Monroeville 5-20-1997.
46.Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by the electorate of the Municipality of
Monroeville 5-20-1997.
§ C-123 CHARTER § C-124
C:63
§ C-125. Oath of office.
All elected and appointed officials, prior to assuming office, shall take and
shall sign on oath of office as shall from time to time be prescribed by the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Such oath may be taken and
signed before the Mayor of the Municipality or before a person authorized
to administer oaths, and no person shall be permitted to assume such office
until the oath, in written form, is filed with the Municipality.
§ C-126. Conflict of interest.
No elected or appointed municipal officer or employee shall influence or
attempt to influence, the making of or supervise in any manner or deal with
any contract or municipal matter in which said person has an adverse or
special interest.
§ C-127. Duty to reveal conflict.
§ C-128. Violation.
Any elected or appointed Municipal officials who shall knowingly violate the
foregoing conflict sections shall forfeit their offices and any employee doing
so shall be dismissed.
§ C-129. Removal from or forfeiture of office of elected officials.
Legal action to determine whether any elected official is subject to removal
from office or forfeiture of office for any reason set forth in this Charter
for committing any of the prohibited actions set forth in this Charter, or
(2) The candidates selected pursuant to Subsection D(1) shall run in
the next municipal or nonmunicipal general election and the
candidate elected shall take office on the first Monday In January
following the general election and shall serve the remainder of the
unexpired term.
A. Any elected or appointed municipal officer who knows or in the exercise
of reasonable diligence could know that, that officer is interested
financially, directly or indirectly, in any municipal contract, or has an
adverse or special interest in any municipal matter, shall notify Council
thereof; any such contract or municipal matter shall not be acted upon
or approved by Council except by an affirmative vote of at least five of
the members thereof. When the interested officer is a member of
Council, such officer shall refrain from voting on said contract or
municipal matter.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to cases where such officer
is an employee of the person, firm or corporation involved in a
municipal contract or municipal matter, in a capacity with no possible
influence on the transaction and in which such person cannot possibly
be benefited thereby, either financially or in any other material matter.
§ C-124 § C-129
C:64
for any cause recognized in law,47 shall be commenced in the Court having
jurisdiction thereof.
§ C-130. Rights and privileges of employees.
§ C-131. Amendment of Charter.
This Charter may be amended in accordance with the Home Rule Charter
and Optional Plans Law, as now or hereafter amended, reenacted or
supplied.48
§ C-132. Severability.
It is the intention of the electors of the Municipality, that if this Charter
cannot take effect in its entirety because of the judgment of any Court
of competent jurisdiction holding invalid any part or parts hereof, the
remaining provisions of the Charter shall be given full force and effect as
completely as if the part or parts held invalid had not been included herein.
A. The Charter shall not give any power or authority to diminish any rights
or privileges of any present or former municipal employee entitled to
benefits in any pension or retirement system.
B. An employee holding a municipal position at the time this Charter takes
full effect, who was serving in that same or a comparable position at the
time of its adoption, shall not be subject to competitive tests as a
condition of continuance in the same position, but in all other respects
shall be subject to the personnel system established pursuant to
Articles XV and XVI.
47.Editor's Note: See the Charter References to General Law included at the end of this
Charter.
48.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2901 et seq.
§ C-129 CHARTER § C-132
C:65

ARTICLE XXI
Transition
§ C-133. Statutes and ordinances superseded.
Subject to pertinent enabling legislation authorizing a Home Rule Charter,
this Charter shall supersede all statutes or parts of statutes local, special,
or general, and all ordinances of the Borough of Monroeville affecting the
organization, government and powers of the Municipality to the extent that
they are inconsistent or in conflict with this Charter.
§ C-134. Continuation of existing statutes and ordinances.
All statutes, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, or portions
thereof, in force when this Charter takes effect and not in conflict herewith,
are hereby continued in force and effect until amended, repealed,
superseded or expired by their own terms.
§ C-135. Pending actions and proceedings.
No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time this Charter
shall take effect, brought by or against the Municipality or any office,
department, agency or officer thereof, shall be affected or abated by the
adoption of this Charter or by anything herein contained.
§ C-136. Continuation of contracts, public improvements and taxes.
All contracts entered into by the Municipality, or for its benefit, prior to
the taking effect of this Charter, shall continue in full force and effect.
Public improvements for which legislative steps have been taken under laws
existing at the time this Charter takes effect may be carried to completion
as nearly as practicable in accordance with the provisions of such existing
laws. All taxes and assessments levied or assessed, all fines and penalties
imposed, and all other obligations owing to the Municipality which are
uncollected at the time this Charter becomes effective, shall continue in full
force and effect and shall be collected as if no change had been made.
§ C-137. Existing authorities.
The Municipality's membership and participation in any Municipal
Authority at the time this Charter is adopted shall continue and the persons
representing the Municipality on the board of any such Authority shall
continue in office until the normal expiration of their terms or until their
successors are appointed.
§ C-138. Continuation of boards and commissions.
A. If a municipal department, office, agency, board, commission or other
entity is abolished by this Charter, the powers and duties given it by law
shall be transferred to the municipal department office, agency, board,
§ C-133 CHARTER § C-138
C:67
§ C-139. Existing Civil Service Commission.
commission or other entity designated in this Charter or, if the Charter
makes no provision, designated by Council.
B. Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, all boards and
commissions in existence at the time of the adoption of this Charter
shall continue and the persons representing the Municipality on any
such board or commission shall continue in office until the normal
expiration of their terms or until their successors are appointed.
Thereafter, persons appointed shall serve terms as designated by
ordinance adopted pursuant to this Charter.
A. The Civil Service Commission of the Borough of Monroeville, existing as
of the effective date of the Charter shall continue in office for the
purpose of disposing of appeals.
B. No new appeals shall be entered with said Commission after the first
organizational meeting of the Personnel Board.
C. Upon rendering its decision in its final case, the Civil Service
Commission shall be dissolved.
§ C-138 § C-139
C:68
ARTICLE XXII
Schedule
§ C-140. Election to adopt Charter.
This Charter shall be submitted to a vote of the electors of the Borough of
Monroeville at the Primary Election to be held on May 21, 1974.
§ C-141. First election.
The first elections required to effect the provisions of this Charter shall be
conducted by the election officials of the Borough of Monroeville and the
County of Allegheny, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Election Code in
the year 1975.
§ C-142. Time of taking full effect.
This Charter shall be in full effect for all purposes on and after the first
Monday in January 1976.
§ C-143. First meeting of Council.
On Monday, January 5, 1976, following the first election of Council members
under this Charter, the Council shall meet at 8:00 p.m. in the legislative
chambers of the Monroeville Municipal Building.
§ C-144. Appropriations.
All appropriations made in the budget ordinance for the year 1976 shall be
made to the then existing offices, departments, Boards and Commissions
of the Municipality or their successors under this Charter. Provision shall
also be made in the budget ordinance for the year 1976 for any offices,
departments, boards or commissions created by this Charter to exercise
new functions.
§ C-145. Review of ordinances.
Council shall, as promptly as possible after its organization, conduct a
review of existing ordinances and adopt any new ordinances or amendment
to existing ordinances which may be necessary to implement the provisions
of this Charter.
§ C-140 CHARTER § C-145
C:69

ARTICLE XXIII
Recall
§ C-146. Officers: subject to recall.
Any person holding an elective office of the Municipality, whether by
election succession or appointment to fill the vacancy, shall be subject to
removal from office at a recall election in the manner provided in this article
or as may otherwise be provided by this Charter or applicable law.
§ C-147. Reasonable cause.
§ C-148. Initiating the recall.
Whenever any registered voter or committee or organization of legal voters
of the Municipality shall desire to demand the recall and discharge of any
person holding an elective office of the Municipality, he, she, or they shall
prepare a typewritten charge reciting:
§ C-149. Charges: sufficiency of grounds.
The grounds for recall to be recited in a petition for recall are sufficient if it
can be understood therefrom that the act or acts charged therein are clearly
A. The recall of an incumbent of an elective office of the Municipality shall
be for reasonable cause which shall include, but not be limited to, an
act or acts which constitute forfeiture of office under this Charter,
malfeasance in office, misfeasance in office, or a violation of the oath of
office, committed by any elective public officer of the Municipality
during the term of office which he or she is presently serving.
B. For the purpose of this article:
(1) "Malfeasance in Office" means an unlawful act committed willfully
by any elective public officer;
(2) "Misfeasance in Office" means the fulfillment of a statutorily
imposed duty in an unlawful or improper manner by an elective
public officer;
(3) "Violation of the Oath of Office" means the neglect or failure by an
elective public officer to perform faithfully a duty imposed by law.
A. The name of the elective public officer;
B. The title of the office;
C. The grounds for holding a recall election (as set forth above); which
charge shall state the act or acts complained of in concise language,
without unnecessary repetition, and shall be signed by the person or
persons making the same, give their respective addresses, and be
verified under oath that he, she, or they believe the charge or charges
to be true.
§ C-146 CHARTER § C-149
C:71
and distinctly set forth in ordinary and concise language, without repetition,
and in such a manner as to enable a person of common understanding to
know what is intended.
§ C-150. Ballot synopsis.
The charge shall be filed in triplicate with the County Board of Elections.
The Board of Elections shall, within 15 days of the filing of the charge,
formulate a ballot synopsis of such charge not to exceed 200 words, which
shall set forth the name of the person charged, the title of the office, and
a concise statement of the elements of the charge, and shall notify the
elective officer against whom such charge or charges have been made, and
the persons filing the charge, of the exact language of such ballot synopsis.
A copy of the charges filed and a copy of the ballot synopsis shall be
served on the elective officer and the persons filing the charge by certified
or registered mail or by personal service. Thereafter, such charge shall
be designated on all petitions, ballots and other proceedings in relation
thereby to such synopsis.
§ C-151. Enforcement provisions; jurisdiction; appeals.
A. Any person aggrieved by the filing of recall charges or by the failure
thereafter of the Board of Elections to perform duties in relation to the
recall, may petition for relief to the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny
County. In reviewing such petition, the Court shall have the jurisdiction
to consider the following grounds.
(1) The sufficiency or specificity of such recall charge or charges.
(2) The sufficiency or specificity of the ballot synopsis of such recall
charge or charges.
(3) The issuance of a writ of mandamus to compel the performance of
any act required by the Board of Elections or to prevent the
performance by the Board of any act in relation to recall not in
compliance with law.
(4) The existence or lack of facts establishing prima facie the
truthfulness of such recall charge or charges provided, that any
person challenging any such recall charge pursuant to this
Subsection A(4) shall have the burden of proof by clear and
convincing evidence.
B. Any proceeding pursuant to Subsection A(1), (2) and (4) of this section
of this article shall be commenced within 15 days from the time that
notice is given of the preparation of a ballot synopsis of such recall
charge or charges and, further provided, that any proceeding pursuant
to Subsection A(3) of this section of this article shall be commenced
within 10 days from the time the cause of complaint arises.
C. Actions brought pursuant to this article shall be considered an
emergency matter of public concern, take precedence over other cases
§ C-149 § C-151
C:72
§ C-152. Preparation of recall petition.
15 days after being notified of the language of the ballot synopsis of the
charge, the person or persons filing the charge shall cause to be prepared
petitions for recall and discharge of such officer. Such petition shall state
the elective official's name, title of the office and the ballot synopsis as
prepared by the Board of Elections.
§ C-153. Number of signatures required.
An election for the recall of such an elected official shall be directed where
such petition has been signed by at least 20% of the registered electors
voting in the last gubernatorial election in the Municipality at large, if
serving in an "at large" position, or of the Ward, if serving in a Ward
position.
§ C-154. Notice to incumbent and petitioners' representative.
and be speedily heard and determined. Any proceeding to review a
decision of the Court of Common Pleas shall be begun and perfected
within 15 days after its decision in a recall election case and shall be by
the Supreme Court considered an emergency matter of public concern
and speedily heard and determined.
A. Each elector signing a recall petition shall add to his or her signature
his or her residence and the date of signing. All signatures must be
executed in ink or ball point pen. Signatures on a recall petition may be
on separate sheets, but each sheet shall be appended to it the affidavit
of some person, not necessarily a signer of the petition, that to the best
of the affiant's knowledge and belief the persons whose signatures
appear on the sheet are registered electors of the Municipality, that
they signed with full knowledge of the contents of the petition and that
their residences are correctly given.
B. A recall petition shall be filed with the County Board of Elections. No
signature shall be counted as valid which is dated more than 60 days
prior to the date the petition is filed. Upon filing with the Board of
Elections, the petition shall be available for examination and copying by
any interested person. Within 15 days after the filing of the petition, the
Board of Elections shall, in writing, pass upon the validity of the petition
and the validity and the number of signatures required thereon. The
decision of the Board of Elections shall be subject to immediate review
on appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
A. As soon as the Board of Elections has issued its written decision as
provided for in § C-153B above, the Board, in writing, shall notify the
incumbent named in the petition that a petition has been filed and a
copy of the Board's decision shall be attached to the notice.
B. If a representative of the petitioners has filed in writing a request with
the Board for a copy of said notice and the Board's decisions, a copy of
§ C-151 CHARTER § C-154
C:73
§ C-155. Recall elections.
§ C-156. Disqualification.
No person who has been removed from an elective office by a recall election
or who has resigned from such an elective office after a recall petition
directed to him or her has been filed shall be eligible for appointment to any
elective or appointed office of the Municipality within two years after his or
her removal or resignation.
the notice and the decision shall also be served on the petitioner's
representative at the same time.
C. The notice and decisions shall be served on the incumbent and any such
representative of the petitioners by certified or registered mail, or
personal service.
D. Upon receipt of such notice, the incumbent may resign from his or her
office and thereupon the recall procedure shall terminate.
A. If the incumbent against whom a recall petition is directed does not
effectively resign from his or her office within 10 days after notice of the
filing of such a petition shall have been given to him or her, the Board of
Elections shall arrange a recall election. If a regular or special election
is to be held not less than 30 days or more than 90 days after the 10
days have expired, the recall questions shall be placed before the
electors in such an election. Otherwise a special recall election shall be
fixed by such Board for a date not earlier than 30 days nor later than 90
days after the 10 days have expired. The incumbent against whom the
recall petition is directed may resign at any time prior to the recall
election and thereupon the recall election shall not be held.
B. The following questions shall be presented to each elector in a recall
election: "Shall (name of officer) be recalled and removed from the
office of (name of office) because (herein insert the synopsis of the
charge as prepared by the Board of Elections)."
C. The above questions shall appear as to every officer whose recall is to
be voted upon and provision shall be made for the elector to vote "yes"
or "no" on the question.
D. If a majority of the registered electors who vote on the question of
recall shall vote "yes", the incumbent shall be deemed recalled and
removed from office, but if a majority of the registered electors do not
vote "yes" he or she shall remain in office. Should the result of such an
election be affirmative, the date of removal and vacancy in the office
shall be seven days subsequent to the date when the results of the
election are certified by the Board of Elections, unless such date is
postponed by an order from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ C-154 § C-157
C:74
§ C-157. Limitations.
No recall petition may be filed against any incumbent of an elective office
within the first year or the last nine months of the terms of his or her office
or within nine months after an unsuccessful recall election against him or
her but an officer who has been reelected for a successive term shall be
subject to recall during the first year of such term.
§ C-157 CHARTER § C-157
C:75
THE CODE
PART I, ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ C-157 § C-157
1:76
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
The codification of a complete body of ordinances for the Municipality
of Monroeville, County of Allegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by
General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of the Charter and Chapters
1 through 359, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Municipality of
Monroeville, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of
the Municipality of Monroeville," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Council of the Municipality of Monroeville, and it is the
intention of said Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Municipality of Monroeville and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to September 13, 1994.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:77
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Municipality prior to the effective date of
this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement
of such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Municipality or
any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Municipality.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Municipality or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Municipality or other instruments or
evidence of the Municipality's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Municipality.
K. Any ordinance providing for requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 § 1-4
1:78
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Municipality or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance pertaining to emergency management.
R. Any legislation relating to vehicles and traffic.
S. The Employee Safety Manual.
T. The Employee Handbook.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances of the Municipality for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Council
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. Nomenclature changes. The following changes shall be made
throughout the Municipality's legislation:
(1) "Burgess" will be changed to "Mayor."
(2) "Justice of the Peace" and "District Magistrate" will be changed to
"District Justice."
(3) "Borough," when referring to the Municipality and used as an
adjective, will be changed to "municipal." All other uses of the term
"borough" (when referring to the Borough of Monroeville) will be
changed to "Municipality."
C. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, the following changes and revisions of a
substantive nature are hereby made to various ordinances included in
the Code.49 These changes are made to bring provisions into conformity
49.Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6C, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:79
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code
shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Manager and shall remain there for use
and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies shall be certified
to by the Manager, as provided by law, and such certified copies shall
remain on file in the office of the Manager, available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed
and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the post-bound book containing said
Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
with the desired policies of the Council, and it is the intent of the
Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed have been previously formally amended to read
as such. All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect
as of the effective date of the Code specified in § 1-15.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
by the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042." A
complete description of all changes is on file in the office of the Municipal Manager.
§ 1-6 § 1-11
1:80
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Manager or someone authorized and directed by
him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the office of the Manager for use by
the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances and resolutions
adopted by the Council subsequent to the effective date of this codification
which the Council shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when
finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes or new
ordinances or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code books, at
which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Manager, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the manner
required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the Code in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality. The enactment and
application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notices
of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability of
copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the
Municipality to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section
of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the maximum
penalty provided by law.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Council that this ordinance and the Code would have been
adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence,
subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof had not been included
therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after July 18, 1997.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:81
Chapter 6
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
CHARTER REFERENCES
Municipal Council — See Art. III.
Operations and procedures of Municipal
Council — See Art. IV.
Ordinances and resolutions — See Art. V.
Municipal Manager — See Art. VII.
Administrative departments — See Art. IX.
Boards, commissions and authorities — See
Art. XVIII.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Refer to the various chapters in Part I of the
Code
§ 1-15 § 1-15
6:82
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 6-1. Short title.
This chapter shall constitute and be designated as the "Administrative
Code."
§ 6-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
following meanings:
ADMINISTRATIVE — The function of carrying out the policies, ordinances
or mandates of Council.
AUTHORITIES — Those bodies, political and corporate, created under the
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.50
COUNCIL — The Municipal Council as provided for in the Home Rule
Charter.
HOME RULE CHARTER — The Home Rule Charter of Monroeville as
approved by the electors of said Municipality on May 21, 1974, with
amendments, if any, thereafter lawfully adopted and approved.
LAW — The Constitution and any statute of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
MANAGER — The Municipal Manager as provided for in Article VII of the
Home Rule Charter.
§ 6-3. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 1510, Ordinance No. 1532 and any other ordinance
inconsistent herewith is hereby repealed and superseded by this chapter.
The first page of Ordinance No. 1510 and Ordinance No. 1532 shall have
a label affixed thereto with reference to the repeal of the same by this
chapter.
50.Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed
by L. 2001, June 19, P.L. 287, No. 22. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 6-1 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 6-3
6:83

ARTICLE II
Municipal Manager51
§ 6-4. Appointment, qualifications and removal.
The provisions in the Home Rule Charter relating to the appointment,
qualifications, removal and tenure of the Manager shall govern these
matters.
§ 6-5. Powers and duties.
In addition to the powers and duties of the Manager prescribed in § C-36 of
the Home Rule Charter, the Manager shall:
A. Have the authority to designate himself/herself or to assign any other
employee of the Municipality to perform the duties and exercise the
functions of any office or position under his/her jurisdiction during a
vacancy or in the absence or disability of an incumbent or where service
is required appropriate to the personnel classification of the individual
so assigned.
B. Have the power to prescribe rules and regulations that he/she
considers necessary for the operation of any departments, office or
other agency of the Municipality under his/her authority.
C. Have the power to investigate, examine or inquire into the affairs or
operations of any department, office or other agency of the Municipality
under his/her authority.
D. Have the power to direct any department, office or other agency of the
Municipality under his/her authority.
E. Have the duty of preparing the agenda with the approval of the Council
for each meeting of the Council and supplying pertinent facts thereto.
F. Have the duty of ensuring that the provision of all franchises, leases,
permits or privileges granted by the Municipality are observed.
G. Have the power to employ, by and with approval of the Council, experts
and consultants to perform work with any of the functions of the
Municipality.
H. Have the power to purchase all supplies and equipment for the various
agencies, boards, departments and other offices of the Municipality. In
connection with this power, the Manager shall keep account of all
purchases and shall prepare, on a regular basis or as directed by the
Council, a list of bills and payroll authorized for payment for action by
the Council prior to payment. The Manager may, with the approval of
51.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2001, adopted 11-12-1996, provided as follows: "The Council
of the Municipality of Monroeville hereby establishes that the appointment, wages, hours,
benefits, and removal of the Municipal Manager shall be accomplished by Ordinance in
conformity with the requirements of Article V of the Home Rule Charter of the
Municipality of Monroeville."
§ 6-4 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 6-5
6:85
the Council, prepare rules and regulations whereby payments can be
made on a timely basis for proper refunds by residents and clients. All
such refunds are subject to ratification by the Council at its next regular
meeting and are subject to the sections of the Home Rule Charter.
When directed by the Council, the Manager will make a full written
report on any items of purchase, vendors account or activity in any
budget entry.
I. Have the responsibility of receiving all complaints regarding services or
personnel of the Municipality. The Manager or an officer designated by
him/her shall investigate and dispose of such complaints within his/her
power and shall make recommendations for alleviation of complaints to
the Council for those problems and complaints not within his/her power.
The Manager shall prepare a written report of all actions taken to
alleviate complaints and problems when requested by the Council.
J. Have custody of all municipal records, including all personnel files.
K. Have the responsibility of performing all other proper duties as
designated him/her by the Council, ordinances and resolutions.
§ 6-5 § 6-5
6:86
ARTICLE III
Administrative Departments and Directors
§ 6-6. Establishment of departments.
The Municipality shall have the following administrative departments, and
such other administrative departments as established by ordinance, which
shall be operated under the supervision of the Manager:
§ 6-7. Appointment and removal of directors of departments.
As provided in § C-36B(2) of the Home Rule Charter, the Manager, with
the consent of the Council, shall appoint all department heads, each of
whom shall be known as the "Director" of his/her department. Department
heads shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive, administrative and
technical qualifications appropriate to the functions and duties of their
respective departments and shall be subject to removal at the discretion of
the Manager, as provided in § C-36B(1) of the Home Rule Charter, provided
that the Manager shall serve as the director of any department until the
appointment of a separate director shall be made.
§ 6-8. Duties of directors.
Under the direction of the Manager, each department head or director shall:
A. Department of Administration.
B. Department of Community Development.
C. Department of Fire, Building and Zoning Code Enforcement.
D. Department of Public Safety.
E. Department of Engineering.
F. Department of Public Works.
G. Department of Recreation, Parks and Human Services.
A. Direct employees in the performance of all duties and responsibilities
required of the department and its subordinate agencies as provided by
law by this Code, by any other ordinance of the Municipality or by
administrative policy and procedures directions, and such other duties
as may be required by the Manager, and which are not in conflict with
the law, the Home Rule Charter or any other provision of this chapter or
any other ordinance of the Municipality.
B. Be immediately responsible to the Manager for the effective
administration of his/her department and all activities and the functions
assigned thereto.
C. Subject to the approval of the Manager, prescribe the internal
organization of his/her department and its constituent and subordinate
§ 6-6 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 6-8
6:87
agencies and the duties of subordinate officers and employees of the
department and develop a detailed manual of department procedures
for discharged departmental functions.
D. Assign functions, powers and duties to subordinate officers and
employees within his/her department and modify those assignments,
subject to the authority of the Manager as set out in § 6-5 of Article II of
this chapter.
E. Be responsible for the work of his/her department and supervise and
direct the work of the employees of his/her department, measure the
performance of the employees in accordance with approved procedures
and report regularly to the Manager.
F. Furnish to any department or agency of the Municipality any service,
labor, material and equipment that may be needed to perform a
municipal function or service.
G. Prepare and submit to the Manager whatever reports the Manager may
require, including periodic reports relating to departmental activities.
H. Serve as staff officer to any committee, commission or board that is
assigned to his/her department by the Manager.
I. Coordinate the activities and work of his/her department with pertinent
regional and area-wide programs, and if any program shall cease to be
conducted on a regional or area-wide basis and shall be assigned by the
Manager or the Council to his department, superintend the
incorporation of that program into his department.
J. Provide the maximum level, quantity and quality of service within the
limitations of the budget.
K. Be responsible for manpower planning within his/her department.
L. Plan and execute appropriate training for departmental personnel.
M. Recommend to the Manager policies and procedures designed to
improve the quality of municipal functions and services.
N. Establish, maintain and preserve a system of filing and indexing records
and reports in sufficient detail in order to furnish all information
necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a
basis for the periodic reports to the Manager.
§ 6-8 § 6-8
6:88
ARTICLE IV
Department of Administration
§ 6-9. Functions.
The functions of the Department of Administration shall be the
administration and direction of municipal activity pertaining to:
§ 6-10. Coordination.
The Department of Administration should be headed by the Director of
Personnel and Finance who will be responsible for the performance of the
functions of this department.
§ 6-11. Bank accounts.
All bank accounts of the Municipality of Monroeville shall be consolidated
to maximum extent possible. All accounts are to be invested via the
A. The receipt, expenditure, accounting, investment, custody and control
of municipal funds, assets and property, except to the extent that any
such activity is expressly charged to any other department, office or
agency.
B. The development and enforcement of personnel rules and regulations,
participation in and direction of labor relations and contract
regulations, training of personnel and administration of the position
classification system, the wage and salary plan and the fringe benefit
program for personnel.
C. The communication of information and ideas between the government
and the people; informing the public by presentation of specific
information and measuring public opinion and attitudes for the purpose
of proposing new and modified programs or abandoning the existing
ones.
D. The processing of facts and figures utilizing electronic data processing
equipment for the purpose of analysis, efficiency and economy.
E. The purchase of materials and services for use by the Municipality
pursuant to Article XIV of the Home Rule Charter, applicable
ordinances and administrative policies and procedures, the
development of specifications for materials and services based upon the
operational needs of the Municipality and the development and
administration of contractual documents with vendors and the
maintenance of inventory controls over purchase items in keeping with
§ C-36B(17) of the Home Rule Charter, applicable ordinances and
administrative policies and procedures.
F. Cooperation with the Library Board and employees to ensure proper
administration.
§ 6-9 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 6-11
6:89
consolidated investment account except those accounts which are
restricted by state statute or federal law or regulation.
§ 6-11 § 6-11
6:90
ARTICLE V
Department of Community Development
§ 6-12. Functions.
The functions of the Department of Community Development shall be the
administration and direction of municipal activity pertaining to:
§ 6-13. Coordination.
The Department of Community Development shall be headed by the
Director of Planning and the Zoning Officer, who shall coordinate with the
Departments of Engineering, Public Works and Fire, Building and Zoning
Code Enforcement and other municipal departments.
A. The tabulation, preparation and presentation of basic information on
the Municipality of Monroeville for mapping, data collection and the
preparation and updating of the Comprehensive Plan, including but not
limited to:
(1) Population.
(2) Economic characteristics.
(3) Land use.
(4) Public facilities.
(5) Transportation networks.
B. The review and enforcement of land use controls and regulations as
related in Chapter 359, Zoning, ancillary land development ordinances
as prescribed by the Manager and other applicable law.
C. The administration of Chapter 324, Subdivision of Land, ancillary land
development ordinances as prescribed by the Manager and applicable
law relating thereof, as well as applications for subdivision.
§ 6-12 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 6-13
6:91

ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)52
§ 6-14. (Reserved)
§ 6-15. (Reserved)
52.Editor's Note: Former Article VI, Department of Fire, Building and Zoning Code
Enforcement, was deleted pursuant to Ord. No. 2149, adopted 7-11-2000, which ordinance
merged the Department of Fire, Building and Zoning Code Enforcement and the
Department of Engineering into the Department of Building and Engineering. For current
provisions, see Art. VIII, Department of Building and Engineering.
§ 6-14 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 6-15
6:93

ARTICLE VII
Department of Public Safety
§ 6-16. Functions.
A. The functions of the Department of Public Safety shall be the
administration and control of municipal activity pertaining to the
protection of persons and property, except to the extent that any such
activity is expressly charged to any other department, office or agency.
B. The Department of Public Safety shall be responsible for the
performance of the following functions:
(1) The provision of police services which shall be divided into the
following functional areas under the supervision of the Chief:
(a) Uniform Services Division, which shall be responsible for
protecting life and property, preserving the peace, suppressing
crime and the apprehension of violators of the law.
(b) Investigative Services Division, which shall be responsible for
the investigation of crimes, identification and apprehension of
criminals, recovery of property, the identification and
preservation of evidence and for assistance in preparation of
cases for court.
(c) Auxiliary Services Division, which shall be responsible for the
operation of departmental communications systems, the
maintenance of departmental records, the safeguarding and
protection of all persons and property in the custody of the
department, the maintenance and operation of the lockup and
the maintenance of all property owned/operated by the
department, including vehicle maintenance.
(2) The Office of the Chief of Police shall provide the following staff
functions to the entire police services unit:
(a) Administrative office responsible for the supervision and
control of all matters related to unit personnel, the formulation
of departmental policy, regulations and procedures, the
preparation and administration of grants and programs as
approved by the Manager, other projects as desired and
designated and the preparation of statistical and written
information designed to assess the criminal threat and
evaluate unit efficiency in alleviating the threat.
(b) Crime prevention program designed to communicate the
essential principles and procedure in crime protection,
alleviate, to the greatest extent, criminal trends within the
Municipality and foster support from the public for police
efforts in general.
§ 6-16 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 6-16
6:95
§ 6-17. Coordination.
The Department of Public Safety shall be coordinated with other municipal
departments and Volunteer Fire Department personnel under the direction
of the Chief of Police.
(c) Traffic safety responsible for the administration and
coordination of all matters related to traffic law enforcement,
the direction of the parking enforcement program and the
supervision of the school crossing guard program.
(d) Training programs designed to maintain or enhance
professional police service proficiency.
(3) The coordination of fire suppression efforts involving the volunteer
fire companies of the Municipality as those efforts involve and
affect the Municipality.
(4) The coordination of emergency medical services involving the
volunteer fire companies of the Municipality as those efforts
involve and affect the Municipality and the preparation of a
disaster relief program coordinating the capabilities of career
service employees, fire company volunteers and their respective
resources.
(5) Cooperation with the designated Emergency Management
Coordinator as required by Monroeville's Emergency Management
Plan.
(6) The coordination with life safety inspections performed by other
departments or levels of government and the issuance of permits
not issued by the Department of Community Development or the
Department of Fire, Building and Zoning Code Enforcement as
required by law dealing with life safety; also, the issuance and/or
application procedures for those permits where the question of
public safety is paramount, such as solicitation permits, parade and
demonstration permits, etc.
§ 6-16 § 6-17
6:96
ARTICLE VIII
Department of Building and Engineering
[Amended 7-11-2000 by Ord. No. 214953]
§ 6-18. Functions.
The functions of the Department of Building and Engineering Services shall
work in conjunction with the independent Engineer in the administration
and direction of municipal activity pertaining to:
§ 6-19. Coordination.
The Department of Engineering shall be coordinated with other municipal
departments under the direction of the Director.
A. The provision of engineering services, including, but not limited to:
(1) Street and highway design;
(2) Sewer system design;
(3) Traffic engineering;
(4) Construction inspection of public works;
(5) Rights-of-way;
(6) Surveying;
(7) Street construction;
(8) Streetlighting;
(9) Traffic signalization;
(10) Drainage system design;
(11) Mapping and public works information keeping;
(12) Traffic signal repair;
(13) Grading and excavation.
B. The provision of building and code inspection services, including, but
not limited to:
(1) Building Code and safety inspection;
(2) Building permit issuance; and
(3) Fire and safety activities.
53.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for the merging of the Department of Engineering
and the Department of Fire, Building and Zoning Code Enforcement into the Department
of Building and Engineering.
§ 6-18 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 6-19
6:97

ARTICLE IX
Department of Public Works
[Amended 5-12-1998 by Ord. No. 2078]
§ 6-20. Functions.
The functions of the Department of Public Works shall be the administration
and direction of municipal activity pertaining to:
A. The provision of special services and public works, including, but not
limited to:
(1) Building custodial service.
(2) Vehicle maintenance.
(3) Cost accounting.
(4) Performance reporting.
(5) Building and grounds maintenance.
B. The provision of street maintenance services, including, but not limited
to:
(1) Street repair.
(2) Street cleaning.
(3) Street marking and striping.
(4) Snow removal and winter maintenance.
(5) Street sign and traffic sign manufacturing and procurement.
(6) Street sign and traffic sign installation and maintenance.
(7) Storm sewer construction.
(8) Storm sewer maintenance.
C. The provision of street tree maintenance.
D. The provision for collection of residential solid waste and recyclables
produced in the Municipality and coordination of storage and disposal
of solid waste, recyclables and wastewater treatment.
E. The provision of sanitary sewer services, including:
(1) Sanitary sewer construction.
(2) Sanitary sewer maintenance.
F. The provision of animal control services, including:
§ 6-20 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 6-20
6:99
§ 6-21. Coordination.
(1) Enforcement of local ordinances to effectively deal with problems
and complaints arising from animals owned throughout the
Municipality.
(2) Proper disposal and housing of animals.
G. The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for the
performance of the following functions with regard to the various
municipal parks and municipal park maintenance services as follows:
(1) Grass cutting at ball fields, soccer fields and related playing field
maintenance.
(2) Maintenance of all facilities in the park.
(3) Maintenance of all park lands.
A. The Department of Public Works shall be coordinated with other
municipal departments under the direction of the Public Works
Director(s).
B. The Department of Public Works shall be coordinated with the
Department of Community Development and the Department of Fire,
Building and Zoning Code Enforcement.
§ 6-20 § 6-21
6:100
ARTICLE X
Department of Recreation, Parks and Human Services
[Amended 5-12-1998 by Ord. No. 2078]
§ 6-22. Functions.
§ 6-23. Coordination.
The Department of Recreation, Parks and Human Services shall coordinate
with the Recreation and Parks Advisory Board and other departments under
the direction of the Director of Recreation, Parks and Human Services.
A. The functions of the Department of Recreation, Parks and Human
Services shall be the administration and control of municipal activity
pertaining to recreation programs and park and recreational facility
utilization, maintenance and operation.
B. The Department of Recreation, Parks and Human Services shall be
responsible for the performance of the following functions:
(1) The administration, organization and conduct of recreational
programs for all citizens of the Municipality.
(2) The development of procedures and regulations designed to
facilitate park and other recreational facility utilization.
(3) The supervision of the park development program.
(4) The planning of new and expanded recreational opportunities and
park facilities.
§ 6-22 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 6-23
6:101

ARTICLE XI
Authorities, Boards and Commissions
§ 6-24. Creation, continuance and termination.
The authorities, boards, and commissions established by the Municipality
before the effective date of this chapter shall continue in existence under
the provisions of any enabling law or under the provisions of the Home
Rule Charter, and the same shall continue in the future until terminated as
provided by law or the Home Rule Charter.
§ 6-24 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 6-24
6:103

ARTICLE XII
Financial Disclosure by Municipal Officials
§ 6-25. Purpose.
Where government is based on the consent of the governed, every citizen
is entitled to have confidence in the integrity of its government. In order to
enhance citizen confidence in local government, the disclosure of financial
interests of certain municipal officers and employees is required.
§ 6-26. Disclosure of financial interest.
Annually, by May 1 of each year, the members of the Municipal Council, the
Mayor, the Planning Commission, the Zoning Hearing Board, the Pension
Committees, the Library Board, the Monroeville Water Authority,54 all
appointed administrative employees and department heads shall complete
a disclosure of financial interest form.
§ 6-27. Disclosure form.
The Municipal Manager shall prepare a form for the disclosure of material
financial interest or may elect to use the form as provided by State Ethics
Commission which shall be submitted to the Manager's office. The form
shall included, as provided in § 43-7 of the Monroeville Ethics Code, for
the disclosure of any direct or indirect financial or other private interest in
any proposed legislation of himself or herself, of any of his or her family
members, of any person with whom he/she has a business or other financial
relationship or of each firm, corporation or other entity in which he/she has
a present or anticipated interest, direct or indirect.
§ 6-28. Maintenance of form.
The Municipal Manager shall provide for the maintenance of such forms
which shall be available for public inspection upon written request.
54.Editor's Note: This Authority's name was revised 5-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2223 to be the
"Monroeville Municipal Authority."
§ 6-25 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 6-28
6:105

ARTICLE XIII
Activities of Council and Mayor and Expense Reimbursements
[Added 1-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2357]
§ 6-29. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVITIES TO BE PERFORMED — In addition to attending meetings or
committee meetings of Council and participating therein and exercising
discretion in respect to the taking of official action:
EXPENSE —
Face-to-face, telephonic and written nonpartisan communications with
residents concerning the availability, delivery and quality of municipal
services;
A.
Face-to-face, telephonic and written communications with
representatives of county, state and federal governments and agencies
and with representatives of other municipal governments and agencies;
B.
Face-to-face, telephonic and written communications with vendors,
contractors, professionals and developers conducting business with
or within the Municipality and prospective vendors, contractors,
professionals and developers; and
C.
Educational workshops, seminars and meetings having as subject
matter municipal government and management thereof, as well as the
impact of state and federal law affecting municipal affairs.
D.
Telecommunications expense supplemental shall be paid on a flat rate
of $125 per month to supplement Council representatives' use of fax
machines, computer/Internet, cell phones, pagers, telephones and
other telecommunications devices for all of the activities performed
for the benefit of the Municipality of Monroeville and to facilitate
interaction with the public;
A.
The actual cost of written nonpartisan communications, including
reimbursement for supplies, photo copying, postage and labor
associated therewith when not prepared or provided by municipal
employees;
B.
The actual cost of travel, including mileage allowance, when utilizing a
personally or family owned vehicle; and
C.
The actual cost of loss of work in respect of those activities to be
performed which can only be performed during hours of regular
employment, provided written documentation and certification thereof
is submitted.
D.
§ 6-29 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 6-30
6:107
§ 6-30. Expense vouchers.
Members of Council and the Mayor shall be reimbursed for any expense
arising out of activities to be performed by them, provided the allowance
therefor is claimed or the actual cost thereof is documented and submitted
by an expense voucher.
§ 6-31. Provision for expense reimbursement and documentation;
formulas for certain expense allowances.
A. Reimbursement of expense for activities to be performed by members
of Council or the Mayor shall not exceed those amounts set forth for
such expense in the Annual Budget.
B. Telephone expense shall include: 1) either charges for a telephone
certified by a member of Council or the Mayor as being used solely and
exclusively for activities to be performed, or 2) specific individual
telephone call expenses certified by a member of Council or the Mayor
as being incurred as an activity to be performed.
C. Travel expenses shall be actual charges incurred for transportation
relating to activities to be performed. Travel associated with activities
to be performed, as certified to have been accomplished exclusively
through the use of a personal vehicle of a member of Council or the
Mayor, shall be reimbursed at the rate as set by the Internal Revenue
Service on an annual basis; plus, actual charges for parking, pursuant
to the Internal Revenue Code. Travel outside the Municipality of
Monroeville solely and exclusively for activities to be performed may be
made utilizing a Municipal vehicle, and in such a case, reimbursement
would be made only for actual expenses incurred, e.g., parking
expenses, etc.
§ 6-30 § 6-31
6:108
Chapter 11
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs, cats and other animals — See Ch. 180. Fees — See Ch. 194.
§ 11-1. Office established; powers and duties.
The office of Animal Control Officer is hereby established for the
Municipality of Monroeville. Such officer shall be deemed a "police officer"
as that term is used in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Dog Law of
196555 and shall have the powers and duties of a police officer in respect
to the administration and enforcement of said Dog Law and prosecutions
thereunder.
§ 11-2. Control and jurisdiction.
Said Animal Control Officer shall be under the control and jurisdiction of the
Chief of Police and shall be deemed his agent for the purpose of disposition
of dogs.
§ 11-3. Additional duties.
Said Animal Control Officer shall have the further duty and responsibility
of enforcing any Municipality of Monroeville ordinances relating to the
control of animals, birds or fowl. Said Animal Control Officer shall not
have any other duties, authority or responsibility of a police officer of the
Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 11-4. Uniform and badge.
The Mayor shall prescribe a uniform and badge which may be worn by the
Animal Control Officer, and said officer shall be entitled to the same uniform
cost allowance as is provided for regular police officers of the Municipality
of Monroeville.
§ 11-5. Charges related to animal seizure. [Amended 7-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 2042]
The Municipality of Monroeville shall charge the owner of any dog seized in
the administration and enforcement of the Dog Law56 the sum as provided
in Chapter 194, Fees, for such seizure, and an additional sum as provided in
Chapter 194, Fees, per day for expenses incurred by reason of its detention.
55.Editor's Note: The 1965 Dog Law was repealed in 1982 by P.L. 784, No. 225; see now 3 P.S.
§ 459-101 et seq.
56.Editor's Note: The 1965 Dog Law as repealed in 1982 by P.L. 784, No. 225; see now 3 P.S.
§ 459-101 et seq.
§ 6-31 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER § 11-5
11:109
Such charges shall be paid prior to the releasing of any dog to its owner.
Similar charges shall be imposed for any other animal, bird or fowl seized
and detained under municipal ordinance or other laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Chapter 16
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
CHARTER REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and authorities — See
Art. XVIII.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 316.
§ 11-5 § 11-5
16:110
ARTICLE I
Hospital Authority
[Adopted 5-11-1976 by Ord. No. 1010]
§ 16-1. Intent.
The Municipal Council of this municipality hereby signifies its intention to
organize and incorporate a municipality authority under the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945 (Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382), as amended.57
§ 16-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The Mayor or, in his absence, another member of Council and the Manager
or a designee are hereby authorized and directed to execute, on behalf
of the Municipality, Articles of Incorporation for such an authority in
substantially the following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE SECRETARY OF
THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
HARRISBURG, PENNSYLVANIA
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L.
382, known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended,58
and pursuant to an ordinance adopted and enacted by the Municipal
Council of the Municipality of Monroeville signifying its desire to organize
and incorporate an authority thereunder, the Municipality of Monroeville,
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, does hereby certify:
A. The name of the Authority shall be the "Monroeville Hospital
Authority."
B. The Authority is formed under the provisions of the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.59
C. No other authority organized under the Municipality Authorities Act
of 1945, as amended, or under the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463,
repealed, is in existence in and for the Municipality of Monroeville,
except for the Monroeville Water Authority.
D. The name of the incorporating municipality is the Municipality of
Monroeville, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and the names and
addresses of its officers and councilmen are on file and available for
inspection in the municipal offices. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
57.Editor's Note: the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed
by L. 2001, June 19, P.L. 287, No. 22. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
58.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
59.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 16-1 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 16-2
16:111
The Board of Authority shall consist of seven members, each of whom shall
be appointed by the Municipal Council of the Municipality of Monroeville.
The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the Board
of the Authority to be formed hereby are on file and available for inspection
in the municipal offices. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
Each of said appointees is a citizen of the Municipality of Monroeville.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned have executed these Articles
of Incorporation on behalf of the Municipality of Monroeville and have
caused the Seal of the Municipality to hereunto be affixed this ______ day of
_______________, 1976.
(SEAL)
ATTEST: MUNICIPALITY OF MONROEVILLE
S/ Marshall W. Bond
Municipal Manager
By S/ R.E. Droske
Mayor
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA )
) SS.
County of Allegheny )
On this ________ day of _______________, 1976, before me, the undersigned,
personally came the above-named RONALD E. DROSKE, and MARSHALL
W. BOND, whose official positions in the incorporating municipality are,
respectively, Mayor and Manager of the Municipality of Monroeville, and
who in due form of law acknowledged the foregoing to be the act and deed
of the incorporating municipality for the purpose therein specified.
WITNESS my hand and seal the day and year aforesaid.
(SEAL) S/ Helen P. Tucker
Notary Public
§ 16-3. Publication of notice of adoption.
The Manager of the Municipality is hereby authorized and directed to cause
a notice of the adoption and enactment of this article to be published as
required by § 3 of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.60
§ 16-4. Filing.
The municipal officers executing said Articles of Incorporation as aforesaid
are hereby further authorized and directed to file such articles and to file
the necessary proofs of publication of the notice provided for in § 16-3
hereof with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to
60.Editor's Note: the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed
by L. 2001, June 19, P.L. 287, No. 22. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 16-2 § 16-4
16:112
do all other acts and things necessary or appropriate to effect the
incorporation of said Authority.
§ 16-5. First members of Board; terms of office.
The persons named in the form of Articles of Incorporation herein set
forth to serve as the first members of the Board of said Authority as
the appointees of the Municipal Council of this municipality are hereby
appointed as such Board members; each such appointee's term of office
shall commence on the date of enactment of this article, subject to the
issuance of a certificate of incorporation by the Secretary of the
commonwealth, and his term shall expire on the date set forth in said form
of Articles of Incorporation.
§ 16-6. Authorized projects.
The Authority is limited to the undertaking of only those projects which
it is hereafter authorized to undertake by this article of the Council of
the Municipality of Monroeville. The Authority is hereby authorized to
undertake the East Suburban Health Center Project to be leased to Forbes
Health System, on the property located at the corner of Haymaker and
McGinley Roads, owned by the Forbes Health System at the time of
enactment of this article, it being hereby determined that the provision of
those health care facilities by the Authority is desirable for the health and
safety of the residents of the Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 16-4 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 16-6
16:113

ARTICLE II
Monroeville Municipal Authority
[On 5-14-2002, the Municipal Council of the Municipality of
Monroeville adopted Ord. No. 2223, which revised the Articles of
Incorporation of the Monroeville Water Authority to adopt a new
name, the "Monroeville Municipal Authority," and to add to its
powers and purposes to effect the transfer of the Sanitary Sewer
System to said Authority. The complete text of Ord. No. 2223, and
related Ord. No. 2229, is on file in the office of the Municipal
Manager, where it may be examined during regular office hours.]
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 16-6
16:115
Chapter 21
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police personnel — See Ch. 105.
§ 16-6 § 16-6
21:116
ARTICLE I
Establishment of Commission
§ 21-1. Definition of terms.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPLICANT — Any individual who applies in writing to the Commission
in response to a legally advertised notice of vacancy and/or examination
for any position in the Police Department.
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — The Municipal Manager of the
Municipality of Monroeville, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
CERTIFICATION — The submission to the appointing authority
pursuant to its request of three names taken from the eligible list
developed by the Civil Service Commission.
CHAIRPERSON — The Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission of
the Municipality of Monroeville, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION — The Commission appointed by the
Council, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Borough Code, to serve the
execution of this part and other functions as Council may prescribe.
ELIGIBLE — A person whose name is recorded on a current eligible list
or furlough list.
ELIGIBLE LIST — The list of names of persons who have passed all
examinations for a particular position in the Police Department.
EXAMINATION — The series of tests given to candidates to determine
their qualifications for a position in the Police Department.
EXTERNAL CANDIDATE — Individual not currently employed by the
Municipality of Monroeville who is an applicant or candidate for a
posted position.
FURLOUGH LIST — The list of persons who were laid off from positions
in the Police Department because of a reduction in the number of
officers in the Police Department.
GOVERNING BODY — The Municipal Council of the Municipality of
Monroeville, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
INTERNAL CANDIDATE — Individual currently employed by the
Municipality of Monroeville who is a candidate for a promotional posted
position.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the Municipality of Monroeville.
MUNICIPAL COUNCIL or COUNCIL — The Council of the Municipality
of Monroeville.
MUNICIPAL MANAGER — The Manager of the Municipality of
Monroeville.
§ 21-1 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION § 21-1
21:117
§ 21-2. The Commission.
§ 21-3. Offices incompatible with Civil Service Commissioner.
No Commissioner shall at the same time hold an elective, appointed, or
employment office under the United States government, the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania or any political subdivision of the commonwealth; except
POLICE OFFICER — For purposes of the rules and regulations, a police
officer is a sworn full-time law enforcement position in the Municipality
of Monroeville Police Department.
PROBATIONER — A police officer in the Police Department who has
been appointed from an eligible list, but who has not yet completed the
probationary period.
PROMOTION — The act or fact of being raised in position or rank
pursuant to Article X, Section 1001 of Home Rule Charter.
REASSIGNMENT — A change to a different position which may result
in a change in salary.
REDUCTION IN RANK — A change to a lesser position or rank where
the employee fulfilled all of the requirements of these rules and
regulations for both the prior and current position and/or rank.
However, a decrease in salary without a change to a different position
or rank shall not necessarily constitute a reduction in rank.
REMOVAL — The permanent separation of a police officer from the
Police Department.
SUSPENSION — The temporary separation without pay of a police
officer from the Police Department.
B. For the purpose of this section, all terms which are set forth in the
masculine gender shall be construed to refer equally to the feminine
gender.
A. The Commission shall consist of three Commissioners who shall be
qualified electors of the Municipality of Monroeville and who shall be
appointed by the Municipal Council initially to serve for terms of two,
four, and six years and, as terms thereafter expire, shall be appointed
for terms of six years.
B. Any vacancy occurring in the Commission for any reason whatsoever
shall be filled by Council for the unexpired term within the period of 30
days after such vacancy occurs.
C. Each member of the Commission, before entering upon the discharge of
the duties of their office, shall take an oath or affirmation to support the
Constitution of the United States and of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and to perform their official duties with fidelity. The Civil
Service Commission shall receive no compensation.
§ 21-1 § 21-3
21:118
one member of the Commission may be a member of Council of the
Municipality and one member may be of the teaching profession.
§ 21-4. Organization of Commission; quorum.
§ 21-5. Duties of Chairperson.
The Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the Vice Chairperson shall
preside at all meetings and hearings of the Commission, decide all points of
order or procedure and perform any duties required by law or by the within
rules and regulations.
§ 21-6. Duties of the Secretary.
The Secretary shall carry on, at the discretion of the Commission, all official
correspondence of the Commission, send out all notices required by law and
by these rules and regulations, keep a record of each examination or other
official action of the Commission, and perform all other duties required by
law or by these rules and regulations.
§ 21-7. Meetings.
Except for the biennial organization meeting, all meetings shall be held
either at the call of the Chairperson or at the call of two members of the
Commission. Unless all members shall waive the requirement, a minimum
of 24 hours' written notice of each meeting shall be given each member.
Except when otherwise provided in these rules or by Pennsylvania law,
meetings shall be open to the public unless a public meeting would breach
the normal confidentiality of employee data. All rules or regulations of the
Commission shall be adopted at a public meeting following the regulations
of the Pennsylvania Sunshine Act.
§ 21-8. Clerks and supplies.
A. The Commission shall have three members and, upon appointment,
shall organize within 10 days of its appointment and shall elect one of
its members as its Chairperson, one of its members as its Vice
Chairperson and one of its members as the Secretary.
B. The Commission shall thereafter meet and organize on the first Monday
of February of each even-numbered year.
C. Two members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum and no
action of the Commission shall be valid unless it shall have the
concurrence of at least two members.
A. The governing body shall furnish the Commission with supplies and
clerical assistance as may be necessary for the Commission to fulfill its
duties.
B. The Commission may retain counsel and any other consultants or
experts, including physicians and psychiatrists, as are necessary, with
§ 21-3 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION § 21-8
21:119
§ 21-9. Rules and regulations.
§ 21-10. Minutes and records.
§ 21-11. Investigations.
prior written notice to the Municipality of Monroeville of its intention
to do so.
C. The elected and appointed officials of the Municipality of Monroeville
shall assist the Commission with all reasonable and appropriate efforts,
including compensation for any counsel or experts retained by the
Commission.
A. The Commission shall have the power to prescribe, amend, revise, void,
replace, or enforce the rules and regulations for carrying into effect the
provisions of Article X, Section 1001 of the Home Rule Charter and
references to the Borough Code for any reason by action of a majority of
the Commission at any properly convened meeting of the Commission.
B. Before any changes to these rules and regulations become effective, the
Municipal Council must approve and adopt them by a public vote.
C. These rules and regulations, and any amendments thereto, shall be
made available to the public for distribution and inspection.
A. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and records of
examinations and other official action.
B. All records of the Commission shall be preserved and disposed of
according to the retention and disposition schedule for records of
Pennsylvania municipalities issued by the Local Government Records
Committee under the authority of the Municipal Records Act, 1968 P.L.
961, No. 428, 53 P.S. 9001.
C. The Secretary or, in his absence, the Vice Chairman shall keep minutes
of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each
question.
D. If the member is absent or fails to vote, the Secretary or, in his absence,
the Vice Chairman shall indicate that fact in the minutes.
E. A copy of all minutes and records shall be filed with the Municipal
Manager, and such copies shall be maintained within the physical
confines of the Monroeville Municipal Building.
A. The Commission shall have the power to conduct investigations
concerning all matters relating to the administration and enforcement
of these rules and regulations.
B. The Chairperson of the Commission is authorized to administer oaths
and affirmations in connection with such investigations.
§ 21-8 § 21-12
21:120
§ 21-12. Subpoenas.
§ 21-13. Annual report.
§ 21-14. Biennial review and report.
A. The Commission shall have the power to:
(1) Issue subpoenas over the signature of the Chairperson.
(2) Require the attendance of witnesses and the production of records
and papers pertaining to any investigation or inquiry.
B. The fees of witnesses for attendance and travel shall be the same as for
witnesses appearing in the courts and shall be paid from appropriations
for the incidental expense of the Commission.
C. All officers in public service and employees of the Municipality of
Monroeville shall attend and testify at a duly called Civil Service
Commission meeting when required to do so by the Commission.
D. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena issued by the
Commission, upon conviction of such refusal or neglect in a summary
proceeding, that person may be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed
$100 and, in default of the payment of such fine and cost, may be
imprisoned not to exceed 30 days.
E. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena, the
Commission may apply by petition to the Court of Common Pleas of
Allegheny County for its subpoena, requiring the attendance of such
persons before the Commission or the court to testify and to produce
any records and papers necessary and, in default thereof, shall be held
in contempt of court.
A. The Commission shall make an annual report by January 15 to the
Municipal Council.
B. The Commission's annual report shall contain a brief summary of its
work during the prior year and a full accounting for any expenditure of
public monies.
C. The annual report shall be available for public inspection.
A. The Commission shall, after its biennial reorganization meeting, meet
to review, in their entirety, the Civil Service Rules and Regulations in
effect at that time.
B. Upon completion of the review, the Commission shall submit a report to
Council with its recommendations for possible updates and
modifications to the rules and regulations.
C. If the Commission recommends no changes to the rules and
regulations, then the report will indicate as such.
§ 21-12 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION § 21-14
21:121

ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations for the Certification of Police Personnel
§ 21-15. Positions, test applications and notice.
A. Nondiscrimination policy.
(1) The Municipality of Monroeville is an equal opportunity employer.
(2) It is the Municipality of Monroeville's and the Commission's policy
to grant equal employment opportunities to qualified persons
without regard to race, religion, gender, age, marital status,
national origin, or non-job-related disability.
(3) The Municipality of Monroeville and the Commission will provide
equal opportunities in employment and promotion.
B. Public notice.
(1) The Commission shall conspicuously post, in the Municipality of
Monroeville Municipal Building, an announcement of the hiring or
promotional testing and set forth the time and place of every
examination, together with the information as to the type of
position to be filled, the requirements for that position, where
applications may be obtained and the deadline for filing those
applications.
(2) At least two weeks prior to the close of the application period,
publication of the notice shall occur in at least one newspaper
circulating generally in the Municipality of Monroeville.
C. Full-time civil service positions. The Council of the Municipality of
Monroeville authorized and recognizes the following full-time civil
service positions within the Municipal Police Department:
(1) Patrol officer.
(2) Corporal.
(3) Sergeant.
(4) Lieutenant.
D. Application availability.
(1) Application forms shall be available to all interested persons in the
office of the Municipal Manager and from such other offices and
officers that the Commission, from time to time, may choose to
designate.
(2) Application forms may be mailed to a potential applicant upon
written, e-mail or telephone request. However, the Commission
assumes no responsibility for missed filing deadlines due to a delay
in mail delivery.
§ 21-15 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION § 21-15
21:123
§ 21-16. Qualifications for patrol officer.
E. Recording and filing applications.
(1) Applications for positions in the Police Department shall be
received at the Municipality of Monroeville Municipal Building only
after an examination has been properly advertised and before the
expiration of the deadline for receiving applications, which must be
set forth in the public advertisement.
(2) The Municipal Manager or his designee will receive applications.
(3) The Municipal Manager or his designee shall record the receipt of
all applications and provide each applicant with notice of the time
and place for the first portion of the testing process, the written
examination.
(4) Any application containing material errors or omissions may, at the
discretion of the Commission, be returned to the applicant for
correction prior to the deadline for filing applications, after which
no new applications or amended applications will be accepted.
A. Eligibility for examination.
(1) In order to be eligible for participation in any examination for any
full-time civil service position within the Police Department, an
applicant must submit a completed application form to the
Commission before the expiration of the deadline stated by the
Commission for that specific examination.
(2) The applicant must make an oath or affirmation that the application
is completed truthfully, and the applicant is subject to the penalties
of 18 Pa. C.S. 54904 relating to falsification of information to
authorities.
(3) At the time of filing of an application, each applicant shall pay a
nonrefundable fee in the amount of $50. Said application fee shall
be used exclusively for the purpose of defraying the costs of the
Municipality in conducting and administering the examination
process. Said application fee may be increased, from time to time,
by ordinance of Municipal Council, based upon the increased costs
of administering and conducting the examination process.
B. Age and residency requirements.
(1) All applicants for the Police Department must have reached their
21st birthday before the deadline for submitting completed
applications. Applicants must move or establish permanent
residence in the Municipality within six months of completing their
probationary period. Appeals must be filed within 30 days before
the expiration of the permanent residency effective date set forth
herein.
§ 21-15 § 21-16
21:124
§ 21-17. Examination and grading procedure.
(2) An applicant may appeal to the Civil Service Commission for one
six-month extension of the residency requirement for good cause.
Appeals must be filed within 30 days before the expiration of the
permanent residency effective date set forth herein.
C. General qualifications.
(1) Every applicant for a position in the Police Department shall
possess a diploma from an accredited high school or graduate
equivalency diploma. In addition, every applicant must be a United
States citizen; be physically and mentally fit to perform the full
duties of a police officer; be certified as a police officer as stated in
Act 120, Municipal Police Officers' Education and Training
Program; must have been a full-time police officer for a minimum of
one year full-time (2,080 hours) or two years as a part-time
(minimum 1,000 hours/year) police officer prior to appointment;
and possess a valid motor vehicle operator's license issued by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. Rejection of an applicant. The Commission may refuse to examine or, if
examined, may refuse to certify as eligible after examination any
applicant who is found to lack any of the minimum qualifications for
examination prescribed in these rules and regulations for the particular
position for which the applicant has applied. In addition, the
Commission may refuse to certify any applicant who is physically or
mentally unfit to perform the full duties of the position applied for, or
who is a habitual substance abuser, who is guilty of any crime involving
moral turpitude, or of infamous or notoriously disgraced conduct, as
defined by PA Crime Code Sub Chapter B and Chapter 59, or who has
been dismissed from public service for delinquency or misconduct in
office, or has been convicted of a serious misdemeanor or a felony, or
who is affiliated with any group whose policies or activities are
subversive to the forms of government set forth in the constitutions and
laws of the United States and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Hearing for disqualified applicants. Any applicant who believes that he
or she is aggrieved by the actions of the Commission in refusing to
examine or to certify them as eligible after examination, may request a
hearing before the Commission. Within 10 days after such request, the
Commission shall designate a time and place for the hearing. The
applicant or aggrieved party must make his or her request for a hearing
in writing within 10 calendar days of the date when the party knew or
should have known of the Commission's action which is being
challenged. The decision of the Commission shall be final.
A. General examination requirements for the position of police officer. The
examination for police officer will consist of a written and oral
examination. The written and oral will be graded on a one-hundredpoint
scale with the written examination representing 70% of the final
§ 21-16 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION § 21-17
21:125
score and the oral examination representing 30% of the final score.
In addition, each applicant will undergo a physical fitness test and a
background investigation. These tests and investigation will be graded
on a pass/fail basis for every applicant. After an applicant has been
extended an offer of employment, final appointment shall be contingent
upon the applicant passing a physical, which will include a drug
screening procedure, and a psychological examination.
B. Appointment of examiners. The Commission shall appoint a written
examination administrator, an oral examination board, a polygraph
examiner, a physical fitness examiner, a medical examiner and a
psychological examiner to conduct the appropriate examination(s) as
required by these rules and regulations.
C. Written and ethics examinations. The written examination shall be
graded on a one-hundred-point scale, and an applicant must score 70%
or higher in order to continue in the application process. Applicants
scoring less than 70% shall be rejected. Within 30 days after the
administration of the written examination, all applicants shall be given
written notice of their test results and passing applicants shall be
scheduled for oral examination appointments.
D. Oral examination. Every applicant who scored 70% or higher in the
written examination shall be given an oral examination which will be
graded on a one-hundred-point scale with a score of 70% or higher
necessary for passing. The oral examination shall involve questioning
applicants on how they would handle situations relevant to police work.
Within 30 days after the applicants' oral examination, they shall be
informed of the score in their oral examination and total overall score,
and each passing applicant shall be informed of the date for physical
fitness testing.
E. Oral Examination Board.
(1) The Civil Service Commission shall, before the oral examination
process begins, appoint the members of the Oral Examination
Board.
(2) The Oral Examination Board shall consist of three appointed
members.
(3) No member of the Municipality of Monroeville Council or
Monroeville Civil Service Commission shall be a member of the
Oral Examination Board. The following individuals may be
members of the Oral Examination Board:
(a) The Chief of Police of the Municipality of Monroeville Police
Department;
(b) A resident(s) of Municipality of Monroeville;
(c) A member(s) of the Pennsylvania State Police;
§ 21-17 § 21-17
21:126
(d) A representative(s) from a bona fide testing agency which
conducts interviews for police officers; or
(e) An instructor(s) who teaches law enforcement classes at a
university, college, technical school, or other certified police
officer training academy.
(4) The Civil Service Commission shall, before the oral examination
process begins, submit the names of the Oral Examination Board
appointees to the Municipal Manager.
(5) Council shall, before the oral examination process begins, have the
right to strike any and all Oral Examination Board appointees who
are not in compliance with the criteria set forth herein to be a
member of the Oral Examination Board. If no strike is offered after
seven days of notification by the Commission, then no appointee
shall be rejected.
F. Veterans' preference points. Pursuant to the Veterans' Preference Act,
any applicant for the position of patrol officer who qualifies as a
"soldier" under this Act shall receive an additional 10 points on top of
his or her total score if that applicant had received passing scores
under Subsections A, C and D.
G. Physical fitness testing. An applicant for the position of police officer
must meet the following:
(1) Stretcher carry. Applicants will be paired off and required to carry
a stretcher with a simulated patient weighing approximately 200
pounds, over a distance of 100 feet. Those applicants failing on the
first attempt will be allowed to retake the exercise with a person
who has successfully completed the exercise.
(2) Body drag. An applicant is required to remove a simulated motor
vehicle operator weighing approximately 200 pounds from behind
the steering wheel of a motor vehicle and drag the simulated
operator to a point 50 feet from the motor vehicle.
(3) Quarter-mile run. An applicant is required to run a distance of 1/4
mile on a premeasured course in less than 110 seconds.
(4) Window climb. An applicant is required to climb through six-foothigh
level window without assistance onto a three-foot level
platform on the other side of the window, and then to the ground.
Applicants must then circle around a marker 20 feet beyond the
window and return up the three-foot-high platform and out the
window onto the ground below.
(5) Sit-ups. An applicant is required, when laying from a supine back
position, with straight legs, hands touching shoulders and crossed
on the chest, to come to an upright sitting position (90 degrees) 15
times in a sixty-second time period.
§ 21-17 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION § 21-17
21:127
§ 21-18. Certification of the list of eligible applicants and
appointment.
§ 21-19. Appointment.
(6) Push-ups. An applicant is required to complete 15 push-ups in a
forty-second time period. The applicant will start by supporting his/
her body by positioning the hands and feet in front of them, and
applicant will lower the body as a unit with shoulders, hips and legs
in the same plane to a point one to two inches from the floor and
return to the front support position.
(7) Motor vehicle push. An applicant is required to push an averagesized
motor vehicle a distance of 25 feet on a premeasured flat
course.
A. Creation of eligibility list.
(1) At the completion of the examination requirements set forth in
§ 21-17, the Commission shall rank all passing applicants on a list
with the applicant receiving the highest score at the top of the list
and the applicant receiving the lowest passing score at the bottom
of the list. Applicants who qualify for Veterans' Preference and
Residence Preference Points or Residency Preference Points shall
have those points added to their passing score prior to being
ranked on the eligibility list. In the case of tied scores, the tie will
be broken by giving preference to the applicant who submitted a
final completed application first. If both tied applicants submitted
their complete application on the same day, then the applicants
shall be ranked in alphabetical order by surname.
(2) The eligibility list should be valid for one year from the date the
Commission ranks all passing applicants, assigns Veterans'
Preference Points and formally adopts the eligibility list. The
Commission may at its sole discretion, by a vote of the majority of
Council at a duly authorized Council meeting, extend the list for an
additional year. The Commission may, at its sole discretion, void an
eligibility list at any time for any reason.
A. The Municipal Manager, in accordance with Section 1001 of the Home
Rule Charter, may fill any vacancy in an existing position in the Police
Department by the reappointment or reinstatement of a former
employee of the Police Department who had been furloughed.
B. Except for physical and psychological examinations, no other testing
shall be required for a furloughed, rehired or reappointed employee.
C. If no furlough list exists, or if positions remain to be filled after all of the
officers on the furlough list are offered reemployment, every full-time
civil service position shall be filled only in the following manner:
§ 21-17 § 21-19
21:128
§ 21-20. Appointment of Chief of Police and Assistant Chief of
Police.
(1) The Municipal Manager shall notify the Commission of any vacancy
which is to be filled and shall request the certification of three
names from the list of those eligible who have received the highest
total scores on the civil service testing.
(2) If three names are not available, then the Commission shall certify
the next highest name(s) remaining on the list.
(3) The Municipal Manager shall make an appointment from one of the
three names certified with reference to the merits and fitness of the
candidates.
(4) However, for initial appointment to the position of police officer,
when any applicant on the certified list is a veteran, that applicant
shall be selected.
D. The Municipal Manager may object to one or more of the persons
certified for the reasons set forth in § 21-16D of these rules and
regulations.
E. If the candidate to whom the Municipal Manager objects fails to timely
exercise the rights to appeal under § 21-16E or if the Commission
declines to uphold the appeal, the Commission shall strike the name of
that candidate from the eligibility list and certify the next highest name
for inclusion on the list of three candidates for each name stricken off.
F. In the case that there is more than one vacancy to be filled, the
Commission shall certify, from the eligible list, a number of the highest
ranked candidates equal to the number of vacancies to be filled, plus
the next two highest ranked candidates. This provision will provide that
the last appointment will always be made from the remaining three
names certified.
A. The position of Chief of Police and Assistant Chief of Police in the
Municipality of Monroeville are not civil service positions and shall not
be filled as such unless otherwise explicitly appointed by the Municipal
Manager with the advice and consent of Council via resolution in
accordance with Home Rule Charter Section 1002.
B. The Municipal Manager may appoint a Chief of Police and/or Assistant
Chief of Police outside of the civil service system. The individuals
appointed shall be so appointed without civil service status.
C. If the Municipal Manager appoints a Chief of Police and/or Assistant
Chief of Police outside of the civil service system, the individual
appointed shall be so appointed without civil service status.
D. In the case of a vacancy in the office of Chief of Police and/or Assistant
Chief of Police, the Municipal Manager has full discretion in selecting
§ 21-19 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION § 21-20
21:129
§ 21-21. Background investigation.
the individual to fill the position of Chief of Police and/or Assistant Chief
of Police with advice and consent of Council.
E. In the event that the Municipal Manager decides to remove a Chief of
Police and/or Assistant Chief of Police, the appointed individual may be
returned to a prior rank if promoted from within the Municipality of
Monroeville's civil service system in accordance with Section 1002(c) of
the Monroeville Home Rule Charter. Otherwise, the individual may be
dismissed without a civil service hearing.
A. The Commission shall request the Chief of Police or the Chief's
designee to conduct a background investigation of applicants who have
passed the written, oral and physical components of the examination
and who remain one of the top three scores, including ties. In the event
of more than one vacancy to be filled, a number of the highest ranked
candidates equal to the number of vacancies to be filled, plus the next
two highest ranked candidates, shall also undergo the background
investigation.
B. The background investigation shall include:
(1) Interviews with the applicant's family, acquaintances, current and
former employers, current and former neighbors, references and
current and former teachers and school officials;
(2) Checking the applicant's credit history;
(3) Checking the applicant's criminal record for criminal convictions;
and
(4) Checking the applicant's driver's license record and history.
C. The applicant may be interviewed directly when the information
collected during the background investigation requires clarification or
explanation.
D. After the background investigation is completed, the Chief or designee
shall make a written recommendation to the Commission on whether
the applicant is appropriate for consideration for appointment as a fulltime
civil service police officer. Appropriateness of the applicant shall
be based on the criteria set forth in § 21-169D of these rules and
regulations.
E. If the Chief's recommendation is to disqualify an applicant, then a
detailed written explanation of the reasons for disqualification must be
included.
F. The Commission shall make the final determination on whether the
information collected during the background investigation warrants
rejection of the candidate.
§ 21-20 § 21-21
21:130
§ 21-22. Polygraph examination.
§ 21-23. Physical and psychological examinations.
G. Within 30 days after the Commission considers the recommendation of
the Chief of Police or designee, all applicants shall be given written
notice indicating whether they have passed the background
investigation.
A. Every application for the position of full-time civil service police officer
shall fill out a personal data questionnaire and may, at the discretion of
the Civil Service Commission, be required to undergo a polygraph
examination.
B. If a polygraph examination is required, the Commission shall furnish
the polygraph examiner with forms upon which the examiner shall state
whether any of the applicant's responses to questions from the
applicant's personal data questionnaire are deceptive.
C. The top three candidates from the Civil Service Commissions' certified
eligibility list shall undergo a polygraph test. In the event of more than
one vacancy to be filled, a number of the highest ranked candidates
equal to the number of vacancies to be filled plus the next two highest
ranked candidates shall also undergo the polygraph test.
D. The report on each examination shall be submitted to the Commission
within five days after the date of the examination.
E. The examiner shall ask questions based on the information contained in
the personal data questionnaire.
F. Before administering the test, the examiner shall ask each applicant
whether there is any more information related to the personal data
questionnaire that the applicant would like to provide.
G. After administering the test, the examiner shall again ask the applicant,
if deception is indicated, whether there is any information which the
applicant is withholding.
H. If the examiner shall deem any of the applicant's responses to be
deceptive, the examiner must tell the applicant immediately and give
the applicant an opportunity to explain, deny or admit the deception. If
the applicant denies being deceptive or if the explanation is found
unsatisfactory by the examiner, the applicant will be given the
opportunity to retake the test with a second examiner. Notice of the
opportunity to retest shall be given in writing to the applicant at the
applicant's cost. The second examiner will not have access to the
results of the first test prior to readministering the polygraph. If the
second examiner finds no deception, the applicant will be considered as
having passed the polygraph examination. If the second examiner also
finds the applicant deceptive, the applicant will be considered as having
failed the examination.
§ 21-21 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION § 21-23
21:131
§ 21-24. Probationary period.
A. After the Municipal Manager selects a candidate from the certified list
for appointment to the vacant position, that candidate shall submit to a
physical examination and a psychological examination by the
appropriate medical experts.
B. If the candidate successfully passes both the physical and psychological
examinations, then that candidate shall be appointed to the vacant
position in the Police Department for which the application was
submitted.
C. The appointment shall be contingent upon successfully passing both the
physical and psychological examinations.
D. Failure to pass either examination shall result in the candidate being
rejected from consideration.
E. The rejected candidate may appeal this decision under § 21-16E.
F. In the event the candidate is rejected, the Commission shall then certify
another name to be included with the two previously certified names for
consideration by the Municipal Manager pursuant to § 21-19.
A. Every successful applicant for the full-time civil service position of
police officer or for a promotional full-time civil service position within
the Police Department shall serve a minimum of six months, which can
be extended to a maximum of twelve-month probationary period
beginning the date of the probationary appointment.
B. During the probationary period, a newly hired full-time civil service
officer may only be dismissed for cause set forth in § 21-16D and the
Home Rule Charter.
C. During the probationary period, a promoted officer may only be
returned to a prior rank for cause set forth in § 21-16D.
D. During the probationary period, the Chief of Police shall monitor the
performance and the general acceptability of each probationer to
determine if the probationer is fully qualified for permanent
appointment.
E. At the end of each month during the probationary period, the Chief of
Police shall make a written evaluation related to the performance and
general acceptability of the probationer.
F. Each monthly evaluation report shall be reviewed with the probationer,
thereby giving him or her an opportunity to improve upon his or her
performance and general acceptability.
G. The Chief of Police shall make a final report no less than 20 days and no
more than 40 days prior to the end of the probation period for each
probationer.
§ 21-23 § 21-24
21:132
§ 21-25. Provisional appointments.
§ 21-26. Promotions for Corporal, Sergeant and/or Lieutenant.
H. The final report shall contain a final recommendation as to whether the
probationer should be offered permanent appointment.
I. All reports shall be submitted by the Chief of Police to the Municipal
Manager and members of Council upon completion of the report.
J. Municipal Manager and Council shall review the Police Chief's final
report, as well as any monthly reports Council deems necessary, prior to
the expiration of the probationer's probationary period in order to make
a decision regarding permanent appointment.
K. If the Municipal Manager finds that at the end of the six- to twelvemonth
probationary period the conduct of the probationer has not been
satisfactory, the probationer shall be notified in writing within 10 days
of its decision and prior to the expiration of the probationary period that
the appointment will not be permanent. At that time, a newly hired
officer's employment shall end and a promoted officer shall return to a
previous rank.
L. Any officer who is not informed in writing that his or her performance
has been unsatisfactory shall receive a permanent appointment to the
new position.
M. Any probationer who is notified in writing that his or her appointment
will not be made permanent has no rights of appeal under these rules
and regulations.
A. Whenever there are urgent reasons for the filling of a vacancy in any
position in the Police Department and there are no names on the
eligible list for such appointment, the Municipal Manager may
nominate a person to the Commission for noncompetitive examination,
and such nominee may be certified by the Commission as qualified after
such noncompetitive examination and may be appointed provisionally
to fill such vacancy, provided that nothing within this section shall
prevent the appointment, without examination of the persons
temporarily as police officers in cases of riot or other emergency.
B. In the event of a provisional appointment, it shall thereupon become the
duty of the Commission, within three weeks, to hold a competitive
examination and certify a list of those eligible, and then a regular
appointment shall be made from the name or names submitted by the
Commission.
A. General qualifications for Corporal, Sergeant and Lieutenant.
(1) All applicants for a promotional position, except the Chief and
Assistant Chief, who have not received a formal written reprimand
for one year prior to the deadline for submitting their name to the
§ 21-24 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION § 21-26
21:133
list of eligibles wishing to be tested for the vacant position and have
not been suspended at any time three years prior to the deadline
for submitting their name to a list. Any formal written reprimand
or suspension to which the applicant has timely appealed pursuant
to the grievance procedure or these rules and regulations shall be
disregarded unless the appeal is resolved prior to creation of the
eligibility list.
(2) All applicants shall have continuous prior service with the
Monroeville Police Department, as follows:
(a) An applicant for the position of Corporal shall have at least two
years' service with the Department;
(b) An applicant for the position of Sergeant shall be a Corporal
and have had at least one year of experience in that rank within
this Department; and
(c) An applicant for the position of Lieutenant shall be Sergeant
and have had at least one year of experience in that rank within
this Department.
B. Rejection of applicants for promotion. The Commission may refuse to
examine or, if examined, refuse to certify as eligible after examination
any applicant who is found to lack any of the minimum qualifications
prescribed in these rules and regulations for the particular position for
which the applicant has applied.
C. Hearing for disqualified applicants. Rejected or disqualified applicants
for promotion have the same rights of appeal as stated in § 21-16E of
these rules and regulations.
D. General examination requirements for the positions of Corporal,
Sergeant, and Lieutenant. The examination for the positions of
Corporal, Sergeant, and Lieutenant shall include a written and oral
examination which will be graded on a one-hundred-point scale, with
the written examination representing 70% and the oral examination
representing 30% of the final score. After an applicant has been
extended an offer of promotion, the Manager may make the offer of
promotion contingent upon the applicant passing a psychological
examination and a drug test.
E. Written and oral examination. The requirements of § 21-17C and D of
these rules and regulations will govern the grading, scoring, and
passing requirements of the promotion examinations excluding the
physical fitness requirements.
F. Veterans' preference points for promotion. Veterans' preference points
are awarded only to those who qualify for the initial appointment to
patrol officer as set forth in § 21-17F.
§ 21-26 § 21-26
21:134
§ 21-27. Suspension, removal and reduction in rank.
G. Creation of promotion eligibility lists. At the conclusion of the
examination requirements, the Commission shall rank all passing
applicants on a list with the applicant receiving the highest score at the
top of the list and the applicant receiving the lowest at the bottom of the
list. The eligibility list should be valid for one year from the date the
Commission ranks all passing applicants and formally adopts the
eligibility list. The Municipal Manager at his/her discretion may extend
the list for an additional year or may void the eligibility list at any time
for any reason.
H. Promotion appointment.
(1) The Municipal Manager will determine if a vacancy exists in the
ranks and should be filled. Three names will be certified from the
list of eligibles.
(2) If three names are not available, then the Commission shall certify
the name(s) remaining on the list.
(3) The Municipal Manager shall make an appointment from one of the
three names certified with reference to the merits and fitness of the
candidates.
(4) The Municipal Manager may object to one or more of the persons
certified for reasons set forth in § 21-16D of these rules and
regulations. If the candidate to whom the Manager objects fails to
timely exercise the rights of appeal under § 21-16E, or if the
Commission declines to uphold the appeal, the Commission shall
strike the name of the candidate from the eligibility list and certify
the next highest name for inclusion on the list of three candidates
for each name stricken off.
A. Grounds for disciplinary action.
(1) No person appointed to a full-time civil service position in the
Police Department pursuant to these rules and regulations may be
suspended without pay or removed, and no person promoted in
rank pursuant to these rules and regulations may be reduced in
rank except for the following reasons:
(a) Physical or mental disability affecting the officer's ability to
continue in service, in which case the officer shall receive an
honorable discharge from service;
(b) Neglect or violation of any official duty;
(c) Violation of any law of this commonwealth which provides that
such violation constitutes a misdemeanor or felony;
(d) Inefficiency, neglect, intemperance, disobedience of orders or
conduct unbecoming an officer;
§ 21-26 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION § 21-27
21:135
(e) Intoxication while on duty; or
(f) Engaging or participating in or conducting of any political or
election campaign, other than the officer's exercise of the right
of suffrage, while on duty.
(2) No officer shall be removed for reasons of religious beliefs or
practices, racial or ethnic background, sexual orientation or
political affiliations.
(3) A statement of any charges made against any officer employed by
the Municipality of Monroeville shall be furnished to the officer
within five days after the Municipal Manager has adopted those
charges.
B. Furloughs.
(1) If for any reason it shall be deemed necessary by the Municipality
of Monroeville to reduce the number of full-time police officers in
the Department, then the Municipal Manager shall apply the
following procedure:
(a) Such reduction shall be accomplished by furloughing in
numerical order commencing with the person last appointed,
including probationers, until such reduction shall have been
accomplished.
(2) In the event that Council decides to increase the Police
Department, the furloughed officers shall be reinstated in order of
their seniority in the Department.
(3) In order to be reinstated, a furloughed officer must accept
reinstatement in writing within 30 days of receiving notice of the
opening.
(4) These reductions in force provisions are not applicable to the Chief
of Police or Assistant Chief of Police.
C. Notice of suspension, removal or reduction in rank.
(1) Whenever a full-time civil service police officer is suspended,
removed or reduced in rank, the specific charges warranting such
actions shall be stated in writing by the Municipal Manager.
(2) Charges against an officer shall be stated clearly and in sufficient
detail to enable the officer to understand the charges and to allow
the officer an opportunity to respond to those charges.
(3) The charges shall specify the clause of Subsection A which provides
the basis for the disciplinary action as well as an explanation of the
factual circumstances upon which the Municipal Manager relied in
finding a violation of Subsection A.
§ 21-27 § 21-27
21:136
(4) Within five days after the Municipal Manager has imposed the
disciplinary action, a written statement of the charges shall be
delivered to the officer either by personal service or by certified
and registered mail.
(5) The charges shall notify the officer of the right to appeal under
§ 21-27D of these rules and regulations.
(6) A copy of the statement of charges shall also be served upon the
members of the Civil Service Commission.
D. Hearings on suspension, removal and reduction in rank.
(1) A full-time civil service officer who has been suspended, removed
or reduced in rank may appeal the decision of the Municipal
Manager.
(2) A written notice requesting a hearing shall be sent to the Secretary
of the Civil Service Commission at:
Civil Service Commission
Municipality of Monroeville
2700 Monroeville Boulevard.
Monroeville, Pennsylvania 15146
(3) This request shall be received by the Commission within 10 days
after the officer received notice of the discipline.
(4) The officer may make written answers to any charges filed no later
than the date fixed for the hearing.
(5) Failure of the officer to provide written answers to any of the
charges shall not be deemed an admission of guilt or wrongdoing
by the officer.
(6) The Commission shall schedule a hearing within 10 days from the
officer's written request for a hearing unless continued by the
Commission for cause at the request of the Commission, the
Municipal Council or the officer.
(7) At any such hearing, the officer against whom the charges have
been made may be present and may be represented by counsel,
may call witnesses and present testimony and documentation in
defense.
(8) The Municipality may be represented by counsel, call witnesses
and present evidence as is necessary to support the charges.
(9) A stenographic record of all testimony shall be taken at every
hearing and preserved by the Commission.
(10) In the event the charges are dismissed, the record shall be sealed
and not be available for public inspection.
§ 21-27 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION § 21-27
21:137
(11) In conducting the hearing, the Commission's standard of review
shall be to determine whether sufficient evidence has been
presented to support the statutory reason for disciplinary action.
(12) If the Commission finds that sufficient evidence has been
introduced to support the charge, the Commission shall not modify
the penalty imposed by the Municipal Manager unless it finds that
the penalty imposed was arbitrary, discriminatory or an abuse of
the Manager's discretion.
(13) In considering the appropriateness of the discipline, the
Commission shall not substitute its judgment for that of the
Municipal Manager or Municipal Council.
(14) The Commission may request post-hearing briefs and shall issue a
written decision containing specific findings of fact and conclusions
of law within 60 days of receipt of the hearing transcript.
E. Notice of hearing. Notice of the date, time and place for each hearing
shall be given in the following manner:
(1) By either personal service or by registered mail to each person
making charges and to the person accused; and
(2) By mailing a notice to all other parties who have an interest in the
hearing; provided, however, that any failure to give the notice
required by this subsection shall not invalidate any action taken by
the Commission.
F. Hearing procedure.
(1) All testimony shall be given under oath administered by the
Chairperson, or, in absence of the chair, the Vice Chairperson.
(2) The Commission shall have the power to issue subpoenas as set
forth in § 21-12.
(3) The hearing shall be closed to the public so long as permitted by
law unless the person accused, when making written demand for a
hearing, requests that such hearing be open to the public.
(4) The rules of evidence now in force in the Court of Common Pleas of
Allegheny County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, shall be the
rules of evidence for the Commission; provided, however, that the
rules with regard to hearsay evidence shall be relaxed and liberally
construed. All rulings on evidence shall be made by the Presiding
Chairperson or in his absence, the Vice Chairperson at the hearing,
subject to objection by other members of the Commission. In the
event of such objection, the Commission shall adjourn, vote in
private on the objection, and return with a public ruling.
(5) Parties to hearing before the Board shall be as follows:
§ 21-27 § 21-27
21:138
(a) Appellant: The parties sought to be suspended, removed or
demoted, who requested a hearing in his counsel.
(b) Commission: The Commission, individually or collectively, shall
have the rights of a party and all hearings and may appear by
counsel.
(c) Suspender: The Municipal Manager of the Municipality of
Monroeville or his designee and Council as a body politic for
the Municipality of Monroeville.
(d) Counsel: Counsel is defined as an attorney at law who is
admitted to practice before the Supreme Court of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(6) Rights of the parties:
(a) All parties shall have the right to request the Commission issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witness or other
evidence. The Board shall not issue such subpoenas except for
good cause shown.
(b) All parties shall have the right to remain silent, to testify,
examine witnesses, cross-examine witnesses of other parties,
and to offer documentary or other non-oral evidence.
(c) The Commission shall have the rights of a party with regard to
calling of witnesses and the right to cross-examine witnesses of
other parties.
(7) Procedural rules:
(a) Appellant shall file with the Commission, in writing, his/her
"demand" for a hearing. The demand for a hearing shall consist
of the following parts:
[1] Written demand for a hearing addressed to the
Commission.
[2] Statement or notice of suspension (permissive, not
mandatory).
[3] Appellant's answer to the suspension (permissive, not
mandatory).
(b) The demand shall be served on the Municipal Manager or his/
her designee, who, for the purpose of accepting service, shall
be the agent of the Commission. The appellant shall have the
right to public hearing and shall notify, in writing, the
Commission of the intent to exercise such right. Failure to give
notice will be deemed as a waiver of such right and the hearing
shall be closed, open only to the parties and their counsel. The
hearing shall be conducted as follows:
§ 21-27 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION § 21-27
21:139
[1] The Presiding Chairman shall call the hearing to order.
[2] The suspension notice, charges and the answer, if any,
shall be read into the record by the Secretary of the
Commission.
[3] All witnesses shall testify under oath. The oath shall be
given by the Presiding Chairperson.
[4] The suspender may make an opening statement.
[5] The suspender may present witnesses and evidence.
[6] The appellant may move for dismissal of the suspension
and charges and may argue and rebuttal.
[7] The Commission shall rule on the motion to dismiss.
[8] The appellant may make an opening statement.
[9] The appellant may present witnesses and evidence.
[10] Argument shall be as follows:
[a] The party ordered the suspensions shall argue first.
[b] The appellant shall have the final argument.
[11] All parties shall have the right to cross-examine at the
conclusion of testimony under act examination. Re-direct
examination and re-cross-examination shall be permitted.
[12] Decision by the Commission:
[a] The decision shall be reached in secret.
[b] Majority and minority opinions may be filed.
[13] A stenographic and/or tape record shall be made of all
hearings.
(8) Decision of the Civil Service Commission. The Commission shall
issue its decision approved by at least two members of the
Commission. The written decision shall include all findings of fact
and conclusions of law. If during the hearing opposing facts are
presented, the Commission shall include its decision as to the
correct facts. The findings and decision of the Commission shall be
forwarded to the person making charges, the accused and to
Municipal Council, Municipal Manager and Mayor.
(9) If the Commission sustains the charges, the officer against whom
disciplinary action was taken may file an appeal with the Court of
Common Pleas within 60 days from the date of entry by the
Commission of its final order.
§ 21-27 § 21-27
21:140
(10)No order of suspension shall be made by the Commission for a
period longer than one year.
(11) In the event that the Commission fails to uphold the charges, then
the person sought to be suspended, removed or demoted shall be
reinstated with full pay for the period of the suspension, removal or
demotion, and no charges related to the suspension, removal or
reduction in rank shall be officially recorded in the officer's record.
§ 21-27 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION § 21-27
21:141
Chapter 23
CONVENTION VISITORS BUREAU
§ 23-1. Bureau established; membership.
Pursuant to the provisions and authority of the Monroeville Home Rule
Charter, as amended, the Municipal Council does hereby create and
establish the Convention Visitors Bureau of Greater Monroeville Board for
the Municipality, consisting of five voting and one ex officio member to be
appointed by Council.
§ 23-2. Powers and authority.
The Board shall be vested with all and full powers and authority as
delegated to it under the Home Rule Charter of the Municipality and the
Second Class County Code61 and with the right to have full and complete
control over the operation and conduct of the efforts of the Municipality
to plan and promote programs designated to stimulate and increase the
volume of tourism and visitor and convention business in Monroeville.
§ 23-3. Appointment; vacancies.
A. The Board shall be appointed pursuant to Article XVIII, § C-104, of the
Home Rule Charter and serve for the term of five years or until their
successors are appointed, except that the members of the Board first
appointed, shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four, and five
years respectively, so that the term of one member shall expire annually
thereafter. Vacancies in the Board, occurring otherwise than by
expiration of term, shall be filled by Council for the unexpired term of
the vacated membership. The members of the Board shall serve without
compensation.
B. The five member voting Board shall be made up of individuals from the
following entities or with the following qualifications:
(1) Three members holding or formerly holding titles of "owner" or
"general manager" to be chosen from the major hotel, motel and
convention facilities in Monroeville. No owner shall have more than
one representative or individual appointed to the Board at any
given time.
(2) One member to be from a major banking institution in Monroeville,
or who was formerly employed by a major banking institution in
Monroeville.
(3) One at-large member who by experience, training, background, or
occupation is engaged in the convention and tourism promotion
industry in and for Monroeville.
61.Editor's Note: See 16 P.S. § 3101 et seq.
§ 21-27 § 23-3
23:142
§ 23-4. Organization; rules and regulations; personnel.
§ 23-5. Receipt of sums and expenditures.
The Board is authorized and empowered to receive and expend such sums,
as may, from time to time, be appropriated to it by the Municipality and by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any of its departments or agencies,
and to receive and utilize for the purposes for which it is created, and sum
or sums of money or any property which may come to it from any source
whatsoever.
§ 23-6. Appropriation and allocation of funds.
The Municipality is authorized to appropriate, set aside, and pay over
to the Board, from time to time, such sum or sums as it shall receive
pursuant to Act 252 of 1982, as amended,62 and from the amount set up
and designated in its annual budget, for such purposes, and shall annually,
in its budget, appropriate, set up and allocate reasonable sums for the
Convention Visitors Bureau of Greater Monroeville activities.
Chapter 25
COUNCIL AND COMMITTEE RULES
CHARTER REFERENCES
Municipal Council — See Art. III.
Operations and procedures of Municipal
Council — See Art. IV.
Ordinances and resolutions — See Art. V.
Mayor — See Art. VI.
C. One ex officio member from Municipal Council. The ex officio member
shall sit as an ex officio member until he/she is replaced by Municipal
Council.
A. The Board, immediately following their appointment, shall meet and
elect its own President, Vice President and Secretary who shall serve
for a period of one year. The Treasurer will be appointed from the
member appointed from the major banking institution.
B. The Board shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations for the
conduct of all business within its jurisdiction. The Board shall meet
annually thereafter for the purpose of electing a President, Vice
President and Secretary to serve for an ensuing year and shall meet
otherwise as directed by the rules and regulations. The Board shall
have the authority to select an attorney to represent it and any and all
other personnel as may be necessary or needed, to serve for periods as
shall be permitted by the rules and regulations of the Board.
62.Editor's Note: See 16 P.S. §§ 4970.2 and 5199.4.
§ 23-3 COUNCIL AND COMMITTEE RULES § 23-6
25:143
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 6.
§ 25-1. Meetings. [Amended 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 2097]
Regular meetings of the Municipal Council shall be held on the second
Tuesday evening of each calendar month at the hour of 7:30 p.m., in the
Council Chambers of the Municipal Building. Any regular meeting falling
upon a legal holiday shall be held on the third Tuesday evening of the
calendar month at the same time and place.
§ 25-2. Special meetings; notice required.
Special meetings may be called by the Mayor whenever he may deem it
expedient and shall be called by the Mayor upon written request of three of
the Council members. Should the Mayor neglect or refuse to issue a call for
a meeting desired by Council members, the Manager shall do so on written
request of three Council members. The Mayor, Manager, Department of
Law, and all Council members shall have at least 24 hours written notice
given by the Manager or other person of the time, place and primary
business to be conducted at the meeting. Such notice shall also be given to
the public at the same time by advertisement and by posting such notice in
a prominent place on the Municipal Building premises 24 hours prior to a
meeting. Only the primary business as presented on the agenda prepared
by the Mayor or Manager may be considered and acted upon at the special
meeting, whether called by the Mayor or after written request of three
Council members.
§ 25-3. Adjournment.
The Council may adjourn from time to time a specific hour and a date, but
no public meeting shall be adjourned, begun, recessed or interrupted in
any way for the purpose of an executive session except for a period not to
exceed 30 minutes for the purpose of considering dismissal or discipline
of, hearing complaints or charges brought against, a public elected officer,
employee or other public agent or considering action with respect to labor
negotiations or any other exception to the Sunshine Act, Act 84 of 1986,63
as amended.
§ 25-4. Minutes.
At any meeting, the reading of the minutes may be dispensed with upon
majority vote of members present and voting. In each instance in which
this reading of the minutes has been dispensed with, copies of the unread
minutes shall be mailed by the Manager to all members at least three days
63.Editor's Note: The Sunshine Act of 1986, Act 84 (65 P.S. § 271 et seq.), was repealed
10-15-1998 by P.L. 729, No. 93; see now 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq
§ 23-6 § 25-4
25:144
prior to the next regular meeting. In the absence of the Manager, the Mayor
shall appoint a person to see to the reading and recording of the minutes.
§ 25-5. Order; appeals.
The Mayor, at the stated hour, shall call the meeting to order. He shall
preserve order and decorum, decide all questions of order and conduct
the proceedings of the meeting in accordance with the parliamentary rules
contained in Roberts Rules of Order, Newly Revised. Any member shall have
the right to appeal from a decision of the presiding officer or to request
information or question the order of business. No appeal shall be debatable,
and the appeal may be sustained by a majority of the members present. In
the event of conflict between Roberts Rules of Order, Newly Revised, and
these rules, these rules shall prevail.
§ 25-6. Agenda required.
The business of the Council shall be conducted according to an agenda
prepared by the Municipal Manager and approved by the Mayor and
Council.
§ 25-7. Conduct of meetings limited to agenda; debate; Citizens'
night.
A. The agenda and order of business shall be closed at the end of executive
session prior to the regular scheduled Council meeting.
B. Debate and Council action is limited to those items on the agenda after
the agenda is closed.
C. The public shall have the opportunity to address Council, as established
by the agenda during the public business meeting. A written statement
shall be prepared by the individual(s) addressing Council and received
and filed with the Manager. Persons wishing to address Council shall
inform the Manager up to the close of the agenda and will be placed on
the agenda with the topic of discussion. Presentations will be limited to
five minutes except if extended by a majority vote of Council. The Mayor
or a majority of Council may limit debate on any item within a
reasonable time frame.
D. Council will conduct "Citizens' Night and the Work Session" on the
Thursday before the second Tuesday (regular meeting night) of each
calendar month at 7:30 p.m. in Council Chambers of the Municipal
Building. Any person or persons wishing to address Council may do so
at Citizen's Night and every effort will be made to accommodate the
individuals or groups wishing to be heard by all of Council. No formal
action may be taken at Citizen's Night or the Work Session. The
presiding officer and majority of Council may limit discussion within a
reasonable time frame. Minutes will be kept on the names, addresses
and nature of problems, important items of discussion and financial
§ 25-4 COUNCIL AND COMMITTEE RULES § 25-7
25:145
§ 25-8. Presiding officer.
If the Mayor is absent at the designated time for any meeting, the duly
elected Deputy Mayor of Council shall preside, and if both the Mayor and
Deputy Mayor are absent, the Senior Majority member, by party, of Council
(by rotating ascending ward number if two or more majority members are
of equal seniority) shall serve as Mayor pro tempore and have the same
authority as is vested in the Mayor and shall serve in such capacity only for
such time as the Mayor or Deputy Mayor is absent, but shall not cast the
Mayor's deciding vote in cases of tie votes of Council.
§ 25-9. Presiding officer making motion must vacate chair; Mayor
excepted.
Whenever the presiding officer, other than the Mayor, shall desire to make
any motion, he shall vacate this chair and designate his Deputy or the
Senior Majority member in the Deputy Mayor's absence to preside
temporarily.
§ 25-10. Committees and chairperson appointment.
Committees and committee chairpersons shall be appointed by the Deputy
Mayor of Council on an ad hoc basis when authorized by a majority of
Council.
§ 25-11. No standing committees; exception for work sessions.
§ 25-12. Work session agenda.
The work session agenda shall be established by the Municipal Manager
and distributed three days prior to the work session.
§ 25-13. Special committees.
Special committees may be created as occasions may require by the
majority of Council. The Deputy Mayor still retains the right to make
committee appointments in the above case.
disposition of matters brought before Council at Citizens' Nights.
[Amended 6-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2226]
A. There shall be no standing committees of Council except that Council
shall meet at least once monthly in a public work session as a
committee of the whole to consider business which may come before
Council at regularly scheduled business meetings.
B. Work sessions shall be held at 7:30 p.m. in the Municipal Council
Chambers on the Thursday prior to the regular Council meeting. Any
regular work session falling on a legal holiday shall be rescheduled and
duly advertised. No formal action shall be taken by the Council on any
matter in the work session.
§ 25-7 § 25-14
25:146
§ 25-14. Proxy votes prohibited at Council meeting.
No vote by proxy will be considered legitimate at any meeting of Council.
§ 25-15. Procedure for adoption of legislation.
All ordinances and resolutions shall be read aloud in their entirety by
the Manager unless presented to the Mayor, the Law Department and all
Councilpeople at least 24 hours prior to the meeting at which its adoption
is sought, in which event the ordinance or resolution may be read aloud
by number and title. Any member of Council, or the Mayor, may require
the reading aloud in full or in part of any ordinance or resolution, whether
or not it is submitted in writing 24 hours in advance. Only members of
Council may present ordinances, resolutions or motions, except as provided
by petition in Article XX of the Home Rule Charter.
§ 25-16. Payment of bills and contracts; investigation.
The Mayor and all Councilpeople shall receive a listing of all bills and
contractual payments. Payment of the bills shall only be authorized by the
majority vote of Council. Any Councilperson may question or investigate
any bills or requests before payment, if he so desires, but any delay in the
vote to approve or reject such bill in order to permit such investigation
shall be for not longer than the interval between the time the request to
investigate is made and the next regular or adjourned meeting. After each
investigation, a report by the investigating member shall be made at the
next regular or adjourned meeting.
§ 25-17. Procedure at meetings; motions; debate; roll; vote;
quorum.
The deliberations of the Council shall be conducted in the following manner:
A. No Councilperson shall address the Council until he has been
recognized by the presiding officer. He shall thereupon address himself
to the Chair and confine his remarks to the question under discussion
and avoid all personalities.
B. When two or more members simultaneously seek recognition, the
presiding officer shall name the member who is to speak first.
C. No person other than a member of Council or other municipal official
shall address the Council unless he has first given to the Manager
notice of his intention to address Council and the exact nature of the
matter he wishes to bring up prior to the close of the agenda of the
meeting he wishes to address.
D. When a question is under discussion, no action shall be in order except
to lay on the table, move the previous question, to postpone to a certain
day, to refer to a committee, to amend or to postpone indefinitely. These
motions shall have precedence in the order listed.
§ 25-14 COUNCIL AND COMMITTEE RULES § 25-17
25:147
§ 25-18. Reconsideration.
It shall be in order for any member voting in the majority to move for a
reconsideration of the vote of any question at that meeting. A motion to
reconsider, being put and lost, shall not be renewed at that meeting.
§ 25-19. Temporary suspension of rules with two-thirds vote.
These rules or any part thereof may be suspended temporarily in connection
with any matter under consideration by a recorded two-thirds of the
members present, and all motions for the suspension shall be without
debate.
§ 25-20. Nominations. [Added 8-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2344]
An applicant for any board, commission or authority who has not been
nominated after his/her name for consideration appears for six consecutive
E. Any member desirous of terminating the debate may move the previous
question, in which event the presiding officer shall announce the
question as "shall the main question now be put?" If a two-thirds
majority of the members present vote in the affirmative, the main
question shall be taken without further debate, its effect being to put an
end to all debate and bring the Council to a direct vote, first upon any
pending amendments, and then upon the main question.
F. The presiding officer shall have the right to limit debate in any uniform
and fair manner, which limitation may be altered by a two-thirds vote of
Council, but in no event shall any Councilperson who is in order and
speaking on the particular agenda item be limited to less than 15
minutes on each subject of debate if the Councilperson so desires.
G. All votes on ordinances shall be by roll call. Any member may request a
roll call vote at any time. A majority vote of any quorum present in favor
of a proposed ordinance, motion, resolution or appointment shall be
necessary for passage or approval, unless a larger number is required
by statute.
H. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, and a motion to adjourn, to
lay on the table, and a call for the previous question shall be decided
without debate.
I. A quorum (four) shall consist of a majority of all the members of
Council. A majority shall consist of one more than half of those voting.
Abstention shall be considered a non-vote. No ordinance shall be
adopted without at least four affirmative votes. Actions of Council,
other than ordinances, shall be effective and binding by the affirmative
vote of a majority of the votes cast, provided that at least three
affirmative votes are cast. Section C-19, Quorum; § C-20, Votes required
for action; and § C-21, Form of action by Council, of the Home Rule
Charter shall apply.
§ 25-17 § 25-20
25:148
regular Council meetings shall have his/her name removed from
consideration for nomination. In addition any nominated candidate that
does not receive appointment to said board, commission or authority after
being nominated for six consecutive regular Council meetings shall have
his/her name removed for consideration for appointment. Nothing
precludes a qualified resident from applying or reapplying when a vacancy
occurs on any board, commission, or authority.
Chapter 29
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND
EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 43.
§ 29-1. Indemnification provided.
With the intent of being legally bound hereby, the Municipality of
Monroeville does hereby provide indemnification for occurrences arising on
or after January 6, 1986, to all current or former elected officials, appointed
officials, appointed members of boards and commissions, appointed
professional consultants, municipal employees and volunteer firemen and
ambulance personnel from the cost of a defense to any lawsuit proceeding
and from the imposition of any judgment resulting out of a lawsuit
proceeding whenever a lawsuit is entered against any such person,
provided that such person is acting within the scope of such person's duties
for or on behalf of the Municipality of Monroeville, and provided that the
conduct upon which the suit proceeding is based is not perpetrated with an
intent to specifically cause harm or with malice.
§ 29-2. Cooperation required; control of defense.
The indemnification provided herein is subject to the person to whom such
indemnification is afforded cooperating with the defense. The control of
any such defense and the right to enter into a compromise settlement shall
remain with the Municipality of Monroeville, subject to the approval of the
Municipal Council.
§ 29-3. Limitation of indemnification.
The indemnification provided herein shall be secondary to and in excess
of any applicable insurance and shall be limited in accordance with any
limitation applicable to the person for whom indemnification is provided
herein as set forth in Political Subdivision Tort Claims Act, as amended or
hereinafter amended.64
64.Editor's Note: See 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8542 et seq.
§ 25-20 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF § 29-4
29:149
§ 29-4. Countersuits against claimants.
In each instance where a lawsuit proceeding is entered against a person
for whom the Municipality of Monroeville shall be required to provide
indemnification as set forth herein, the Municipality of Monroeville shall
investigate and explore any and all grounds for the entry of a countersuit
against the claimant initiating lawsuit proceedings against a person entitled
to indemnification and, to the extent there is a legitimate basis for entering
such a countersuit, then such a countersuit shall in fact be entered. Such
countersuits shall include, but are not limited to, countersuits for abuse
of process, misuse of process, malicious prosecution, bad faith initiation of
legal proceedings, defamation, intentional or malicious outrageous conduct
and/or vexatious litigation.
Chapter 31
DELINQUENT MUNICIPAL ACCOUNTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 6. Fees — See Ch. 194.
§ 29-4 § 29-4
31:150
ARTICLE I
Attorney's Fees
[Adopted 10-8-1996 by Ord. No. 1998]
§ 31-1. Rates established.
Attorney fees incurred in the collection of any delinquent account due
and owing the Municipality shall be assessed at the rate of $80 per hour,
with $100 per hour charged for litigation, plus costs, as reasonable
compensation to the attorney for the undertaking of collection and/or
representation of the Municipality of Monroeville in actions involving claims
arising under the Municipal Claim and Tax Lien Law.65
§ 31-2. Notice of intent to impose fees.
§ 31-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply retroactively to all claims filed on or after December
19, 1990.
A. At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney fees in
connection with the delinquent account, the Municipality of
Monroeville shall, by United States certified mail, return receipt
requested, postage prepaid, mail to the property owner a statement of
the Municipality of Monroeville's intent to impose or assess attorney
fees within 30 days of mailing the notice.
B. If the certified mail is refused, unclaimed or the return receipt is not
received, then at least 10 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney
fees in connection with the collection of the delinquent account, the
Municipality of Monroeville, by United States first-class mail, shall mail
to the property owner the above notice.
C. The notice sent to the property owner shall include a statement
indicating that the imposition or assessment of attorney fees may be
avoided by payment of the delinquent account in full within 10 days of
the receipt of the notice.
65.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 31-1 DELINQUENT MUNICIPAL ACCOUNTS § 31-3
31:151
Chapter 33
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
§ 31-3 § 31-3
33:152
ARTICLE I
Monroeville Foundation
[Adopted 4-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2296]
§ 33-1. Establishment.
The proper Municipal officials are hereby authorized and empowered to
form and establish a nonprofit corporation known as the "Monroeville
Foundation."
§ 33-2. Authorization to execute documents.
The proper Municipal officials shall be authorized to execute any and all
documents necessary to form and establish said nonprofit corporation and
perfect and file whatever documents are necessary with local, state and
federal agencies concerning the creation of said nonprofit corporation.
§ 33-3. Articles of Incorporation; bylaws.
Attached hereto and made part of this article are the Articles of
Incorporation and bylaws to be enacted by said nonprofit corporation as
part of its creation.66
66.Editor's Note: Said documents are on file with Ord. No. 2296, in the office of the Municipal
Manager.
§ 33-1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT § 33-3
33:153

ARTICLE II
Monroeville Growth Alliance
[Adopted 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 2306]
§ 33-4. Establishment.
The proper Municipal officials are hereby authorized and empowered to
form and establish a nonprofit corporation known as the "Monroeville
Growth Alliance."
§ 33-5. Authorization to execute documents.
The proper Municipal officials shall be authorized to execute any and all
documents necessary to form and establish said nonprofit corporation and
perfect and file whatever documents are necessary with local, state and
federal Agencies concerning the creation of said nonprofit corporation.
§ 33-6. Articles of Incorporation; bylaws.
Attached hereto and made part of this article are the Articles of
Incorporation and bylaws to be enacted by said nonprofit corporation as
part of its creation.67
67.Editor's Note: Said documents are on file with Ord. No. 2306, in the office of the Municipal
Manager.
§ 33-4 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT § 33-6
33:155
Chapter 35
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Volunteer fire departments — See Ch. 50.
§ 35-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them
in this section:
AGENCY — The Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency.
DISASTER — A man-made disaster, natural disaster or war-caused disaster.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT — The judicious planning, assignment and
coordination of all available resources in an integrated program of
prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery for
emergencies of any kind, whether from attack, man-made or natural
sources.
EMERGENCY SERVICES — The preparation for and the carrying out of
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, to prevent, minimize and provide emergency repair of injury
and damage resulting from disasters, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of those
functions. The functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services,
police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, disaster
warning services, communications, radiological, shelter, chemical and other
special weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken areas,
emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, emergency
resources management, existing or properly assigned functions of plant
protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other
functions related to civilian protection.
LOCAL EMERGENCY — The condition declared by the local governing body
when in their judgment the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster is or
threatens to be of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant coordinated
local government action to prevent or alleviate the damage, loss, hardship
or suffering threatened or caused thereby. A local emergency arising wholly
or substantially out of a resource shortage may be declared only by the
Governor, upon petition of the local governing body, when he deems the
threat or actual occurrence of a disaster to be of sufficient severity and
magnitude to warrant coordinated local government action to prevent or
alleviate the damage, loss, hardship or suffering threatened or caused
thereby.
LOCAL ORGANIZATION — A local emergency management organization.
§ 33-6 § 35-1
35:156
MAN-MADE DISASTER — Any industrial, nuclear or transportation
accident, explosion, conflagration, power failure, natural resource shortage
or other condition, except enemy action, resulting from man-made causes,
such as oil spills and other injurious environmental contamination, which
threatens or causes substantial damage to property, human suffering,
hardship or loss of life.
NATURAL DISASTER — Any hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water,
wind-driven water, tidal wave, earthquake, landslide, mudslide, snowstorm,
drought, fire, explosion or other catastrophe which results in substantial
damage to property, hardship, suffering or possible loss of life.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — Any county, city, borough, incorporated town
or township.
RESOURCE SHORTAGE — The absence, unavailability or reduced supply
of any raw or processed natural resource, or any commodities, goods or
services of any kind which bear a substantial relationship to the health,
safety, welfare and economic well-being of the citizens of this
commonwealth.
WAR-CAUSED DISASTER — Any condition following an attack upon the
United States resulting in substantial damage to property in injury to
persons in the United States caused by use of bombs, missiles, shellfire,
nuclear, radiological, chemical or biological means or other weapons or
overt paramilitary actions, or other conditions such as sabotage.
§ 35-2. Agency established.
The Monroeville Emergency Management Agency is hereby established and
is hereby recognized as the successor to the Office of Civil Defense of the
Borough of Monroeville.
§ 35-3. Powers and duties of agency.
The powers and duties of the Monroeville Emergency Management Agency
shall be:
A. To coordinate the preparation and maintenance of a current disaster
emergency management plan for the prevention and minimization of
injury and damage for prompt and effective response to disaster; and
for disaster emergency relief and recovery in consonance with the
Pennsylvania Emergency Management Plan;
B. To coordinate the establishment, equipping and staffing of an
emergency operations center, consolidated with warning and
communications systems to support government operations in
emergencies; and to coordinate the provisions of other essential
facilities and equipment for agencies and activities assigned emergency
functions;
C. To coordinate individual and organizational training programs to insure
prompt, efficient and effective disaster emergency services;
§ 35-1 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 35-3
35:157
§ 35-4. Coordinator established; powers and duties; control;
recommendation.
D. To coordinate the organization and preparation of all locally available
manpower, materials, supplies, equipment, facilities and services
necessary for disaster emergency readiness, response and recovery;
E. To coordinate the adoption and implementation of precautionary
measures to mitigate the anticipated effects of disaster;
F. To cooperate with any public and private agency or entity in achieving
any purpose herein;
G. To have available for inspection at its emergency operations center all
emergency management plans, rules and orders of the Governor and of
the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency, the Allegheny
County Emergency Management Agency and the Monroeville
Emergency Management Agency;
H. To provide prompt and accurate information regarding local disaster
emergencies to appropriate commonwealth, county and municipal
officials and agencies and to the general public as well; and
I. To render assistance in times of emergency in accordance with the
provisions of mutual aid agreements.
A. The position of Monroeville Emergency Management Agency
Coordinator is hereby established with the following powers and duties:
(1) The Coordinator shall be appointed by the Governor upon the
recommendation of the Mayor.68
(2) The Coordinator shall be responsible for the planning,
administration and operation of the Monroeville Emergency
Management Agency, subject to the direction and control of the
Mayor and Council as provided herein.
(3) The Coordinator shall attend basic and advanced seminars,
workshops and training conferences called by the State Director
and/or official having responsibility for providing the Coordinator
with in-service training.
(4) The Coordinator shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred
in the performance of his duties and attendance at scheduled
meetings.
(5) The Coordinator shall develop mutual aid agreements with
adjacent political subdivisions for reciprocal emergency assistance.
68.Editor's Note: See also Subsection B of this section.
§ 35-3 § 35-4
35:158
§ 35-5. Declaration of local emergency; ratification. [Amended
5-13-1986 by Ord. No. 1529]
In accordance with the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Services
Code, 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et seq., at 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7501(b), a declaration
of a disaster emergency shall he made by the Mayor, or in his absence the
Deputy Mayor, or in his absence the Municipal Manager, which declaration
of a disaster emergency shall be subject to ratification by Municipal
Council.
§ 35-6. Powers and duties of Municipality.
The Municipality shall have the following powers to enter into contracts and
incur obligations necessary to disaster emergency management, response
and recovery:
(a) Said agreements shall be consistent with the plans and
programs of the Pennsylvania Emergency Management
Agency.
(b) Said agreements shall be ratified by the governing bodies of
the political subdivisions involved.
(c) Support forces furnished a political subdivision from outside
its jurisdiction pursuant to said agreements shall be under the
operational control of the department, agency or office
furnishing the force.
B. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Service
Code, 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et. seq., at 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7502(a) and (c), the
Coordinator of the Monroeville Emergency Management Agency shall
be subject to the direction and control of the Mayor, or in his absence
the Deputy Mayor, or in his absence the Municipal Manager, and the
Municipal Mayor is hereby authorized to recommend, to the Governor
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, appropriate personnel to serve
as an Emergency Management Coordinator. [Added 5-13-1986 by
Ord. No. 1529; amended 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 1653; 7-8-1997
by Ord. No. 2042]
A. Upon declaration of a disaster emergency, the Municipality is
authorized pursuant to Section 7301(c) of P.L. 133269 to exercise the
powers vested under this chapter in the light of the exigencies of the
emergency situation without regard to procedures and formalities
prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work,
entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of
temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase of supplies
and materials, the levying of taxes and the appropriation and
expenditure of public funds.
69.Editor's Note: See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301(c).
§ 35-4 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 35-6
35:159
§ 35-7. Liability; compensation for injury.
B. The Municipality shall have the power to make appropriation for the
payment of expenses of the Monroeville Emergency Management
Agency in the manner provided by law for making appropriations for
the ordinary expenses of the Municipality.
C. The Monroeville Emergency Management Agency shall be deemed an
agency, board or commission of the Municipality, subject to all of the
laws governing the making of contracts or purchases, the employment
of persons or otherwise incurring financial obligations which apply to
the Municipality.
D. Any gift or grant of money made to the Monroeville Emergency
Management Agency or to the Municipality of Monroeville for the
payment of expenses incurred or to be incurred by or for the
Monroeville Emergency Agency shall be deposited in the treasury of the
Municipality and shall be appropriated by the Municipality for the
purpose for which the gift or grant was made, and any bills or claims to
be paid from the gift or grant shall be paid in the manner provided in
this chapter.
A. Neither the Municipality nor the Monroeville Emergency Management
Agency; nor, except in cases of willful misconduct, the agents,
employees or representatives of any of them engaged in any emergency
services activities; nor, except in cases of willful misconduct or gross
negligence, any individual or other persons under contract with them to
provide equipment or work on a cost basis to be used in disaster relief;
nor, except in cases of willful misconduct or gross negligence, any
person, firm, corporation or an agent or employee of any of them
engaged in disaster services activities, while complying with or
attempting to comply with this chapter, shall be liable for the deaths of
or any injury to persons or loss or damage to property as a result of that
activity.
B. All duly enrolled emergency management volunteers who are not
eligible to receive benefits under the worker's compensation laws shall
be entitled, except during a state of war or periods of armed conflict
within the continental limits of the United States, to those benefits
which are authorized by 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7706 of P.L. 1332, as amended,
relating to injuries sustained while actually engaged in emergency
management activities or en route to and from emergency management
tests or operations authorized by the Pennsylvania Emergency
Management Agency and carried out in accordance with rules and
orders promulgated and adopted by that Agency.
C. This does not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which
he would otherwise be entitled under the workers' compensation laws
or under any pension law, nor the right of any person to receive any
benefits or compensation under any federal law.
§ 35-6 § 35-8
35:160
§ 35-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the plans and programs adopted and
promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $200 or
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both, for the first offense, and a
fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both,
for each subsequent offense.
§ 35-9. Committee established to review plan. [Added 5-13-1986 by
Ord. No. 1529]
§ 35-10. Emergency management plan adopted. [Added 12-13-1988
by Ord. No. 1653]
In accordance with the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Services
Code, 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et seq., the attached exhibit is hereby adopted
as the official Emergency Management Plan of the Municipality of
Monroeville.70
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Services
Code, 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et. seq., a Committee shall be established
consisting of the following:
(1) Representatives from the Monroeville volunteer fire and
ambulance personnel, which representatives shall be designated by
the Monroeville volunteer fire and ambulance personnel.
(2) Representatives from Monroeville Municipal Council to be
designated by the Deputy Mayor.
(3) The Fire Official.
(4) The Public Safety Director.
(5) The Police Chief.
(6) The Municipal Manager.
B. Said Committee shall review and, if necessary, rewrite and further
clarify the Monroeville Emergency Management Plan and define
relationships between the Municipality and volunteer fire and
ambulance personnel.
70.Editor's Note: Said Emergency Management Plan is on file in the office of the Municipal
Manager.
§ 35-8 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 35-10
35:161
Chapter 39
ENGINEER, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 6.
§ 39-1. Office established.
There is hereby established the office of Municipal Engineer.
§ 39-2. Direction; duties.
The Municipal Engineer shall work under the direction of the Council and
Manager of the Municipality in carrying out the following duties:
A. To fix, establish and locate all sidewalk and street grades.
B. To prepare plans, specifications and estimates of all engineering work
except such work as is assigned by contract or otherwise to consulting
engineers and, whenever required, furnish the Manager or Council with
reports, information or estimates on any municipal engineering work.
C. Immediately after the completion of any municipal improvements, the
cost of which in whole or in part is to be paid by the owners of abutting
property, to determine and certify the day or time on which the
particular improvement was completed and file such certificate with the
Manager. The time mentioned in such certificates shall be conclusive on
all parties. The time of completion shall be taken to mean the time of
the completion of the whole contract for the improvement. He shall also
furnish the Municipal Manager with a certificate showing the time at
which any such particular improvement was commenced, and such
certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the time when said
improvement was begun.
D. To make and keep, for the benefit of the Municipality, correct minutes,
maps, records, plans, specifications and estimates of all matter
pertaining to municipal, surveys or public works and maintain a record
of such minutes, maps, records, plans, specifications and estimates
when prepared by the consulting engineers or any other engineer
working on behalf of the Municipality, and to deliver all such work,
whether prepared by the Municipal Engineer or maintained by the
Municipal Engineer, to his successor or to such persons as the Council
may direct.
E. To perform such other engineering services as the Council or Manager
may from time to time direct.
§ 35-10 § 39-3
39:162
§ 39-3. Qualifications; salary and expenses.
The Municipal Engineer shall be well-skilled in the sciences of civil
engineering and building and in the practical application thereof and
certified by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a registered civil
engineer. He shall be paid such salary and expenses as are fixed by the
Council from time to time and shall continue in office until a successor is
selected by the Council.
§ 39-4. Right of entry.
The Municipal Engineer, together with his necessary assistants, may at
all reasonable hours enter into or upon any pieces of land within the
Municipality and survey and measure the same in order to perform the
service and duties required of him by virtue of the office.
§ 39-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
If any person shall alter, deface, remove or destroy any monument, mark
post or pin made or set up by the Engineer or his assistants, he shall
forfeit and pay for each offense a fine not exceeding $600, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 39-6. Office and equipment; office hours.
The Municipal Engineer shall be furnished with an office and the necessary
instruments, books, etc., at the expense of the Municipality, and his office
shall be kept open for the transaction of business during such hours as he
and the Council may designate.
§ 39-7. Additional duties.
The Municipal Engineer shall, in addition to the work described in the
foregoing sections, attend the meetings of the Council and prepare all
plans, specifications and information necessary for the Council to
understand properly and to act intelligently upon any engineering question
under consideration.
§ 39-8. Return of municipal property upon removal.
The Municipal Engineer, on his removal from office, by resignation or
otherwise, shall deliver to his successor or, if no successor is appointed at
the time of his removal, to the Manager all records, books, instruments,
etc., which are or may be the property of the Municipality.
§ 39-3 ENGINEER, MUNICIPAL § 39-9
39:163
§ 39-9. Assistants.
The assistant engineers and other assistants shall perform such duties
as the Engineer shall direct. The Engineer and assistants shall give their
undivided attention to Municipality work.71
Chapter 43
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification of officers and
employees — See Ch. 29.
71.Editor's Note: Original Section 10, which immediately followed this section and amended
Ord. No. 145 (which ordinance has been superseded), was deleted 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042.
§ 39-9 § 39-9
43:164
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 43-1. Title.
This code shall be known as the "Ethics Code of the Municipality of
Monroeville" and shall be hereinafter referred to as "the code."
§ 43-2. Findings.
A. The Monroeville Council does hereby find that the public confidence
and trust in municipal government depends on the integrity,
impartiality and commitment to ethics of public officials and public
employees.
B. The reputation and efficiency of, and public confidence and faith in,
municipal government suffer whenever the public trust is violated by an
official or employee who commits an act of misconduct, attempts to
realize personal financial gain or does not avoid conflicts of interest or
the appearances of impropriety.
C. There is a need to ensure that the citizens of the Municipality of
Monroeville have complete confidence in their municipal officials and
employees.
D. It is essential that there exists legislation to ensure that the highest
standards of conduct in municipal government will be enforced
regardless of any change in Mayor and Council.
E. The Monroeville Council determines that every public official and
public employee should:
(1) Put loyalty to the Municipality and to the highest moral principles
above all private interests.
(2) Uphold the United States and Pennsylvania Constitutions, all laws,
statutes and regulations of the United States and all governments
therein and the Home Rule Charter and all ordinances and
regulations of the Municipality of Monroeville and neither condone
nor be a party to their evasion.
(3) Give a full day's work for a full day's pay.
(4) Avoid conflicts of interest and strive to avoid the appearance of
conflicts of interest, not only being above reproach but appearing
above approach.
(5) Never use for personal benefit confidential information obtained in
the course of one's duties.
(6) Never give special favor or special privilege to anyone in return for
any personal benefit.
§ 43-1 ETHICS, CODE OF § 43-2
43:165
§ 43-3. Intent.
(7) Never accept favors, gifts or benefits for oneself or a member of
one's family except in situations specified in this code.
(8) Make no use of municipal employment or resources for private gain
or political benefit for any individual or entity or for other than
official government purposes.
(9) Attempt to remedy or eliminate public corruption, waste and
inefficiency wherever and whenever discovered.
(10) Demonstrate the highest standards of personal integrity,
truthfulness and fortitude in all public activities.
(11) Strive for personal professional excellence and encourage the
professional development of all public officials and public
employees.
(12) Exercise whatever discretionary authority held to promote the
public interest.
(13) Serve the public with respect, concern, courtesy and
responsiveness and administer the public's business with
professional competence, fairness, impartiality, efficiency and
effectiveness, recognizing that service to the public is beyond
service to oneself.
(14) Uphold these ethical principles, ever aware that public service and
public employment are public trusts.
F. It is the duty of the Monroeville Council to earn and maintain for the
government of the Municipality of Monroeville the reputation as a nononsense,
honest Municipality, and, to that end, any section of this code
in which the intent is in doubt should be construed in a manner that
favors the public good over the convenience of the public official or
employee.
A. It is the intent of the Monroeville Council that, as contemplated by the
Legislature, this code supplements the Public Official and Employee
Ethics Law72 and, as such, is more restrictive than that Act.
B. Because public confidence and trust in municipal government can best
be sustained by assuring the people of Monroeville of the integrity and
impartiality of all public officials and public employees, it is the specific
intent of the Monroeville Council to remedy and eliminate public
corruption, patronage, nepotism, special privileges, gifts and, as
anticipated by Monroeville's Home Rule Charter, involuntary political
contributing.
72.Editor's Note: The Public Official and Employee Ethics Law (65 P.S. § 401 et seq.) was
repealed by L. 1998, P.L. 729, No. 93. See now 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 1101.1 et seq.
§ 43-2 § 43-3
43:166
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 43-4. Definitions and word usage.
The following words and phrases, when used in this code, shall have, unless
the context clearly states otherwise, the meanings given to them in this
section:
ABUSE OF AUTHORITY — An arbitrary or capricious exercise of power of
an official or employee that adversely affects the rights of any person or that
results in personal gain or advantage to himself or herself or to preferred
other persons.
AGENCY — Any department, bureau, commission and board or other
governmental body within or established by a borough or Municipality,
including the Municipal Council.
APPOINTED OFFICE — Any position or office, with the exception of that of
an elected official, held by an employee who is required under the Public
Official and Employee Ethics Law73 to file an annual statement of financial
interests with the Municipal Manager and any position on the boards and
commissions of Monroeville.
APPOINTED OFFICIAL —
BUSINESS — Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual,
holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust or any legal entity
organized for profit.
BUSINESS DEALING WITH THE MUNICIPALITY — Any contract, service,
work or business with, any sale, renting or other disposition to, any
purchase, leasing or other acquisition from and any grant, license, permit or
other privilege from the Municipality or any municipal board or commission
and any performance of or litigation with respect to any of the foregoing.
BUSINESS WITH WHICH HE OR SHE IS ASSOCIATED — Any business in
which the person or a member of the person's family is a director, officer,
An individual holding an office named in the code or in any other
ordinance of this Municipality, to which he is named by the Municipal
Council, whether that individual serves full-time or part-time, whether
or not he receives compensation from the Municipality for his services
and whether or not he holds a single-named office or is one of several
individuals serving on a board, commission or authority.
A.
An individual employed by the Municipality on a full-time or parttime
basis, exercising supervisory authority over any other municipal
employee and/or performing nonministerial action in connection with
municipal affairs.
B.
73.Editor's Note: The Public Official and Employee Ethics Law (65 P.S. § 401 et seq.) was
repealed by L. 1998, P.L. 729, No. 93. See now 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 1101.1 et seq.
§ 43-4 ETHICS, CODE OF § 43-4
43:167
owner, employee or holder of stock or percentage ownership exceeding 5%
of the equity at fair market value of the business or more than 5% of the
assets of the economic interests in indebtedness.
CANDIDATE or CANDIDATES — Any individual, individuals or slate of
individuals seeking any office which is filled by the vote of the electorate.
CLASSIFIED EMPLOYEES — An employee in classified service for the
Municipality of Monroeville.
COMPENSATION — Any thing of economic value, however designated,
which is paid, granted, given, donated or transferred or to be paid, loaned,
granted, given, donated or transferred for personal services to any person,
official or employee of the Municipality.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST — Any situation in which a public official or
public employee is in a position where his or her vote or decision can
result in a financial benefit to himself or herself or a member of his or her
immediate family other than those benefits which may accrue to the public
generally.
ELECTED OFFICE — The office of Mayor and members of the Council.
ELECTED OFFICIAL — The Mayor and members of the Council.
ETHICS BOARD — A duly appointed and qualified Ethics Board of the
Municipality of Monroeville, comprised of three individuals who are not
regular employees or elected officials of the Municipality and who shall
possess qualifications necessary for carrying out their duties as members of
the Ethics Board and who shall be retained by the Municipality to conduct
investigations, swear witnesses, take testimony and make appropriate
determinations as to whether or not violations of this chapter have been
made.
FAMILY MEMBER — Any spouse, child, grandchild, parent, grandparent,
sibling, in-law, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, ex-spouse, stepparent, stepchild,
half brother, half sister or the spouse of any such relative or person.
GIFT —
Anything which is received without consideration of equal or greater
value. "Gift" shall not include a political contribution otherwise
reported as required by law or a commercially reasonable loan made in
the ordinary course of business. "Gift" shall include, but not be limited
to, any payment, favor, gratuity, thing of value, service or services,
promise, discount, admission, performance of any act or series of acts,
entertainment, reward, loan which is not commercially reasonable and
made in the ordinary course of business or promise of any of the
preceding.
A.
"Gift" shall not include:
(1) A political contribution reported as permitted by law;
B.
§ 43-4 § 43-4
43:168
GOVERNMENTAL BODY — Any department, commission, committee,
council, board, bureau, division, service office, office, administration,
legislative body or other establishment in the municipal government or a
political subdivision thereof.
GROSS WASTE OF FUNDS — Unnecessary expenditure of substantial sums
of money, or a series of instances of unnecessary expenditures of smaller
amounts.
INCOME — Any money or thing of value received or to be received as
a claim on future services, whether in the form of a fee, salary, expense,
allowance, forbearance, forgiveness, interest, dividend, royalty, rent, capital
gain or any other form of recompense or any combination thereof.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville.
PERSON — Any individual, union, association, committee, club or other
organization or group of persons.
POLITICAL OFFICE — A position in a political party.
PRIVILEGE — Any exemption, consideration, special treatment or
advantage.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — Any individual employed by the Municipality of
Monroeville, with the exception of public officials.
PUBLIC OFFICE — Any elected or appointed office or position of the
Municipality of Monroeville.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL — Any elected or appointed official of the Municipality
of Monroeville.
RELATIVE — A member of an individual's immediate family and also that
individual's father, mother, grandfather, grandmother, son, daughter or
sibling, whether by blood, adoption or marriage, the latter including, for
example, stepparents, stepchildren, half brothers and half sisters.
RESPONDENT — Any person who is alleged to have or who is found to have
violated the code.
A commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of
business; or
(2)
(3) A gift received from a relative.
§ 43-4 ETHICS, CODE OF § 43-4
43:169

ARTICLE III
Conflicts of Interest; Restricted Activities
§ 43-5. Unlawful acts; financial disclosure.
A. No public official or public employee shall disclose or use for his or her
own benefit or the benefit of others confidential information which he or
she has acquired by reason of his or her public position.
B. No public official or public employee shall receive any benefit from or
participate in the selection, award or administration of or vote or
participate in the legislative discussion on any contract to which the
Municipality is a party or participate in the selection, award or
administration of a contract supported by public funds if a conflict of
interest would be involved. Such a conflict would arise when any of the
following has a financial or other interest in the firm selected for award:
(1) The public official or public employee.
(2) Any member of his or her family.
(3) Any person with whom he or she has a business or other financial
relationship.
(4) An organization which employs any of the above.
C. No public official or public employee shall be or become interested
directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever, except by operation of
law, in any business dealing with the Municipality of Monroeville Board
or Commission.
D. No public official or public employee shall act as agent, broker,
employee or consultant for any person, firm, corporation or other entity
interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in any
business dealings with the Municipality of Monroeville Board or
Commission.
E. No public official or public employee shall engage in any business
transaction or private employment or shall have any financial or other
private interest, direct or indirect, which is in conflict with the proper
discharge of his or her official duties.
F. No public official or public employee shall use or attempt to use his
position to obtain any financial gain, contract, license, privilege or other
private or personal advantage, direct or indirect, for himself or herself
or any person, firm, or corporation or other entity with which he or she
is associated. He or she shall be deemed "associated" with each person
who is a member of his or her family, with each person with whom he or
she has a business or other financial relationship and with each firm,
corporation or other entity in which he or she has a present or
anticipated interest, direct or indirect.
§ 43-5 ETHICS, CODE OF § 43-5
43:171
G. No public official or public employee shall attempt to influence the
course of any proposed legislation affecting any private or financial
interest not readily apparent of himself or herself, of any of his or her
family members, of any person with whom he or she has a business or
other financial relationship or of each firm, corporation or other entity
in which he or she has a present or anticipated interest, direct or
indirect.
H. Every public official and public employee shall publicly disclose, as
provided in § 43-7, any direct or indirect financial or other private
interest in any proposed legislation of himself or herself, of any of his or
her family members, of any person with whom he or she has a business
or other financial relationship or of each firm, corporation or other
entity in which he or she has a present or anticipated interest, direct or
indirect. A subcontract of a contract with the Municipality shall be
deemed a "direct or indirect financial interest."
I. No public official or public employee shall become financially
interested, subsequent to final action, in any legislation, including
ordinances and resolutions, awards, contracts, leases, cases, claims,
decisions, decrees or judgments made by him or her in his or her official
capacity, during his or her term of office or employment and until two
years have elapsed since the expiration of employment or service. This
prohibition shall apply so as to prevent a family member or any person,
firm, partnership, corporation, business association, trustee or straw
party from becoming financially interested for or on behalf of a public
official or public employee within said two-year period.
J. This section shall not be construed to prohibit any public official or
public employee from:
(1) Accepting or receiving any benefit which is provided for or made
available to citizens or residents or classes of citizens or residents.
(2) Being affiliated with by an investment not exceeding 5% of the
equity at fair market value or more than 5% of the assets of the
economic interest in indebtedness, employed by or representing a
person, firm or corporation or other entity whose business dealings
with the Municipality or any municipal board or commission form
an insubstantial part of its total business, provided that he or she
has no direct or indirect interest in such business dealings and
receives no part of the benefit thereof, takes no part in such
business dealings and receives no compensation in connection
thereof.
K. Nothing in this section shall apply to the affiliation of any public official
or public employee with any nonprofit or community service
organization.
§ 43-5 § 43-6
43:172
§ 43-6. Voting conflicts.
Where voting conflicts are not otherwise addressed by the Constitution
of Pennsylvania or by any law, rule, regulation, order or ordinance, the
following procedure shall be employed:
§ 43-7. Gifts.
A. Any public official or public employee who in the discharge of his
official duties would be required to vote on a matter that would result in
a conflict of interests shall abstain from voting and, prior to the vote
being taken, publicly announce and disclose the nature of his interests
as a public record in a written memorandum filed with the person
responsible for recording the minutes of the meeting at which the vote
is taken; any such contract or municipal matter shall not be acted upon
or approved by the Council except by an affirmative vote of at least five
of the members thereof. When the interested officers is a member of the
Council, such officer shall refrain from voting on said contract or
municipal matter.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to cases where such officer
is an employee of the person, firm or corporation involved in a
municipal contract or municipal matter in a capacity with no possible
influence on the transaction and in which such person cannot possibly
be benefited thereby, either financially or in any other material matter.
A. No public official or public employee or family member of a public
official or public employee of the Municipality shall accept a gift, as
defined in § 43-4 of this chapter:
(1) From a person seeking to obtain a contract grant, employment or
any financial relationship from the Municipality.
(2) From a person or business having a financial relationship with the
Municipality.
(3) From a person or business whose operations or activities are
regulated or inspected by the Municipality.
(4) From a principal, agent and/or attorney in proceedings in which the
Municipality is an adverse party.
(5) From a person who has an interest that may be substantially
affected by the performance or nonperformance of any public
official's or public employee's official duties.
B. Exceptions. The prohibitions imposed by Subsection A shall not apply to
the following:
(1) Acceptance of a gift when circumstances make it clear that the
motivation for the gift is due to family relationship, close personal
relationship or traditional practices among close friends, such as
exchange of birthday and holiday gifts.
§ 43-6 ETHICS, CODE OF § 43-7
43:173
§ 43-8. Employment restrictions.
(2) Acceptance of an award for meritorious achievement from a
charitable, religious, professional, recreational, social, fraternal,
public service, civic or similar organization.
(3) Acceptance of a plaque or memento of nominal value offered as a
token of esteem or appreciation on the occasion of a speech or
public appearance.
(4) Acceptance of small tokens or favors given to everyone attending a
function or celebrating an occasion.
(5) Acceptance of a legal political contribution made to and reported
by a duly registered campaign committee. However, there shall not
have been an understanding that the contribution was for the
purpose of influencing a vote, action or judgment of the public
official or public employee.
(6) Acceptance of unsolicited advertising or promotional material such
as pens, calendars and other such items of nominal intrinsic value.
(7) Acceptance of food and refreshment of nominal value on infrequent
occasions or the ordinary course of a luncheon, dinner party or
meeting.
A. No public official or public employee shall engage in, solicit, negotiate
for or promise to accept private employment or render his or her
services for private interests or conduct a private business when this
employment, service or business creates a conflict of interest or impairs
the proper discharge of his or her duties.
B. Full-time public employees shall provide written notification of
acceptance of a secondary, paid position to their director. Included in
this notification should be the name of the secondary employer and the
employee's intended job classification and duties. Secondary
employment may be undertaken only when not in conflict with the
conditions of employment or regulations promulgated by the
Municipality.
C. No person who has served as a public official or public employee,
whether paid or unpaid, within a period of two years after termination
of his or her employment or service, shall appear before any municipal
board or commission, department or public official or employee on
behalf of any person, firm, corporation or other entity or receive
compensation or remuneration of funds for any services rendered on
behalf of any person, firm, corporation or other entity in relation to any
case proceeding, application, business dealings or other matter with
the Municipality and Municipal Board or Commission.
§ 43-7 § 43-9
43:174
§ 43-9. Preferential treatment of applicants for employment.
No public official, with the exception of the Manager and Directors of
Departments, shall exert his or her influence to gain or attempt to gain
preferential treatment on behalf of an applicant for employment with the
Municipality, with the exception of his or her personal staff, except for good
cause shown. "Good cause" shall be found to be a showing that such effort
is necessary for the best interests of the Municipality.
§ 43-10. Equal treatment required.
§ 43-11. Use of official influence.
No public official or public employee shall use his or her official influence
to assist any person for a fee or other compensation other than the
compensation that is provided by law. The performance of usual and
customary constituent services without additional compensation does not
constitute the use of prestige of office for private gain.
§ 43-12. Use of municipal property.
No public official or public employee shall request or permit the use of or
use any municipal motor vehicle, equipment, material or property except in
the conduct of official municipal business or as provided in the terms of his
or her employment.
§ 43-13. Political activity.
A. No public official or public employee shall grant, offer or provide any
privilege to any person, persons, business or other entity beyond that
which is available to every other person, business or other entity, with
the exception of any legally determined affirmative action plan or
municipally authorized program.
B. No public official or public employee shall in any manner receive
benefit from the profits of any work or service for the Municipality, or
accept any service or thing of value directly or indirectly upon more
favorable terms than those granted to the public generally, from any
person, firm, corporation or other entity having dealings with the
Municipality. Privileges granted by the Municipality to public officials
are exempted from the terms of this provision.
C. No public official or public employee shall solicit or receive any
compensation, gratuity or other thing of value for any act done in the
course of public work other than his normal wage or salary paid by the
Municipality and set as a condition of employment or as provided for in
law.
A. No public official or public employee shall require any public employee
to engage in any campaign activities related to the election of any
candidate or candidates.
§ 43-9 ETHICS, CODE OF § 43-13
43:175
§ 43-14. Representation of private interests before municipal
agencies.
It shall be unlawful for any elected or appointed official or for any employee
to appear in behalf of another private interest before any agency of the
Municipality or to represent any private interest in the action or proceeding
against the interests of the Municipality in any litigation to which the
Municipality is a party.
B. No public official or public employee shall use any public property,
material or resources on behalf of any political party, political
committee, candidate or candidates or use his or her official authority
for the purpose of interfering with an election or affecting the results
thereof, except the Municipal Council Chambers upon written consent
by the Manager. It is the intention that all political parties shall have
equal access to the chambers as approved by the Manager.
C. No appointed official or public employee shall engage in any type of
partisan political activity while at work or while the employee should be
at work.
D. An appointed official or public employee who desires to undertake any
partisan political activity restricted by this section may take a leave of
absence from municipal employment without pay, thereby temporarily
leaving the municipal payroll.
§ 43-13 § 43-14
43:176
ARTICLE IV
Ethics Board
§ 43-15. Composition of Board; vacancies; terms.
§ 43-16. Responsibilities.
There is hereby delegated to the Ethics Board as defined herein the
responsibility set forth in § 43-17 relating to enforcement procedures. If an
allegation or complaint is filed with the office of the Municipal Manager,
said Manager shall send notice to the Ethics Board to conduct an
investigation into the allegation or complaint, provided that in the event
that said complaint shall involve in some manner the office of the Ethics
Board, said matter shall be referred to the Municipal Solicitor for
investigation, all in accordance with the procedures outlined herein.
A. The Ethics Board shall be composed of three individuals, who shall be
appointed in the following manner:
(1) one individual appointed by the Council of the Municipality of
Monroeville.
(2) one individual appointed by the Mayor of the Municipality of
Monroeville.
(3) A third individual appointed by the Council Representative and the
Mayor Representative.
B. All members of the Ethics Board shall sit for a term of two years. In the
case of a vacancy on the Board, an appointment shall be made to said
vacancy by that body which made the original appointment prior to the
vacancy occurring.
§ 43-15 ETHICS, CODE OF § 43-16
43:177

ARTICLE V
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§ 43-17. Enforcement.
A. Any person who has knowledge of a violation of this Code of Ethics
committed by any person subject to the jurisdiction of this chapter may
make a signed written report of the same to the Municipal Manager.
The fact that a report has been received, the contents of the report and
the identity of the person making the report shall remain confidential
until such time as the Manager, after receipt of notice as provided
herein, has referred the same to the Ethics Board for an initial
threshold determination that probable cause exists to believe that a
violation of the Code of Ethics has occurred.
B. Upon receipt of a report, the Ethics Board, without benefit of subpoenas
or sworn testimony, shall make such preliminary investigation as it
deems appropriate to determine whether probable cause exists to
believe that a violation of the Code of Ethics has occurred. If the Ethics
Board is satisfied that probable cause does exist, it may choose between
two courses of action as follows:
(1) Refer the matter to the proper authorities for criminal prosecution,
provided that upon a determination that the proof beyond a
reasonable doubt necessary for criminal conviction is not available,
the proper authorities may refer the matter back to the Ethics
Board proceedings consistent with this chapter.
(2) Retain the matter for its own formal investigation with a view
toward the ultimate disposition by the Ethics Board in the event
that it is determined an actual violation has occurred.
C. If the Ethics Board should determine probable cause does not exist, it
shall communicate its decision, in writing, to the person who made the
initial report. The Ethics Board's determination of lack of probable
cause shall remain confidential, unless the person who made the initial
report chooses to make his or her complaint public. Should this later
event occur, all of the Ethics Board's records, files, notes,
correspondence and investigative materials relating to the finding of
lack of probable cause shall be made open for public inspection.
D. Should the Ethics Board decide to retain the matter for its own formal
investigation pursuant to Subsection B(2) above, the Ethics Board shall
notify, in writing, the person who made the report and the person
complained against of its decision to pursue a formal investigation by
way of holding a hearing to determine if a violation has occurred. The
person complained against may choose whether the hearing shall be
open or closed to the public.
E. Hearings conducted by the Ethics Board.
§ 43-17 ETHICS, CODE OF § 43-17
43:179
§ 43-18. Violations and penalties.
(1) Hearings conducted by the Ethics Board shall be informal. The
person complained against may be represented by legal counsel
and/or by his or her bargaining representative and may present and
cross-examine witnesses and give evidence before the Ethics
Board. The Ethics Board may call witnesses on its own motion and
compel the production of books, records, papers or other evidence
needed. To that end, the proper authorities shall issue subpoenas
and subpoenas duces tecum at the request of the Ethics Board or
the person complained against. All testimony shall be under oath
administered by the Ethics Board. The Ethics Board may adjourn
its hearing from time to time in order to allow for the orderly
presentation of evidence.
(2) Upon motion made by the person complained against or upon its
own motion, the Ethics Board may temporarily stay or permanently
suspend its investigation when, in its informed discretion, the
manifest needs of justice and fairness will be better served thereby.
(3) The Ethics Board shall prepare an official record of the hearing,
including all testimony, which shall be recorded manually or by
mechanical device, and exhibits, provided that the Ethics Board
shall not be required to transcribe such records unless presented
with a request accompanied by payment of the cost of
transcription.
F. Within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Ethics Board
shall make and fully record in its permanent records, findings of fact,
conclusions of law and its determination of a final disposition. A copy of
the findings, conclusions and final disposition shall be forwarded by
registered mail to the person who made the initial report and to the
person complained against at addresses as given by both persons to the
Ethics Board. An additional copy of the findings, conclusions and
recommendations shall be forwarded to the Municipal Council.
G. Any person found, by final written order of the Ethics Board, to be in
violation of this Code of Ethics may appeal the Board's decision to the
Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
A. Any elected official, appointed official or public employee who violates
the code shall be subject to the following disciplinary action:
(1) Private formal reprimand;
(2) Written reprimand;
(3) Suspension without pay for up to five days;
(4) Dismissal as set forth in the Home Rule Charter and other
applicable laws; and
§ 43-17 § 43-18
43:180
(5) Other types of penalties authorized by collective bargaining
agreements or statutes.
B. Upon dismissal, and when warranted, appropriate information will be
volunteered by the Municipality to the proper local, state or federal
authorities for further action.
C. Any disciplinary action taken by the Municipality shall be conducted in
accordance with pertinent provisions of relevant labor agreements,
with applicable procedures as established by the Municipal Department
of Personnel and Civil Service for municipal officers and employees, and
with applicable notions for procedural due process of law.
D. In addition, any public official or public employee who violates the code
shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 for a first violation and not
exceeding $1,000 for each additional violation and, in default thereof,
imprisonment not exceeding 72 hours.
E. When appropriate, the Municipality may take the necessary legal steps
pursuant to a breach of contract with a third party, agent, subrecipient,
contractor or consultant. Such steps may include, but not be limited to:
(1) Termination of the agreement with no further transfer of funds.
(2) Recovery of appropriate liquidated damages.
F. Any person who realizes financial gain by way of a violation of any
provision of this code, in addition to any other penalty provided by law
or this code, shall pay into the Treasury of the Municipality of
Monroeville a sum of money equal to double the financial gain resulting
from such violation. The Ethics Board or Council shall determine the
amount of financial gain realized.
G. Any person, corporation, company or other entity found to have
benefited as a result of a violation of this code shall be debarred from
participating in business dealings with the Municipality for 10 years,
unless the Municipality would suffer a hardship as a result of the
debarring, in addition to being subject to any other penalty provided by
law or this code.
H. A public official, appointed official or public employee of a political
subdivision who acts in good faith reliance on a written, nonconfidential
opinion of the Solicitor of the political subdivision or upon an opinion of
the Solicitor of the political subdivision, publicly stated at an open
meeting of the political subdivision and recorded in the official minutes
of the meeting, shall not be subject to the penalties provided for in
Subsection A, B, C, D, F or G of this section. Solicitor's opinion has been
rendered under duress or where the parties seeking and rendering the
Solicitor's opinion have colluded to purposely commit a violation of this
chapter.
§ 43-18 ETHICS, CODE OF § 43-18
43:181
Chapter 50
FIRE DEPARTMENTS, VOLUNTEER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Division of Fire Prevention — See Ch. 54.
Alarm devices — See Ch. 151.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 206.
§ 50-1. Powers and duties.
The Municipality's Volunteer Fire Departments and their membership are
authorized by the Municipal Council to perform the following in addition to
the normal fire-fighting, rescue and emergency medical duties:
A. Participation in drills, practices, training sessions and prefire planning
activities authorized by the Fire Chiefs and supervised by a qualified
instructor or a Fire Department officer.
B. Participation in community celebrations, ceremonial observances and
funerals for deceased fire fighters or other public figures where such
attendance is deemed appropriate by the Fire Chiefs. Out-of-town
participation must have prior approval of the Municipality.
C. Performing duties necessary to prepare the fire station for use as a
distribution center or a polling place for the primary and general
elections. This is extended to include like services performed at other
municipal or school district buildings.
D. Preparation for and responsible participation in parades, provided that
attendance has the prior approval of the Fire Department. Out-of-town
participation must have prior approval of the Municipality.
E. Any public service functions performed for the welfare of the
community, including recovery of animals, as long as these activities
are responsibly supervised and are sanctioned by the Fire Department.
F. Any and all public safety activities undertaken by Fire Department
members to render care to the injured, prevent loss of life, provide
comfort and security to victims and limit or prevent damage to or loss of
property as circumstances may dictate.
G. Rendering assistance to police officers where such aid is specifically
requested or is done without request to protect the public welfare from
imminent danger, including fire/police duties.
H. Participation in fire prevention activities, postfire investigations, bomb
searches, evacuation drills and fire lane enforcement.
§ 43-18 § 50-1
50:182
Chapter 54
FIRE PREVENTION, DIVISION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Volunteer Fire Departments — See Ch. 50.
Firearms and explosives — See Ch. 198.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 206.
§ 54-1. Division created.
From and after the approval of this chapter there shall be and is hereby
created a Division of Fire Prevention.
§ 54-2. Duties.
The Division of Fire Prevention is hereby delegated to carry out the
enforcement of all laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
ordinances of the Municipality of Monroeville bearing on fire prevention
and covering the following in the manner and to the extent hereinafter set
forth.
I. Participating in public programs to promote health and safety, to enlist
new members or solicit community support or conduct fundraising
activities, so long as no compensation is being paid to the member while
engaged in the fundraising activity and 100% of the proceeds go to the
Fire Department and so long as each activity is sanctioned by the Fire
Department.
J. Safely and responsibly performing maintenance and remodeling work
on the Fire Department vehicles, buildings, grounds or equipment.
K. Such other duties necessary for the efficient operation of the Volunteer
Services as may, from time to time, be assigned by the Municipal
Council and the officers of the Fire Department and as may be defined
within the constitution and bylaws of the Volunteer Fire Departments.
A. To provide for certain inspections to ensure against fire hazards.
B. To provide and require that the owner or occupant of any building shall
remove any combustible or explosive matter therein and correct
flammable conditions, upon the order of the Fire Chiefs, to safeguard
life or property, and to provide that said Chiefs may close the building
or premises pending such removal or correction, and if the owner or
occupant fails to obey such order, may have the necessary work done at
the expense of the Municipality, to be recovered by the Municipality.
§ 50-1 FIRE PREVENTION, DIVISION OF § 54-2
54:183
§ 54-3. Inspection of certain uses.
The Fire Chiefs or their designated assistants shall inspect, as often as
may be necessary, all specially hazardous manufacturing processes, storage
and installations of acetylene or other gases, chemicals, oils, explosives and
flammable materials, all other interior fire alarms and automatic sprinkler
systems in such other hazards or appliances and shall make such report as
may be necessary for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances governing
the same and for the safeguarding of life and property from fire.
§ 54-4. Additional inspections; dangerous conditions.
C. To require the installation and maintenance, in such buildings as shall
be designated, of standpipes, sprinkling systems, hose lines and other
similar appliances.
D. To require the installation and maintenance, in such buildings as shall
be designated, of portable fire apparatus such as axes, pike poles, hose
and reels, ladders, chemical extinguishers, portable pumps and other
similar appliances.
E. To provide for the keeping of all halls, doors, stairways, passageways,
aisles, fire escapes and exits in such repair and so free from obstruction
as to provide, in case of fire, full free, safe and adequate means of
escape for those people who use frequently or are employed in such
buildings.
F. To provide, for the purpose of preventing fire, the spread of fire, fire
waste, danger to life in case of fire and loss of life or damage to the
property from unsafe or improper construction or design of buildings,
regulations and specifications for construction, equipment,
arrangement, maintenance, alteration and inspection, heating, cooling
and lighting, stairways, doorways, elevators, fire towers, fire escapes,
exits, aisles, passageways, floor levels, seats, fire alarms and all other
means of providing safe escape in case of fire for all buildings which
may hereafter be constructed for use as stores, manufacturing
establishments, churches, theaters, dance halls, lodging houses,
tenements, dwellings, stables, storage houses, office buildings,
hospitals, asylums, hotels, colleges, schools, dry-cleaning
establishments, garages and all other buildings where a large number
of people have homes, congregate or are employed.
G. To provide regulations and specifications for the construction and
arrangement, maintenance, alteration and inspection of proper,
adequate and safe means and appliances to prevent the spread of fire
and to enable the occupants to escape safely in case of fire.
H. To provide for the preparation and distribution by the Division of Fire
Prevention of rules and regulations to minimize the danger of fire and
lessen fire waste, not inconsistent with the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and the ordinances of the Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 54-2 § 54-4
54:184
§ 54-5. Inspection upon complaint.
The Fire Chief, upon the complaint of any person or whenever he shall deem
it necessary, shall inspect or designate any of his assistants to inspect the
buildings and premises, except the interiors of private dwellings, within
their jurisdiction.
§ 54-6. Correction of dangerous conditions.
Whenever any of said officers shall find any building or other structure
which for want of automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire
extinguishment equipment or by reason of age or a dilapidated condition
or from any other cause is especially liable to fire and which is so situated
A. It shall be the duty of the Fire Chiefs or their designated assistants to
inspect, as often as may be necessary, all buildings, premises and public
thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose
of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to
cause fire or any violation of the provisions and intent of any ordinance
of the Municipality affecting the fire hazard.
B. Whenever the Fire Chiefs, or their assistants so designated as
authorized by the Chiefs in writing, shall find in any building or upon
any premises or other place combustible or explosive matter or
dangerous accumulation of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of
wastepaper, boxes, shavings or highly flammable material especially
liable to fire which is so situated as to endanger property, or shall find
obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or
windows liable to interfere with the operations of a Monroeville Fire
Company or the egress of occupants of said premises in case of fire, the
Chiefs shall order the manner of improvement to ensure proper safety,
which shall be complied with by the owner or occupant of such
premises or buildings, subject to appeal within three days to the Mayor
of the Municipality of Monroeville, as provided in this chapter.
C. Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such order within a
reasonable period after the issuing of said order shall be liable for a
penalty as hereinafter provided. Service of notice of such order may be
made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed, either
by delivering a copy of same to such occupant personally or by
delivering the same to and leaving it with an adult person in charge of
the premises, or, in case no such adult person is found upon the
premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door
at the entrance of said premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve
such an order upon the owner or occupant of the premises, such order
may be served either by delivering to or leaving with said person a copy
of said order; or, if said owner is absent from the Municipality of
Monroeville and the premises should not be occupied, then service of
such order may be made upon the owner by mailing such copy to the
owner's last known post office address.
§ 54-4 FIRE PREVENTION, DIVISION OF § 54-6
54:185
as to endanger other property or the occupants thereof, and whenever
such officer shall find in any building combustible or explosive matter or
flammable conditions dangerous to the safety of said building or occupants
thereof, he or they shall order such dangerous condition to be removed or
remedied, and such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner
or occupant of said building. If such order is made by the Fire Chief,
such owner or occupant may within three days appeal to the Mayor of
the Municipality of Monroeville, who shall within three days review such
order and file his decision thereon, and unless by this authority the order is
revoked, it shall remain in full force and be complied with within the time
fixed in said order.
§ 54-7. Hours of inspection; right of entry.
The Fire Chiefs or their assistants specially authorized thereto may,
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., enter any building or
premises, excepting the interior of private dwellings, within their
jurisdiction for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation which
under the provisions of this chapter may be necessary to be made.
§ 54-8. Inspection upon written request; report.
Upon receipt of a written request by the property owner, the Fire Chiefs
may inspect private property and give a written report of their findings.
§ 54-9. Report to be submitted to Council.
The Fire Chiefs shall, at the first regular meeting in February, August and
December, render to the Municipal Council a complete written report of
their actions taken and contemplated.
§ 54-10. Persons authorized to make inspections.
No person shall be permitted to make any inspections under this chapter
who has not filed his name with the Municipal Manager and received from
him an identification card authorizing him as a proper person to make such
inspections.
§ 54-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person or persons, firms or corporations violating any of the provisions
of this chapter or neglecting to comply with any order issued pursuant to
any section hereof shall, upon conviction thereof before any district justice
of the Municipality of Monroeville, be fined in a sum not exceeding $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 54-6 § 54-11
54:186
Chapter 61
HUMAN RELATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 6.
§ 61-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Monroeville Human Relations Ordinance."
§ 61-2. Policy.
§ 61-3. Applicability.
This chapter applies to discriminatory practices, including but not limited to
discrimination in employment, housing and public accommodations, which
occur within the territorial limits of the Municipality of Monroeville and
to employment contracted for, performed or to be performed within these
limits and to housing accommodations and places of public accommodation,
resort, recreation and amusement located within the territorial limits of the
Municipality.
§ 61-4. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from context:
COMMISSION — The Commission on Human Relations established in the
Municipality of Monroeville by this chapter.
A. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Municipality of Monroeville
in the exercise of its powers for the protection of the public safety and
the general welfare, for the maintenance of peace and good
government and for the promotion of the Municipality's trade,
commerce and manufactures to assure the right and opportunity of all
persons to participate in the social, cultural, recreational and economic
life of the Municipality and to assure equal opportunity for all persons
to live in decent housing facilities, free from restrictions because of
color, race, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex, handicap, marital
status or place of birth.
B. To accomplish these goals it shall be the public policy of the
Municipality of Monroeville to prohibit discrimination because of race,
color, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex, handicap, age, marital
status or place of birth in employment, housing and places of public
accommodation, resort, recreation or amusement.
§ 54-11 HUMAN RELATIONS § 61-4
61:187
DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION — Includes any differences in
treatment based on race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex,
handicap, age, marital status or place of birth.
EMPLOYER — Any person who employs five or more employees, exclusive
of the parents, spouse or children of such person, but excluding any
religious, fraternal, charitable or sectarian organization which is not
supported in whole or part by any governmental appropriations.
EMPLOYMENT — Shall not include the employment of individuals in
domestic service.
EMPLOYMENT AGENCY — Any person regularly undertaking, with or
without compensation, to procure opportunities for employment or to
procure, recruit, refer or place employees.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION —
LABOR ORGANIZATION — Any organization which exists for the purpose,
in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers
concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment or other mutual
aid or protection in relation to employment.
LENDING INSTITUTION — Any bank, insurance company, savings-and-loan
association or any other person regularly engaged in the business of lending
money or guaranteeing loans.
OWNER — Includes the owner, co-owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee,
assignee, manager, agent or any other person having the right of ownership
or possession or the authority to sell, rent or lease any housing
accommodation, or any person having an equitable or security interest in
any housing accommodation, including the Municipality of Monroeville and
its departments, boards, commissions and authorities.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, labor organization
or other organization or association, including those acting in a fiduciary
or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or otherwise.
The term "person" as applied to partnerships or other organizations or
associations includes their members, and as applied to corporations
includes their officers.
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION, RESORT, RECREATION OR AMUSEMENT —
Includes any place, business or activity which is open to, accepts or solicits
the patronage of the general public or offers goods, services or recreation
to the general public.
A building, structure or portion thereof which is used or occupied, or
is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as a home,
residence or sleeping place by a person, by a family or by a group of
persons living together; or
A.
A parcel of real property or lot available for the construction of a
"housing accommodation."
B.
§ 61-4 § 61-4
61:188
REAL ESTATE BROKER — Any natural person, partnership, corporation or
other association which for a fee or other valuable consideration manages,
sells, purchases, exchanges or rents or negotiates or offers or attempts to
negotiate the sale, purchase, exchange or rental of the real property of
another or holds itself out as engaged in the business of managing, selling,
purchasing, exchanging or renting the real property of another or collects
rent for the use of the real property of another, and includes real estate
salesmen or agents or any other person employed by a "real estate broker"
to perform or to assist in the performance of his business.
§ 61-5. Commission on Human Relations.
§ 61-6. Duties of Municipal Manager.
A. There is hereby established a Commission on Human Relations to
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Commission shall consist of a maximum of seven members and a
minimum of three members appointed for four-year terms. The terms
shall be so fixed that the term of office of two members shall expire
once every four years and two members each of the next two years. one
member's term shall expire the third year.
C. The Commission on Human Relations shall be established and operated
in accordance with Article XVIII of the Monroeville Home Rule Charter.
D. The Commission shall elect one of its members as Chairman and may
elect such other officers as it may deem necessary. The Chairman may,
with the approval of the Commission, appoint such subcommittees as
may be necessary to carry out the powers and duties of the
Commission, and the Commission may authorize such subcommittees to
take any necessary action for the Commission.
E. The Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations for its own
organization, operations and procedures as the Commission shall deem
necessary to administer, implement and enforce this chapter.
F. The Commission shall meet on an as-needed basis. A majority of
members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business, and a majority vote of these present at any
meeting shall be sufficient for any official action taken by the
Commission, except that approval of a majority plus one of the
members of the Commission shall be required before any public hearing
may be held.
G. The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, but
they may be reimbursed for all expenses necessarily incurred in the
performance of their duties in accordance with appropriations made by
the Municipal Council.
§ 61-4 HUMAN RELATIONS § 61-6
61:189
§ 61-7. Powers and duties of Commission.
The Commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty to:
A. The Municipal Manager or his designee shall assist the Commission in
administering, implementing and enforcing the provisions of this
chapter and shall attend meetings of the Commission.
B. The Municipal Manager or his designee shall serve as the staff
executive officer for the Commission. He shall promote the efficient
transaction of its business, the orderly handling of complaints and other
matters before the Commission.
C. The Commission may authorize the Municipal Manager or his designee
to initiate complaints of unlawful practices, as set forth in this chapter.
A. Initiate, receive, investigate and seek the satisfactory adjustment of
complaints charging unlawful practices, as set forth in this chapter.
B. Initiate or receive and investigate other complaints of discrimination
against any person because of race, color, religion, ancestry, national
origin, sex, age, handicap, marital status or place of birth, and to seek
the satisfactory adjustment of such complaints.
C. Hold hearings, subpoena witnesses and compel their attendance,
administer oaths, take the testimony of any person under oath and in
connection therewith require the production of evidence relating to any
matter under investigation or any question before the Commission,
make findings of fact for forwarding to the county, state or Federal
Human Relations Commission for action, decision, orders and
enforcement.
D. Certify upon the request of any person that a particular occupation or
position is exempt from the provisions of this chapter relating to
unlawful employment practices if the Commission finds that the
occupation or position reasonably requires the employment of a person
or persons of a particular race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin,
age, handicap, sex, marital status or place of birth, and that such
certification is not sought as means of circumventing the spirit and
purpose of this chapter, the burden of proving the facts required for
such a finding to be in each instance upon the person requesting the
certification of exemption from the provisions of this chapter.
E. Study and investigate by means of public hearings or otherwise any
conditions having an adverse effect on intergroup relations in the
Municipality of Monroeville, and to study the problems of prejudice,
intolerance, bigotry and discrimination as they affect the public safety
and general welfare of the Municipality of Monroeville.
F. Recommend educational and other programs to promote the equal
rights and opportunities of all persons, regardless of their race, color,
religion, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, handicap, marital status or
§ 61-6 § 61-7
61:190
§ 61-8. Unlawful employment practices.
place of birth, and to promote understanding among persons and
groups of different races, colors, religions, ancestry, national origins or
places of birth. In the performance of its duties, the Commission may
cooperate with interested citizens, private agencies and agencies of the
federal, state and local governments.
G. Request other departments, boards and commissions of the municipal
government to assist in the performance of its duties, and such other
departments, boards and commissions shall cooperate fully with the
Commission.
H. Assist in the enforcement of fair practices in municipal contracts.
I. Render from time to time a written report of its activities and
recommendations.
J. Recommend legislation to promote and ensure equal rights and
opportunities for all persons regardless of their race, color, religion,
ancestry, national origin, sex, handicap, age, marital status or place of
birth.
K. Adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the
purposes and provisions of this chapter.
A. It shall be an unlawful employment practice, except where based upon
applicable national security regulations established by the United
States, by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by any political
subdivision of the commonwealth having jurisdiction in the
Municipality of Monroeville, or except where based upon a bona fide
occupational exemption certified by the Commission in accordance with
§ 61-7D of this chapter:
(1) For any employer to refuse to hire any person or otherwise to
discriminate against any person with respect to hiring, tenure,
compensation, promotion, discharge or any other terms, conditions
or privileges directly or indirectly related to employment because
of race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex, handicap, age,
marital status or place of birth.
(2) For any employer, employment agency or labor organization to
establish, announce or follow a policy of denying or limiting,
through a quota system or otherwise, the employment or
membership opportunities of any person or group of persons
because of race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex,
handicap, age, marital status or place of birth.
(3) For any employer, labor organization, employment agency or any
joint labor-management committee controlling apprentice training
programs to deny to or withhold from any person the right to be
admitted to or participate in a guidance program, an
§ 61-7 HUMAN RELATIONS § 61-8
61:191
apprenticeship training program, an on-the-job training program
or any other occupational training program because of race, color,
religion, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, handicap, marital
status or place of birth.
(4) For any employer, employment agency or labor organization to
require of any applicant for employment or membership any
information concerning race, color, religion, ancestry, national
origin, marital status or place of birth.
(5) For any employer, employment agency or labor organization to
publish or circulate or to cause to be published or circulated any
notice or advertisement relating to employment or membership
which indicates any discrimination because of race, color, religion,
ancestry, national origin, sex, age, handicap, marital status or place
of birth.
(6) For any employment agency to fail or refuse to classify properly or
refer to employment or otherwise to discriminate against any
person because of race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin,
age, sex, handicap, marital status or place of birth.
(7) For any employer substantially to confine or limit recruitment or
hiring of employees, with intent to circumvent the spirit and
purpose of this chapter, to any employment agency, employment
service, labor organization, training school, training center or any
other employee-referring source which serves persons who are
predominantly of the same race, color, religion, ancestry, national
origin, marital status or place of birth.
(8) For any labor organization to discriminate against any person in
any way which would deprive or limit his employment opportunities
or otherwise adversely affect his status as an applicant for
employment or as an employee with regard to tenure,
compensation, promotion, discharge or any other terms, conditions
or privileges directly related to employment because of race, color,
religion, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, handicap, marital
status or place of birth.
(9) For any employer, employment agency or labor organization to
discriminate against any person because he has opposed any
practice forbidden by this chapter or because he has made a
complaint or testified or assisted in any manner in any investigation
or proceeding under this chapter.
(10) For any person, whether or not an employer, employment agency or
labor organization, to aid, incite, compel, coerce or participate in
the doing of any act declared to be an unlawful employment
practice by this chapter, or to obstruct or prevent any person from
enforcing or complying with the provisions of this chapter or any
rule, regulation or order of the Commission or to attempt, directly
§ 61-8 § 61-8
61:192
§ 61-9. Unlawful housing practices.
or indirectly, to commit any act declared by this chapter to be an
unlawful employment practice.
B. The Commission shall forward such complaints of employment
discrimination to the next higher level of review when the employer,
employment agent or labor organization is not operating exclusively in
the Municipality of Monroeville.
A. It shall be an unlawful housing practice, except as otherwise provided
in this section:
(1) For any owner, real estate broker or any other person to refuse to
sell, lease, sublease, rent, assign or otherwise transfer or to refuse
to negotiate for the sale, lease, sublease, rental assignment or
other transfer of the title, leasehold or other interest in any housing
accommodation on the grounds that is not available for inspection,
sale, lease, sublease, rental, assignment or other transfer when in
fact it is so available or otherwise to deny or withhold any housing
accommodation from any person because of race, color, religion,
ancestry, national origin, sex, handicap, marital status or place of
birth or to discriminate against, segregate or assign quotas to any
person or group of persons in connection with the sale, lease,
sublease, rental, assignment or other transfer of the title, leasehold
or other interest in any housing accommodation or housing
accommodations.
(2) For any person, including any owner or real estate broker, to
include in the terms, conditions or privileges of any sale, lease,
sublease, rental, assignment or other transfer of any housing
accommodation any clause, condition or restriction discriminating
against or requiring any other person in the use or occupancy of
such housing accommodation because of race, color, religion,
ancestry, national origin, sex, handicap, marital status or place of
birth.
(3) For any person, including any owner or real estate broker, to
discriminate in the furnishing of any facilities or services for any
housing accommodation because of race, color, religion, ancestry,
national origin, sex, handicap, marital status or place of birth.
(4) For any person, including any owner or real estate broker, to
publish, circulate, issue or display or cause to be published,
circulated, issued or displayed any communication, notice,
advertisement or sign of any kind relating to the sale, rental, lease,
sublease, assignment, transfer or listing of a housing
accommodation or accommodations which indicates any
preference, limitation, specification or discrimination based on
race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex, marital status or
place of birth.
§ 61-8 HUMAN RELATIONS § 61-9
61:193
(5) For any person, including any bank, banking organization,
mortgage company, insurance company or other financial or
lending institution or any agents or employees thereof, to whom
application is made for financial assistance for the purchase, lease,
acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of
any housing accommodation or housing accommodations to:
(a) Discriminate against any person or group of persons because
of the race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex,
handicap, marital status or place of birth of such person or
group of persons or of the prospective occupants or tenants of
such housing accommodation in the granting, withholding,
extending, modifying or renewing or in the rates, terms,
conditions or privileges of any such financial assistance in the
extension of services in connection therewith; or
(b) Use any form of application for such financial assistance or
make any record of inquiry in connection with applications for
such financial assistance which indicates, directly or indirectly,
any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, color,
religion, ancestry, national origin, sex, handicap, marital status
or place of birth, or any intent to make any such limitation,
specification or discrimination.
(6) For any real estate broker or real estate salesman or agent or any
other person for business or economic purposes to induce, directly
or indirectly, the sale or rental or the listing for sale or rental of a
housing accommodation by representing that a change has
occurred or will or may occur with respect to the racial, religious or
ethnic composition of the street, block, neighborhood or area in
which said housing accommodation is located.
(7) For any person, whether or not a real estate broker, real estate
salesman or agent, owner or lending institution to aid, incite,
compel, coerce or participate in the doing of any act declared to be
an unlawful housing practice under this chapter or to obstruct or
prevent enforcement or compliance with the provisions of this
chapter or any rule, regulation or order of the Commission or to
attempt directly or indirectly to commit any act declared by this
chapter to be an unlawful housing practice.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall bar any religious or sectarian institution or
organization or any charitable or educational organization which is
operated, supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious
or sectarian organization or any bona fide private or fraternal
organization from limiting admission to or giving preference to persons
of the same religion or sect or to members of such private or fraternal
organization, or from making such selection as is calculated by such
organization to promote the religious or sectarian principles or the
aims, purposes or fraternal principles for which it is established or
maintained.
§ 61-9 § 61-10
61:194
§ 61-10. Unlawful public accommodations practices.
It shall be unlawful public accommodation practice:
§ 61-11. Obstruction of fair practices.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not within the named
classifications set forth in this chapter, to aid, incite, compel, coerce or
participate in the doing of any act declared to be an unlawful practice under
this chapter or to obstruct or prevent enforcement of compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or any rule, regulation or order of the Commission
or to attempt, directly or indirectly, to commit any act declared by this
chapter to be an unlawful practice.
§ 61-12. Municipal contracts.
A. For the owner, lessee, proprietor, manager, superintendent, agent or
employee of any business or place of public accommodation, resort,
recreation or amusement to:
(1) Refuse, withhold from or deny to any person because of race, color,
religion, ancestry, national origin, sex, handicap, marital status or
place of birth, either directly or indirectly, any of the
accommodations, advantages, facilities, services or privileges,
products or goods of such place of public accommodation, resort or
amusement; or
(2) Publish, circulate, issue, display, post or mail, either directly or
indirectly, any written or printed communication, notice or
advertisement to the effect that any of the accommodations,
advantages, facilities, goods, products, services and privileges of
any such place shall be refused, withheld or denied to any person
on account of race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, marital
status or place of birth or that the patronage of any person of any
particular race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin or place of
birth is unwelcome, objectionable or not acceptable, desired or
solicited.
B. For any person, whether or not included in Subsection A of this section,
to aid, incite, compel, coerce or participate in the doing of any act
declared to be an unlawful public accommodations practice under this
chapter.
A. All contractors of the Municipality of Monroeville shall comply with the
spirit and intent of the chapter.
B. Allegations of unlawful employment practices by any municipal
contractor shall be brought before the Municipal Manager, who shall
request a finding of fact from the Commission.
C. Based upon the finding of fact, the Municipal Manager may negate the
contract, bar further purchases by the Municipality, seek satisfactory
§ 61-10 HUMAN RELATIONS § 61-12
61:195
§ 61-13. Complaint procedure; investigation; hearing.
remedy to the problem and undertake other actions so provided by law.
Nothing shall prevent the Commission from filing separate actions with
the appropriate county, state or federal commission.
A. A complaint charging that any person has engaged or is engaging in any
unlawful practice as set forth in this chapter may be made by an
aggrieved resident. Any complaint may be amended by the
complainant, or the Commission with the consent of the complainant,
anytime before the final findings have been made by the Commission.
B. The complaint shall be in writing, signed and verified, and include the
name and address of the person or persons alleged to have committed
the unlawful practice and the particulars thereof and such other
information as may be required by the Commission.
C. The Commission shall make a prompt and full investigation of each
complaint of unlawful practice and shall forward the findings of fact to
the appropriate county, state or federal agency, or any other
appropriate agency, within 30 days of the publication of the findings of
fact. Findings of fact shall be considered published when signed by the
Commission Chairman and entered into the minute book for the Human
Relations Commission. Each and every party to the complaint shall be
provided a copy of the findings of fact after publication.
D. New information or facts after the publication of the Commission's
findings of fact shall be forwarded directly to the agency to which the
findings of fact had been forwarded to by the Commission.
E. The Commission may of its own volition attempt to negotiate an
equitable solution to the problem. Suggestions from the Commission
are nonbinding on either party; however, if accommodation and
agreement are reached, the terms to which both parties are agreeing
and consenting shall be reduced to writing and treated as a normal
legal agreement between both parties.
F. If in the opinion of the majority of the Commission irreparable harm
may result if the alleged unlawful act would continue or be
consummated during the period that findings of fact are in progress,
the Commission may request the Municipal Manager to seek an
injunction restraining the action until such time as procedures pursuant
to this chapter can be normally concluded.
G. While a public hearing is held, the Commission shall designate one or
more of its members to conduct such a hearing. The Commission shall
serve upon the person charged with having engaged or engaging in the
unlawful practice, hereinafter referred to as the "respondent," a
statement of charges made in the complaint or amended complaint and
a notice of time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be not less
than 10 days from the service of the statement of charges. The
§ 61-12 § 61-13
61:196
§ 61-14. Enforcement.
In the event that the respondent refuses or fails to comply with the terms of
this chapter or violates any of the provisions of this chapter, the Commission
shall certify the case and the entire record of its proceedings to the
Municipal Attorney, who shall invoke the aid of the appropriate court to
secure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 61-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter relating to
unlawful practices or any rule or regulation pertaining thereto adopted by
the Commission or any order of the Commission shall be subject to a fine of
not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
of the fine and costs, shall be subject to imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
§ 61-16. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable and if any provision, sentence,
clause, section or part thereof is held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional
or inapplicable to any person or circumstance such illegality, invalidity,
unconstitutionality or inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of the chapter
or their application to other persons or circumstances. It is hereby declared
to be the legislative intent that this chapter would have been adopted if
such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional provision, sentence, clause, section
or part had not been included therein and if the person or circumstances to
which the chapter or any part thereof is inapplicable has been specifically
exempted therefrom.
§ 61-17. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances repealed by this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and not as new enactments. The provisions of this chapter shall
not affect any act done or any complaint or proceeding pending under
authority of the repealed ordinances. All rules and regulations adopted
respondent shall have the right to file an answer to the statement of
charges, to appear at the hearing in person and/or be represented by an
attorney or, subject to the approval of the hearing panel, by any other
person and to examine and cross-examine witnesses. The complainant
shall also have the right to be represented by an attorney or, subject to
the approval of the hearing panel, any other person. The Commission
shall not be bound by the strict rule of evidence prevailing in courts of
law or equity. The testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath
and may be transcribed.
§ 61-13 HUMAN RELATIONS § 61-17
61:197
pursuant to any ordinance repealed by this chapter shall continue with the
same force and effect as if such ordinance had not been repealed.
Chapter 69
INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION
§ 61-17 § 61-17
69:198
ARTICLE I
Turtle Creek Valley Council of Governments
[Adopted 11-10-1978 by Ord. No. 1148]
§ 69-1. Membership authorized.
The Municipality of Monroeville shall join and be a member of the Turtle
Creek Valley Council of Governments.
§ 69-2. Conditions of agreement.
No action taken by the Turtle Creek Valley Council of Governments which
creates a legal obligation, whether it is contractual, financial or otherwise,
upon a member Municipality shall be binding upon a member Municipality
affected unless and until its municipal legislative body ordains, resolves
or otherwise enacts the actions recommended by the Turtle Creek Valley
Council of Governments, according to the procedure set forth in the
appropriate municipal code and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 69-3. Duration of agreement.
This agreement shall stand in perpetuity.
§ 69-4. Duties of Council.
The Turtle Creek Valley Council of Governments shall assist the member
municipalities individually or collectively to execute their governmental
responsibilities in as efficient and responsible a manner as possible; further,
the Turtle Creek Valley Council of Governments shall undertake such other
projects related to municipal government as the Board of Directors of the
corporation may direct, subject to the provisions of § 69-2.
§ 69-5. Financing.
The Turtle Creek Valley Council of Governments shall be financed by annual
dues paid by member municipalities and by funds obtained by the
corporation from public or private sources.
§ 69-6. Organization.
The Turtle Creek Valley Council of Governments shall be the agent for
the Municipality of Monroeville in matters pertaining to this agreement;
the chief legislative officer of each Municipality shall be a Director of
the Turtle Creek Valley Council of Governments, with the right to appoint
an alternative(s) from among the legislative body of that Municipality to
represent him fully in his absence; and the Board of Directors of the Turtle
Creek Valley Council of Governments shall be authorized to act as it deems
necessary, in accordance with its bylaws, subject to §§ 69-2 and 69-5.
§ 69-1 INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION § 69-7
69:199
§ 69-7. Acquisition, management and disposal of property.
Real or personal property necessary to implement this agreement shall
be acquired, managed and disposed by the Turtle Creek Valley Council of
Governments, in accordance with the bylaws of the corporation and any
laws or contracts which apply.
§ 69-8. Bylaws.
The bylaws of the Turtle Creek Valley Council of Governments attached
hereto and made a part hereof are hereby approved.74
74.Editor's Note: The bylaws are on file in the office of the Municipal Manager.
§ 69-7 § 69-8
69:200
ARTICLE II
Penn Prime Trust
[Adopted 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 1621; amended in its entirety
10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 1858]
§ 69-9. Membership authorized.
The Council of the Municipality of Monroeville is hereby authorized to
execute the Penn Prime Workers Compensation Trust Agreement (or
Member Participation Agreement), which Agreement provides for the
participation of Monroeville, in cooperation with other Pennsylvania
municipalities and local public agencies, in the Penn Prime Workers
Compensation Trust. The Trust Agreement, which incorporates the
organizational structure necessary to implement the program, is on file for
inspection and review at the offices of the Pennsylvania League of Cities and
Municipalities, 414 North 2nd Street, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania 17101. The
Agreement may be amended after the enactment of this article to conform
to any requirements imposed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Department of Labor and Industry, Bureau of Workers Compensation and
such other manner as the Trust Agreement may permit.
§ 69-9.1. Participation.
The participation of Monroeville in Penn Prime Workers Compensation
Trust is authorized for the purpose of enabling Monroeville to ultimately
reduce and stabilize the cost of its workers compensation obligations
through the creation of a joint fund to be used for the payment of workers
compensation and employers' liability claims on behalf of all participants in
the Penn Prime Workers Compensation Trust.
§ 69-9.2. Conditions for participating municipalities.
As set forth in the Penn Prime Workers Compensation Trust Agreement,
the following conditions, among others, apply to the participation of
Monroeville in the Penn Prime Workers Compensation Trust:
A. Each participating Municipality meets the admission and eligibility
requirements set forth therein;
B. Each participating Municipality agrees to pay all of its annual
contributions and any assignments which are required for the creation
and maintenance of the General Operating and Restricted Surplus
Funds created pursuant to the Penn Prime Workers Compensation
Trust and pledges its full taxing authority for the payment of those
obligations.
C. Each participating Municipality complies with the terms of the Trust
Agreement as respects contributions, required loss prevention
methods, cooperation with the trust service and fiscal agents,
attorneys, claims adjustors, etc., and that each participating
Municipality complies with all applicable statutes and regulations
§ 69-9 INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION § 69-9.2
69:201
§ 69-9.3. Self-insurance exemption required to participate.
The participation of Monroeville in the Penn Prime Workers Compensation
Trust will not be effective unless and until it is granted a self-insurance
exemption for the payment of workers compensation claims by the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry pursuant to 77 P.S. § 501
and any regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 69-9.4. Length of participation.
That Monroeville agrees to participate in the trust for a minimum period
of two years, with annual renewals thereafter, subject to the condition
that it continues to retain a self-insurance exemption for the payment of
workers compensation claims from the Pennsylvania Department of Labor
and Industry.
§ 69-9.5. Delegation of powers.
Each participating Municipality delegates to the Board of Trustees of the
Penn Prime Workers Compensation Trust the powers enumerated in the
Trust Agreement, including the right to expel participants under certain
conditions.
§ 69-9.6. Payment of annual contributions; contact person;
performance of covenants.
As a condition of participating in the Penn Prime Workers Compensation
Trust, Monroeville agrees to the following:
§ 69-9.7. Statutory authority.
This article is being enacted pursuant to 53 P.S. § 481 et seq.75
governing the payment of workers compensation claims, including but
not limited to the Pennsylvania Workers Compensation Act.
A. Pay all annual contributions or assessments as may be required by the
Board of Trustees.
B. Designate a contact person for the purpose of communicating with the
trust or its representatives.
C. Perform all covenants contained in the Penn Prime Workers
Compensation Trust Agreement and delegate to the Board of Trustees
the powers and authority enumerated in that Agreement.
75.Editor's Note: Said 53 P.S. § 481 et seq. was repealed by L. 1996, P.L. 1158, No. 177. See
now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 69-9.2 § 69-9.7
69:202
ARTICLE III
Local Government Investment Trust
[Adopted 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 162276]
§ 69-10. Entrance into trust.
This governmental unit shall join with other local governmental units in
accordance with the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act77 by becoming a
settlor of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust ("the trust")
and entering into the Declaration of Trust, which is adopted by reference
with the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a
copy of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this
chapter was adopted.
§ 69-11. Purchase of trust shares; redemption.
This governmental unit is authorized to purchase shares in the trust from
time to time with available funds and to redeem some or all of those shares
from time to time as funds are needed for other purposes. These actions are
to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose, pursuant to general
or specific instructions by the governing body of this governmental unit.
§ 69-12. Custody of funds.
The Trustees of the trust are designated as having official custody of this
governmental unit's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in
the trust.
§ 69-13. Findings.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,78 the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 73-1;
B. This governmental unit's participation in the trust shall be terminable
at any time by ordinance/resolution;
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this governmental unit's funds in obligations which
are otherwise legal investments, as part of a pooled arrangement with
other local governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other
advantages of pooled investments;
76.Editor's Note: The introduction to this ordinance provided that the Municipality of
Monroeville would herein be referred to as this "governmental unit."
77.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
78.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 69-10 INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION § 69-13
69:203
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
funds of this governmental unit except through the purchase of shares
in the trust;
E. The trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein; and
F. Shares may be repurchased and redeemed from time to time as this
governmental unit may determine to be necessary or appropriate to
meet its cash investment requirements.
§ 69-13 § 69-13
69:204
Chapter 80
LIBRARY
CHARTER REFERENCES
Library Board — See § C-111.
§ 80-1. Creation and composition of Board of Directors.
§ 80-2. Nomination and appointment of members by majority vote
of Council.
All nominations and appointments to the Board of Directors shall be by the
affirmative vote of a majority of the elected members of Council.
§ 80-3. Terms of office.
Members appointed to serve on the Library Board of Directors shall not
serve more than two consecutive terms. Filling an unexpired term shall not
A. There is hereby created and established, in the Municipality of
Monroeville, the Board of Directors of the Monroeville Library, which
shall have full and complete control over the operation and conduct of a
municipal library including the effort to get such a library established.
B. The Board shall consist of seven members each of whom shall be a bona
fide resident of the Municipality of Monroeville. One member of the
Council of the Municipality of Monroeville shall sit in an ex officio
capacity as a representative of the Council of the Municipality of
Monroeville. Council shall appoint an ex officio administrator
responsible for the library as an ex officio member of the Board.
C. No more than one person from each Ward of the Municipality of
Monroeville shall sit as a member of the Board of Directors of the
Monroeville Library. The current members of the Board of Directors
shall be permitted to fulfill their terms without being in violation of this
provision, however, upon expiration of the terms of the current
members, the vacancies shall be filled so that no more than one
member from each Ward of the Municipality shall be represented on the
Board of Directors.
D. In the event a Ward Board position is advertised and remains vacant for
a four-month period, Council may nominate and appoint a qualified
resident from another Ward to fill the vacated position. Upon conclusion
of this non-Ward appointment, the Ward Board position shall revert
back to the respective Ward. No more than one person from each Ward
of the Municipality of Monroeville shall sit as a member at large of the
Library Board of Directors.
§ 69-13 LIBRARY § 80-3
80:205
be considered in calculating terms for this purpose. The term of office for
members of the Board of Directors shall not exceed three years.
§ 80-4. Election of officers.
The Board of Directors, when appointed, shall organize by electing a
President, Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer at the February monthly
meeting. The newly elected officers shall begin their respective terms
immediately and shall hold office for one year or until her or his refusal, or
inability to serve, death, resignation or removal.
§ 80-5. Bylaws.
The Board of Directors shall adopt bylaws.
§ 80-6. Library rules and regulations.
The Board of Directors shall prescribe rules and regulations for the
operation of the Monroeville Library, including the hours that the library
will be open.
§ 80-7. Appointment and discharge of library employees.
The Board of Directors at their pleasure shall have the power to hire and
discharge, discipline such employees as shall be necessary for the proper
operation of the library provided that the number of employees shall be
within the provisions of the annual budget enacted by the Council.
§ 80-8. Quality library aid.
The Council of the Municipality of Monroeville hereby agrees to maintain
the Monroeville Public Library in accordance with the provisions of Section
401 of the Library Code, the Act of June 14, 1961, P.L. 324,79 at a level
of financial support that will insure that the library will have a minimum
financial effort of $5 per capita for each person residing in the
municipalities based on which it qualifies for aid in accordance with Section
303.2 of the Library Code.80
§ 80-9. Library cardholders.
Library cards are free of charge to residents of Allegheny County and areas
that participate in Access PA. Pennsylvania residents of areas not in Access
PA and out-of-state residents are charged a fee to be determined by the
Board of Directors. Identification must be presented to verify name and
address when applying for a card.
79.Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. § 4101 et seq. and, in particular, 24 P.S. § 4401.
80.Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. § 4303.2.
§ 80-3 § 80-10
80:206
§ 80-10. Receipt of library income; maintenance; disbursement;
audit.
All monies appropriated for the establishing or maintenance or both of the
library and all monies, if any, received from other sources for its use, shall
be under the exclusive control and shall be disbursed under the direction of
the Board of Directors who shall make an annual report to the Council of
the Municipality of Monroeville. The accounts of the Treasurer of the Board
of Directors shall be audited as is the case of other expenditures.
§ 80-11. Investment policy.
§ 80-12. Endowment fund investment policy.
A. It is the policy of the Monroeville Library Board of Directors to invest
public funds and donations in a manner which will provide the highest
return with the maximum security while meeting cash flow demands.
All investments will conform to all applicable laws and regulations
governing the investment of public funds, including 53 P.S. § 46316,
Investment of funds, as amended, including funds that are secured
through public insurance protection companies.
B. The primary objectives, in priority order, of the library's financial
investments are:
(1) Safety of principal: Safety of principal is the foremost objective of
the investment program. All investments shall be undertaken in a
manner that seeks first to preserve capital and second to fulfill
other investment objectives;
(2) Liquidity: The library's investment portfolio will remain sufficiently
liquid to enable the library to meet all operating requirements
which might be reasonably anticipated; and
(3) Return on investments (yield): The library's investments should
generate the highest available return without sacrificing the first
two objectives outlined above.
C. The Treasurer shall be responsible for implementation of the
investment program and is authorized, with approval from the Board of
Directors, to invest library funds in only those investments specifically
delineated as follows: Certificates of deposits (CDs) with a maturity of
one year or less and money market funds, both with financial
institutions insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
Securities Investor Protection Corporation or the Federal Savings and
Loan Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Share
Insurance Fund or the Pennsylvania Savings Association Insurance
Corporation, or its successor to the extent that such accounts are so
insured.
A. The purpose of the Monroeville Library Endowment Fund is to provide
the library with a permanent source of income for library materials,
§ 80-10 LIBRARY § 80-12
80:207
§ 80-13. Annual report by Board.
The Board of Directors shall report in writing annually, to the Council of the
Municipality of Monroeville, the operation of the Monroeville Library for the
previous year and shall specify in reasonable detail, source and amount of
receipts as well as expenditures.
§ 80-14. Title to property.
services and programs beyond those allotted through public funds.
All investments will conform to all applicable laws and regulations
governing the investment of endowment funds, including 20 P.S.
Chapter 73, Fiduciaries Investments, as amended.
B. The objective of the investments made with the Monroeville Library
Endowment Fund is to provide a high and consistent level of income
and preserve the principal while allowing for the growth of the principal
to offset effects of inflation.
C. All monies in the endowment fund will consist of individual and
corporate gifts; all stocks will be sold immediately; all fixed income/
bonds will be considered on an individual basis; and any other tangible
property will be converted into cash.
D. All funds in the Monroeville Library Endowment Fund shall be invested
in funds in only those investments specifically delineated as follows:
(1) Certificates of deposits (CDs) with a maturity not to exceed one
year;
(2) Fixed income with an investment grade of A or better by S&P or
Moody's. Maturity shall not exceed five years;
(3) A balanced (60% equities / 40% fixed income) mutual fund with a
performance history of at least 10 years;
(4) Monies waiting for investment will be placed in a money market
fund; and
(5) All investments will be in United States based corporations.
A. Title to all property of the library, including real estate, personal
property, funds and accounts shall be in the Government of the
Municipality of Monroeville.
B. Should the library building or the ground upon which it is located cease
to be used for the purposes as specified in the Municipality of
Monroeville Resolution 62-7 for a continuous period of two years after a
library building has been constructed on the grounds, or five years from
February 28, 1962, whichever shall last occur, the Municipality of
Monroeville, by its duly constituted officers, will forthwith convey the
aforesaid tract of ground with all buildings located thereon free of liens
and encumbrances to the Municipal Authority of the School District of
§ 80-12 § 80-14
80:208
Chapter 93
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 97.
Police personnel — See Ch. 105.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 123.
Social security — See Ch. 131.
the Municipality of Monroeville upon written request therefor from the
Board of Directors of the Gateway Union School District.
§ 80-14 PENSIONS § 80-14
93:209

ARTICLE I
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 1-9-1973 by Ord. No. 822; amended in its entirety
4-11-2006 by Ord. No. 236481]
§ 93-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in this plan shall have the meaning
set forth in this article, unless a different meaning is otherwise clearly
required by the context:
ACCRUED BENEFIT — As of any given date, the benefit determined under
§ 93-4B, calculated on the basis of final monthly average wage as of the
date of determination and multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which
shall be the participant's aggregate service determined as of such date and
the denominator of which shall be the participant's projected aggregate
service, provided that the participant is assumed to continue in active
employment until attainment of normal retirement age. Notwithstanding
anything contained herein to the contrary, in no event shall the fraction
exceed one. In no event, however, shall the accrued benefit exceed the
maximum limitation, determined as of the date of computation, provided
under § 93-6. All accrued benefits are subject to all applicable limitations,
reductions, offsets, and actuarial adjustments provided pursuant to the
terms of the plan prior to the actual payment thereof. The accrued benefit
shall include any service increment determined pursuant to § 93-4D
attributable to the participant's aggregate service as of the date of
determination.
ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS — The total amount contributed by any
participant to this fund or its predecessor by way of payroll deduction
or otherwise, plus interest credited at 5.5% per annum. Interest shall be
credited in the form of a compound interest rate compounded quarterly
from the date on which the contributions were made to the date that a
distribution of accumulated contributions under §§ 93-11D and 93-12B shall
be paid or payment of benefits shall commence.
ACT — The Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act
which was enacted as Act 205 of 1984, as amended, 53 P.S. § 895.101 et
seq.
ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT — Two forms of payment of equal actuarial
present value on a specified date. The actuarial present value shall be
determined by use of the UP-1984 Mortality Table and 7% interest unless
otherwise specifically provided herein.
ACTUARY — The person, partnership, association or corporation which at
any given time is serving as actuary, provided that such actuary must be an
"approved actuary," as defined in the Act.
AGGREGATE SERVICE — The total period or periods of the participant's
employment with the employer whether or not interrupted.
81.Editor's Note: Effective January 1, 2006.
§ 93-1 PENSIONS § 93-1
93:211
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, should any such participant
receive a distribution of accumulated contributions with respect to a period
of employment, such period of employment shall not be included in
aggregate service thereafter unless, at the commencement of the next
period of employment, the participant repays to the fund the amount of
such distribution with interest. For purposes of this definition, interest shall
accrue as of the date the employee receives a distribution of accumulated
contributions and shall be computed at the same rate and in the same
manner as described in the definition of "accumulated contributions" in this
section. Aggregate service shall be calculated in whole years and completed
months.
ATTENDING COLLEGE — The eligible dependent children are registered
at an accredited institution of higher learning and are carrying a minimum
course load of seven credit hours per semester.
BENEFICIARY — The person or entity designated by the participant to
receive a distribution of the participant's accumulated contributions should
the participant die prior to becoming entitled to a retirement benefit. In the
event that a participant does not designate a beneficiary or the beneficiary
does not survive the participant, the beneficiary shall be the surviving
spouse, or if there is no surviving spouse, the issue, per stirpes, or if there
is no surviving issue, the estate; but if no personal representative has been
appointed, to those persons who would be entitled to the estate under the
intestacy laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania if the participant had
died intestate and a resident of Pennsylvania.
CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person designated by the
Municipality who has the primary responsibility for the execution of the
administrative affairs for the plan.
CODE — The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
COMMITTEE — The Police Pension Committee, as determined pursuant to
§ 93-14.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COMPENSATION — The total remuneration of the employee, whether
salary or hourly wages, including but not limited to overtime pay, holiday
pay, longevity pay, shift differential, premium pay, any single sum or lumpsum
payments, payments received under the Pennsylvania Heart and Lung
Act and any other form of remuneration paid by the employer for police
services rendered.
For participants hired after January 24, 2001, compensation shall not
include any single sum or end of career one-time lump-sum payments,
except to the extent that said payments are for benefits which were
earned during the calculation period, pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Auditor General Bulletin No. 2001-01, as amended.
A.
Compensation shall be limited on an annual basis for purposes of the
plan to the amount specified for government plans pursuant to Code
Section 401(a)(17), as adjusted under Code Section 415(d).
B.
§ 93-1 § 93-1
93:212
COUNCIL — The Council of the Municipality of Monroeville.
DISABILITY DATE — The date when a participant is determined by the Plan
Administrator to be incapacitated due to total and permanent disability, or
the date when the participant's employment terminates due to such total
and permanent disability, if later.
EARLY RETIREMENT AGE — The date on which the participant has
completed at least 20 years of aggregate service.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual employed by the employer on a regular, fulltime
basis as a member of the employer's police force.
EMPLOYER — The Municipality of Monroeville, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
EMPLOYMENT — For the purpose of determining aggregate service shall
mean:
The period of time for which an employee is directly or indirectly
compensated or entitled to compensation by the employer for the
performance of duties as a police officer;
A.
Any period of time for which an employee is granted an authorized
leave of absence, provided that the participant shall pay participant
contributions to the plan in an amount equal to the amount which would
have been paid if the participant continued in active employment,
unless Council shall waive the payment of such participant
contributions. Such an authorized leave of absence may be granted
for a period of time for which an employee is paid a fixed, periodic
amount in the nature of salary continuation payments for reasons other
than the performance of duties (such as vacation, holidays, sickness,
entitlement to benefits under workers' compensation or similar laws),
either directly by the employer or through a program to which the
employer has made contributions on behalf of the employee; or a period
during which an employee is entitled to disability benefits under this
plan, provided that the employee returns to employment within three
months of the date on which it is determined that the employee is no
longer totally and permanently disabled if such determination occurs
prior to the date a participant attains normal retirement age; or for any
other reason acceptable to the Council;
B.
Any period of voluntary or involuntary military service with the armed
forces of the United States of America, provided that the participant
has been employed as a regular, full-time member of the employer's
police force for a period of at least six months immediately prior to the
period of military service; and the participant returns to employment
within six months following discharge from military service or within
such longer period during which employment rights are guaranteed by
applicable law or under the terms of a collective bargaining agreement
with the employer;
C.
§ 93-1 PENSIONS § 93-1
93:213
Any period of voluntary or involuntary military service with the armed
forces of the United States of America not to exceed a total of 24
months which occurred prior to the date on which a participant first
became employed as an employee of the employer, provided that the
participant shall pay into the plan the required sum as determined
herein for the purchase of such service credit under the plan. The
participant may make application for such purchase of military service
credit at any time prior to retirement or other termination of
employment as an employee of the employer. The participant shall pay
an amount as determined by the actuary based upon the cost to provide
the service credit requested under applicable law;
D.
Any period of qualified military service as determined under the
requirements of Chapter 43 of Title 38, United States Code, provided
that the participant returns to employment following such period of
qualified military service, and the participant makes payment to the
plan in an amount equal to the required participant contributions that
would otherwise have been paid to the plan during such period of
qualified military service to pay for benefits derived from participant
contributions. The amount of participant and/or employer contributions
shall be based upon an estimate of the compensation that would have
been paid to the participant during such period of qualified military
service as determined by the average compensation paid to the
participant during the 12 months immediately preceding the period
of qualified military service. The amount of participant contributions
calculated must be paid into the plan before the end of the period that
begins on the date of reemployment and ends on the earlier of the date
that ends the period that has a duration of three times the period of
qualified military service or the date that is five years after the date of
reemployment; and
E.
Any period of voluntary or involuntary military service with the armed
forces of the United States of America not to exceed a total of two years
which occurred prior to the date on which a participant first became
employed as an employee of the employer, provided that the participant
shall purchase such credit and that such participant is not entitled to
receive, eligible to receive or is receiving retirement benefits for such
military service under a retirement system administered and wholly or
partially paid for by any other governmental agency except military
retirement pay earned by a combination of active and nonactive duty
with a reserve or national guard component of the armed forces which
is payable upon the attainment of specified age and period of service
under 10 U.S.C. Chapter 67 (relating to retired pay for nonregular
service). The purchase price for such service shall be computed by
multiplying the average normal cost rate for the plan as certified by the
Public Employee Retirement Commission and not to exceed 10% times
the participant's average annual rate of compensation during the first
three years of employment and multiplying the result times the number
of years and fractions thereof being purchased. Interest shall be paid at
F.
§ 93-1 § 93-1
93:214
FINAL MONTHLY AVERAGE WAGE —
INSURER or INSURANCE COMPANY — A legal reserve life insurance
company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
MEMBER'S SALARY AT THE TIME OF DEATH — The fixed, periodic
payment for the final completed month of active employment.
MEMBER'S SALARY AT THE TIME THE DISABILITY WAS INCURRED —
The last month of basic salary or basic rate of pay as applicable under any
then current collective bargaining agreement before the disability date.
MINIMUM MUNICIPAL OBLIGATION — The minimum obligation of the
municipality as determined by the actuary pursuant to the provisions of the
Act.
a rate of 4.75% compounded annually from the first date of employment
to the date of payment.
Employment shall not mean for purposes of determining aggregate
service: Any period of disability for a participant who was disabled as a
result of a nonservice related disability.
G.
For participants hired prior to January 24, 2001, the average monthly
wages earned by the participant and paid by the employer during
the highest 36 months of the last 60 months of active employment.
(The applicable 36 months do not need to be consecutive months of
active employment.) Wage shall include the employee's compensation
to which the employee is entitled for the rendering of services in
employment, including but not limited to overtime, longevity, shift
differential, holiday pay, premium pay, any single sum or lump-sum
payments and payments received under the Pennsylvania Heart and
Lung Act.
A.
For participants hired after January 24, 2001, final monthly average
wage shall mean the average monthly wages earned by the participant
and paid by the employer during the final 36 months immediately
preceding termination of employment as an employee of the employer.
Wage shall include the employee's compensation to which the employee
is entitled for the rendering of services in employment, including but
not limited to overtime, longevity, shift differential, holiday pay and
premium pay. However, wage shall exclude any single sum or end of
career one-time lump sum payments, except to the extent that said
payments are for benefits which were earned during the calculation
period, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Auditor General Bulletin No.
2001-01, as amended.
B.
Final monthly average wage shall be calculated by taking into account
only those periods during which an employee receives wages, as that
term is defined in this definition. Compensation used to determine
final monthly average wage shall be limited on an annual basis for the
purpose of the plan to the amount specified for government plans in
accordance with Code § 401(a)(17), as adjusted under Code § 415(d).
C.
§ 93-1 PENSIONS § 93-1
93:215
NORMAL RETIREMENT AGE — The date on which the participant has
completed 25 years of aggregate service with the employer and has attained
age 55.
NOTICE or ELECTION — A written document prepared in the form
specified by the Plan Administrator and delivered as follows: If such notice
or election is to be provided by the employer or the Plan Administrator, it
shall be mailed in a properly addressed envelope, postage prepaid, to the
last known address of the person entitled thereto, on or before the last day
of the specified notice or election period; or, if such notice or election is to
be provided to the employer or the Plan Administrator, it must be received
by the recipient on or before the last day of the specified notice or election
period.
PARTICIPANT — An employee who has met the eligibility requirements to
participate in the plan as provided in § 93-2A and who has not for any
reason ceased to be a participant hereunder.
PENSION FUND or FUND — The Police Pension Fund administered under
the terms of this plan and which shall include all money, property,
investments, policies and contracts standing in the name of the plan.
PLAN — The plan set forth herein, as amended from time to time and
designated as the Municipality of Monroeville Police Pension Plan.
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The Committee or the individual appointed for
the purpose of supervising and administering the provisions of the plan. In
the event that no such appointment is made, the Plan Administrator shall be
the Council.
PLAN YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning on January 1 and ending
on December 31 of each year.
POLICY or CONTRACT — A retirement annuity or retirement income
endowment policy (or a combination of both) or any other form of insurance
contract or policy which shall be deemed appropriate in accordance with
the provisions of applicable law.
RESTATEMENT DATE — January 1, 2006, the date upon which this
amendment and restatement of the plan becomes effective.
RETIREMENT DATE — The first day of the month coincident with or next
following the date on which the participant retires from employment or
the first day of any month thereafter on which the payment of retirement
benefits pursuant to this plan shall commence.
SERVICE INCREMENT — The amount calculated pursuant to § 93-4D on
behalf of a participant for each completed year of service in excess of 25
years, not to exceed $100.
TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY — A condition of physical or mental
impairment due to which a participant is unable to perform the usual
and customary duties of a Monroeville police officer, which condition is
reasonably expected to continue to be permanent for the remainder of
the participant's lifetime. Whether a participant is totally and permanently
§ 93-1 § 93-1
93:216
disabled shall be determined by a medical examiner appointed by or
acceptable to the Municipality.
§ 93-2. Participation in the plan.
§ 93-3. Contributions.
A. Eligibility requirements. Each employee who is employed as a regular,
full-time permanent member of the Police Department of the employer
shall participate herein as of the date on which such employee's
employment first commences or recommences, provided all
prerequisites to participation under this plan shall have been fulfilled,
including but not limited to completion of all forms required by the Plan
Administrator.
B. Notification of Plan Administrator. The Council shall furnish the Plan
Administrator with written notification of the appointment of any new
full-time permanent employee who is eligible for participation
hereunder.
C. Designation of beneficiary. Any new, full-time employee who becomes a
participant hereunder shall provide a written notice in the manner
prescribed by the Plan Administrator which designates a beneficiary at
the time participation commences. The participant's election of any
such beneficiary may be rescinded or changed, without the consent of
the beneficiary, at any time, provided the participant provides the
written notice of the changed designation to the Plan Administrator in
the manner prescribed by the Plan Administrator. Any designation of a
beneficiary made in any manner other than one acceptable to the Plan
Administrator shall be null and void and have no effect under the terms
of this plan.
D. Change in status. A participant who remains in the service of the
employer but ceases to be an employee eligible for participation
hereunder, or ceases or fails to make any contributions which are
required as a condition of participation hereunder, shall have no further
benefit accruals occur until the individual again qualifies as a
participant hereunder eligible to resume such accrual of benefits.
E. Recordkeeping. The employer shall furnish the Plan Administrator with
such information as will aid the Plan Administrator in the
administration of the plan. Such information shall include all pertinent
data on employees for purposes of determining their eligibility to
participate in this plan.
A. Participant contributions. Each participant shall, as a requirement of
participation pay regular contributions to the pension fund in an
amount equal to 5% of the participant's compensation. Each participant
shall complete the necessary forms to authorize the payment of
participant contributions by way of payroll deduction.
§ 93-1 PENSIONS § 93-3
93:217
§ 93-4. Retirement benefits.
B. Reduction of participant contributions. Notwithstanding the preceding
Subsection A, if an actuarial study performed by the actuary shows that
the condition of the pension fund is such that payments into the pension
fund by participants may be reduced below the minimum percentages
prescribed in Subsection A, or may be eliminated, and that if such
payments are reduced or eliminated, contributions by the employer will
not be required to keep the pension fund actuarially sound, the
employer may, by ordinance, reduce or eliminate payments into the
pension fund by participants on an annual basis.
C. Employer contributions. The Chief Administrative Officer, in
accordance with the Act, shall determine the minimum municipal
obligation of the employer. The employer shall pay into the pension
fund, by annual appropriations or otherwise, the contributions
necessary to satisfy the minimum municipal obligation.
D. State aid. General municipal pension system state aid, or any other
amount of state aid received by the employer from the commonwealth
in accordance with the Act, may be deposited into the pension fund
governed by this plan and shall be used to reduce the amount of the
minimum municipal obligation of the employer.
E. Gifts. The Council is authorized to take by gift, grant, devise or
otherwise any money or property, real or personal, for the benefit of the
plan and cause the same to be held as a part of the pension fund. The
care, management, investment and disposal of such amounts shall be
vested in the Council or its delegate, the Plan Administrator, subject to
the direction of the donor and not inconsistent with applicable laws and
the terms of the plan.
F. Employer reversion. At no time shall it be possible for the plan assets to
be used for, or diverted to, any purpose other than for the exclusive
benefit of the participants and their beneficiaries, including payment of
any reasonable plan expenses. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any
contributions made by the employer may be returned to the employer if
the contribution was made due to a mistake and the contribution is
returned within one year of the date on which the discovery of the
mistaken payment of the contribution was made or reasonably should
have been made or the plan is terminated, as provided in § 93-24.
A. Normal retirement. Each participant shall be entitled to a normal
retirement benefit after retirement on or after the participant has
attained normal retirement age.
B. Normal retirement benefit. Each participant who shall become entitled
to a benefit pursuant to Subsection A shall receive a benefit paid
monthly in an amount equal to 50% of the participant's final monthly
average wage as determined herein.
§ 93-3 § 93-4
93:218
C. Late retirement. A participant may continue to work beyond the
attainment of normal retirement age subject to the employer's rules
and regulations regarding retirement age. If a participant who has met
the requirements of Subsection A continues to work beyond normal
retirement age, there shall be no retirement benefits paid until
employment ceases and retirement begins. The retirement benefit of a
participant who retires after attainment of normal retirement age shall
be calculated in accordance with Subsection B on the basis of the final
monthly average wage as of such participant's actual retirement date.
D. Service increment. A participant who shall retire after completion of at
least 26 years of aggregate service may be eligible to receive a service
increment in addition to the normal retirement benefit under
Subsection B. The monthly amount of the service increment shall be
equal to $50 for each year of completed service in excess of 25 years of
service, not to exceed $100. The calculation of such service increment
shall be determined and only include periods of time when the
participant actively renders service in employment.
E. Early retirement. Each participant shall be entitled to an early
retirement benefit after retirement on or after the participant has
attained early retirement age and prior to attainment of normal
retirement age.
F. Early retirement benefit. Each participant who shall become entitled to
a benefit pursuant to Subsection E and who shall make written
application to commence such early retirement benefit shall receive a
benefit paid monthly in an amount equal to the amount that is the
actuarial equivalent of the participant's accrued benefit. The actuarial
equivalent calculation shall be completed using the applicable factors
contained in the last actuarial valuation report filed with the Public
Employee Retirement Commission under the Act and for the purpose of
adjusting the amount of benefit to recognize the early commencement
of benefit payments prior to attainment of normal retirement age.
G. Window benefit. Upon completion of an actuarial study annually, the
employer may establish an election period known as an open window
during which any employee who shall have attained at least 50 years of
age and completed at least 25 years of aggregate service shall have the
option to retire and commence receipt of a normal retirement benefit
without any adjustment for early commencement.
H. Normal form. The normal form for payment of retirement benefits shall
be a monthly annuity payable for the life of the participant.
I. Payment of benefits. Retirement benefit payments shall be prorated
from the date of retirement to the first day of the following month,
payable in the normal form as of the first day of the month coincident
with or next following the participant's retirement date. A participant
must complete an application for benefits in the manner prescribed by
the Plan Administrator and deliver such application to the Plan
§ 93-4 PENSIONS § 93-4
93:219
§ 93-5. Retired participants.
Any participant who shall have retired prior to the restatement date shall
not have the benefit altered in any way by the provisions of this amended
and restated plan, except where otherwise expressly provided herein. Such
retired participants shall continue to have their benefits governed by the
terms of the plan in effect on the day preceding the restatement date. Any
participant who shall have terminated employment and elected to receive
a deferred retirement benefit under § 93-12C shall have such benefit
determined based upon the provisions of the plan in effect as of the date of
such termination of employment and shall not have the benefit altered by
the provisions of this amended and restated plan.
§ 93-6. Maximum benefit limitations.
Administrator at least 30 days prior to the date on which benefit
payments shall commence. Notwithstanding anything contained herein
to the contrary, no retirement benefit payments nor any other payments
shall be due or payable on or before the first day of the month
coincident with or next following the date that is 30 days after the date
the Plan Administrator receives the application for benefits.
A. Notwithstanding any provision of this plan to the contrary, no benefit
provided under this plan attributable to contributions of the employer
shall exceed, as an annual amount, the amount specified in Code
Section 415(b)(1)(A), as adjusted pursuant to Code Section 415(d),
assuming the form of benefit shall be a straight life annuity (with no
ancillary benefits). The limitations described in this § 93-6 shall be
governed by the following conditions and definitions:
(1) benefits paid or payable in a form other than a straight life annuity
(with no ancillary benefits) or where the employee contributes to
the plan or makes rollover contributions shall be adjusted on an
actuarially equivalent basis in accordance with applicable
regulations to determine the limitation contained herein;
(2) In the case of a benefit which commences prior to the attainment of
age 62 by the participant, the limitation herein shall be adjusted on
an actuarially equivalent basis to the amount determined pursuant
to this section commencing at age 62; however, in the case of a
qualified participant (a participant with respect to whom a period
of at least 15 years of service, including applicable military service,
as a full-time employee of a police department is taken into account
in determining the amount of benefit), the limitation contained
herein shall not apply.
(3) In the case of a benefit which commences after attainment of age
65 by the participant, the limitation herein shall be adjusted on an
actuarially equivalent basis in accordance with applicable
regulations to the amount determined herein commencing at age
65;
§ 93-4 § 93-6
93:220
§ 93-7. Required distributions.
(4) Benefits paid to a participant which total less than $10,000 from all
defined benefit plans maintained by the employer expressed as an
annual benefit shall be deemed not to exceed the limitation of this
section, provided that the employer has not at any time maintained
a defined contribution plan in which the participant has
participated; however, in the case of a participant who is not
receiving a disability retirement benefit pursuant to § 93-10B or a
survivor benefit pursuant to §§ 93-11B or C, with fewer than 10
years of participation, the limitation expressed in this Subsection
A(4) shall be reduced by 1/10 for each year of participation less
than 10, but in no event shall this limitation be less than $1,000;
(5) The limitations expressed herein shall be based upon plan years for
calculation purposes, shall be applied to all defined benefit plans
maintained by the employer as one defined benefit plan and to all
defined contribution plans maintained by the employer as one
defined contribution plan, and shall be applied and interpreted
consistent with Code Section 415 and regulations thereunder as
applicable to government plans in general and this plan in
particular; and
(6) In the case of a disability retirement benefit under § 93-10B or a
survivor benefit under § 93-11B or C, the adjustment under
Subsection A(2) hereof, shall not apply, and the applicable
limitation shall be the limitation contained herein without regard to
the age of the benefit recipient.
B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to the contrary, the
limitations, adjustments, and other requirements prescribed in this
section shall at all times comply with the provisions of Code Section 415
and the regulations thereunder (as such apply to governmental plans),
the terms of which are specifically incorporated herein by reference.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, the entire benefit of
any participant who becomes entitled to benefits prior to death shall be
distributed either:
(1) Not later than the required beginning date; or
(2) Over a period beginning not later than the required beginning date
and extending over the life of such participant or over the lives of
such participant and a designated beneficiary (or over a period not
extending beyond the life expectancy of such participant, or the
joint life expectancies of such participant and a designated
beneficiary).
§ 93-6 PENSIONS § 93-7
93:221
If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies
prior to the date when the entire interest has been distributed
after distribution of benefits has begun in accordance with
Subsection A(2) above, the remaining portion of such benefit shall
be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of
distribution being used under Subsection A(2) as of the date of
death.
B. If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies before
distribution of benefits has begun, the entire interest of such employee
shall be distributed within five years of the death of such employee,
unless the following sentence is applicable. If any portion of the
employee's interest is payable to (or for the benefit of) a designated
beneficiary, such portion shall be distributed over the life of such
designated beneficiary (or over a period not extending beyond the life
expectancy of such beneficiary), and such distributions begin not later
than one year after the date of the employee's death or such later date
as provided by regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury,
then, for purposes of the five-year rule set forth in the preceding
sentence, the benefit payable to the beneficiary shall be treated as
distributed on the date on which such distributions begin; provided,
however, that notwithstanding the preceding sentence, if the
designated beneficiary is the surviving spouse of the participant, then
the date on which distributions are required to begin shall not be
earlier than the date upon which the employee would have attained age
70 1/2 and, further provided, if the surviving spouse dies before the
distributions to such spouse begin, this subsection shall be applied as if
the surviving spouse were the employee.
C. For purposes of this section, the following definitions and procedures
shall apply:
(1) "Required beginning date" shall mean April 1 of the calendar year
following the later of the calendar year in which the employee
attains age 70 1/2 or the calendar year in which the employee
retires.
(2) The phrase "designated beneficiary" shall mean any individual
designated by the employee under this plan according to its rules.
(3) Any amount paid to a child shall be treated as if it had been paid to
the surviving spouse if such amount will become payable to the
surviving spouse upon such child's reaching majority (or other
designated event permitted under regulations issued by the
Secretary of the Treasury).
(4) For purposes of this section, the life expectancy of an employee
and/or the employee's spouse (other than in the case of a life
annuity) may be redetermined but not more frequently than
annually.
§ 93-7 § 93-8
93:222
§ 93-8. Direct rollovers.
A. This Subsection A applies to distributions made on or after December
31, 2001. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that
would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a
distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the
Plan Administrator, to have any portion of an eligible rollover
distribution that is equal to at least $500 paid directly to an eligible
retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover.
B. This Subsection B shall apply to distributions made on or after January
1, 2006. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that
would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, if a
distribution in excess of $1,000 is made and the distributee does not
make an election under § 93-8A and does not elect to receive the
distribution directly, the Plan Administrator shall make such transfer to
an individual retirement plan of a designated trustee or issuer pursuant
to § 93-15A(9). The Plan Administrator shall notify the distributee in
writing, within a reasonable period of time and as otherwise prescribed
by law, that the distribution may be transferred to another individual
retirement plan.
C. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
(1) ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION -- Any distribution of all or
any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except
that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any
distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic
payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or
life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life
expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated
beneficiary, or for a specified period of 10 years or more; any
distribution to the extent such distribution is required under Code
Section 401(a)(9); and the portion of any distribution that is not
includible in gross income (determined without regard to the
exclusion for net unrealized appreciation with respect to employer
securities). For purposes of the direct rollover provisions in this
section of the plan, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an
eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of
after-tax employee contributions that are not includible in gross
income. However, such portion may be paid only to an individual
retirement account or annuity described in Section 408(a) or (b) of
the Code, or to a qualified defined contribution plan described in
Section 401(a) or 403(a) of the Code that agrees to separately
account for amounts so transferred, including separately
accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible
in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so
includible.
(2) ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN -- A qualified trust described in
Code Section 401(a), an individual retirement account described in
§ 93-8 PENSIONS § 93-8
93:223
§ 93-9. Assignment; personal right; nonduplication of benefit;
limitation of liability.
Code Section 408(a), an individual retirement annuity described in
Code Section 408(b), an annuity plan described in Code Section
403(a), an annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b), an
eligible plan under Section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained
by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or
instrumentality of a state, or political subdivision of a state and
which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into
such plan from this plan.
(3) DISTRIBUTEE -- An employee or former employee. In addition, the
employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the
employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse who is
the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order, as
defined in Code Section 414(p), are distributees with regard to the
interest of the spouse or former spouse.
(4) DIRECT ROLLOVER -- A payment by the plan to the eligible
retirement plan specified by the distributee or the Plan
Administrator, if the distributee does not make an election.
A. Assignment. The pension benefit payments prescribed herein shall not
be subject to attachment, execution, levy, garnishment or other legal
process and shall be payable only to the participant or designated
beneficiary and shall not be subject to assignment or transfer unless the
subject of a domestic relations order, mandated by a court of competent
jurisdiction, that clearly provides for proper distribution of a portion of
the pension benefit payments to an alternate payee (former spouse of
the participant) and does not require any benefit to be paid in excess of
the available funds earned and accrued under the plan.
B. Personal right of participant. The right to receive any benefits under
this plan is a personal right of the participant and shall expire upon the
death of the participant. No heir, legatee, devisee, beneficiary, assignee
or other person claiming by or through a participant shall have any
interest in any benefits hereunder unless clearly and expressly so
provided by the terms of this plan or the provisions of applicable law. A
participant's election, failure to make an election or revocation of an
election hereunder shall be final and binding on all persons.
C. Nonduplication of benefit. To avoid any duplication of benefits, a
participant who is receiving a retirement benefit under the plan and
who shall resume employment shall have benefit payments suspended
until the first day of the month coincident with or next following the
date such employment shall cease. Upon resumption of benefit
payments, such participant shall receive the greater of the amount of
the suspended benefit or the amount of benefit based upon final
monthly average wage and aggregate service as of the date that such
period of resumed employment shall cease.
§ 93-8 § 93-9
93:224
§ 93-10. Disability retirement.
D. Limitation of liability. Nothing contained herein shall obligate the
employer, the Plan Administrator, any fiduciary or any agent or
representative of any of the foregoing, to provide any retirement or
other benefit to any participant or beneficiary which cannot be provided
from the assets available in the pension fund, whether such benefits are
in pay status or otherwise payable under the terms of the plan. The
Council retains the right to amend or terminate this plan consistent
with applicable law at any time with or without cause and whether or
not such action directly or indirectly results in the suspension,
reduction or termination of any benefit payable under the plan or in pay
status, and without liability to any person for any such action.
A. Disability retirement. A participant who shall incur a total and
permanent disability shall be entitled to a disability retirement benefit
as of the disability date.
B. Disability retirement benefit. A participant who shall be entitled to a
disability retirement benefit under Subsection A, whose total and
permanent disability is the direct result of injuries incurred in the line
of duty of employment shall be entitled to an employment-related
disability benefit, which shall be a monthly benefit in an amount equal
to 50% of the participant's final monthly average wage, reduced dollar
for dollar by the monthly amount of any short-term disability payments,
workmen's compensation benefits, federal social security disability
payments or any other benefits provided by the employer, to the extent
and only to the extent that a plan participant shall not receive more
than 100% of the participant's annual wage at the time participant is
declared disabled. However, a participant's disability retirement benefit
shall be no less than 50% of the member's salary at the time the
disability was incurred, as defined in § 93-1, determined as of the
disability date, provided that any member who receives benefits for the
same injuries under social security disability shall have the
participant's disability benefits offset or reduced by the amount of such
benefits.
C. Payment of disability benefits. Disability payments shall be made
monthly as of the first day of each month, commencing as of the first
day of the month coincident with or immediately following the
participant's disability date and continuing until the earliest of the
death of the participant or cessation of total and permanent disability. A
participant who shall fail to return within three months to employment
as an employee of the employer upon cessation of total and permanent
disability prior to attainment of normal retirement age shall be deemed
to have terminated employment as of the disability date, and shall not
be entitled to any distribution of accumulated contributions pursuant to
§ 93-12B to the extent that the total amount of disability payments
exceeds the value of the participant's accumulated contributions as of
the disability date.
§ 93-9 PENSIONS § 93-10
93:225
§ 93-11. Death benefits.
D. Verification of disability. The Plan Administrator shall, in its sole
discretion, determine whether a participant shall have incurred a total
and permanent disability. The Plan Administrator shall rely on the
report of a physician acceptable to the Plan Administrator. If the Plan
Administrator shall determine that a participant who is totally and
permanently disabled has recovered sufficiently to resume active
employment as a police officer or if a participant refuses to undergo a
medical examination as directed by the Plan Administrator (such a
medical examination may not be required more frequently than once in
any given twelve-month period), the payment of disability retirement
benefits shall cease. A participant, upon attainment of normal
retirement age, shall thereafter not be required to undergo any medical
examinations directed by the Plan Administrator.
E. Cessation of disability. A participant who is receiving payment of
disability retirement benefits under this plan must notify the Plan
Administrator of any change which may cause a cessation of
entitlement to receipt of such benefits hereunder. If a participant fails
to provide immediate notice to the Plan Administrator of any such
change in status and continues to receive payment of benefits
hereunder to which the participant is not entitled, then the plan may
take whatever action is necessary to recover any amount of improperly
paid amounts, including legal action or offsetting such amounts against
any future payments of retirement or other benefits under the plan,
including the costs of such actions.
A. Death benefit. Except as hereinafter set forth, no benefit shall be
payable hereunder upon or by reason of the death of any participant
unless such benefit is payable under the form of benefit payment
chosen by the participant.
B. Survivor benefit.
(1) If a participant shall die after commencement of retirement or
disability benefit payments or after the participant is eligible to
retire under § 93-4A and before retirement benefit payments
commence, a survivor benefit shall be paid to the surviving spouse
of the participant, or, if no spouse survives or the spouse survives
and subsequently dies, then the child or children of the participant
under the age of 18, or if attending college, under or attaining the
age of 23 in an amount equal to 50% of the participant's retirement
benefit which the participant was receiving or would have been
receiving had the participant been retired at the time of death.
(2) The survivor benefit shall be paid to the surviving spouse until the
date of death of the surviving spouse. Upon the death of the
surviving spouse, the survivor benefit shall be paid monthly in
equal shares to the surviving child or children of the deceased
participant until the death or attainment of age 18 of each child, or
§ 93-10 § 93-11
93:226
§ 93-12. Termination of employment.
if attending college, under or attaining the age of 23. The shares
payable to the surviving children shall be adjusted as each child
ceases to be eligible to receive a share of the benefit hereunder.
(3) Such survivor benefit shall be paid in lieu of any distribution of
accumulated contributions to which the deceased participant may
have been entitled; provided, however, that in the event the amount
of the participant's accumulated contributions exceeds the amount
of survivor benefit payable in accordance with the preceding, then
such participant's death benefit shall be equal to the amount of the
participant's accumulated contributions.
C. Killed in service survivor benefit.
(1) A survivor benefit shall be payable in the event of the death of a
participant who is killed in service. In the event such a benefit
becomes payable, the surviving spouse of the participant shall
receive a benefit in an amount equal to 100% of the member's
salary at the time of death, as identified in § 93-1. Upon the death of
the surviving spouse or if there is no surviving spouse, the survivor
benefit shall be paid monthly in equal shares to the surviving
dependent child or children of the deceased participant until
attainment of age 18, or if attending college, under or attaining the
age of 23.
(2) Such survivor benefit shall be paid in lieu of any refund of
accumulated contributions to which the deceased participant may
have been entitled; provided, however, that in the event the amount
of the participant's accumulated contributions exceeds the amount
of survivor benefit payable in accordance with the preceding, then
such participant's death benefit shall be equal to the amount of the
participant's accumulated contributions.
D. Death of participant prior to survivor benefit eligibility. If a participant
shall die before payment of a benefit has commenced and without
eligibility for payment of a survivor benefit under Subsection B or C, the
beneficiary shall be eligible to receive a distribution in an amount equal
to the accumulated contributions of the participant as of the date of
death of the participant. If the participant has received disability
benefits hereunder, the amount of the distribution of accumulated
contributions shall be reduced by the amount of disability retirement
benefits which have been paid hereunder.
A. Rights of terminated employees. A participant who shall cease to be an
employee except as otherwise hereinbefore provided shall have all
interest and rights under this plan limited to those contained in the
following subsections of this section.
§ 93-11 PENSIONS § 93-12
93:227
§ 93-13. Plan Administrator.
The Plan Administrator shall be the Committee which shall have the power
and authority to do all acts and to execute, acknowledge and deliver all
instruments necessary to implement and effectuate the purpose of this plan.
The Plan Administrator may delegate authority to act on its behalf to any
persons it deems appropriate. If a Plan Administrator is not appointed, the
Council shall be the Plan Administrator.
§ 93-14. Police Pension Committee.
The Police Pension Committee shall be the Plan Administrator and the
Council shall delegate such authority as it shall deem appropriate to the
Committee to permit the Committee to act as the Plan Administrator. The
Committee shall consist of five members, two of whom shall be police
officers selected by the police officers of the Municipality, one member shall
be a member of Council selected by the Council and two of whom shall
be individuals acceptable to both the police officers and Council and shall
be appointed by the Deputy Mayor. Each member of the Committee shall
serve in that capacity until the earliest of resignation, death, removal or
otherwise.
§ 93-15. Authority and duties of the Plan Administrator.
B. Distribution of accumulated contributions. A participant whose
employment with the employer shall terminate for any reason other
than retirement, death or total and permanent disability, prior to
attainment of normal retirement age shall be entitled to receive a
distribution of accumulated contributions. Upon receipt of such
accumulated contributions, said participant and beneficiary shall not be
entitled to any further payments from the plan.
C. Deferred vested benefit. A participant who has completed at least 12
years of aggregate service and whose employment with the employer
shall terminate for any reason other than retirement, death or total and
permanent disability prior to attainment of normal retirement age shall
be entitled to elect to receive a deferred vested benefit in lieu of a
distribution of accumulated contributions under Subsection B. The
election hereunder shall be made within 90 days of the date on which
the participant's employment shall cease or shall be forever waived and
a distribution pursuant to Subsection B shall occur. Such a deferred
vested benefit shall be in an amount equal to the participant's accrued
benefit as of the date employment terminates and shall commence after
application pursuant to § 93-4I as of the day of the month on which the
participant's normal retirement age would be attained if the participant
continued in employment until such date.
A. The Plan Administrator shall have full power and authority to do
whatever shall, in its judgment, be reasonably necessary for the proper
administration and operation of the plan. The interpretation or
§ 93-12 § 93-15
93:228
§ 93-16. Police Pension Committee organization.
The Committee may organize itself in any manner deemed appropriate to
effectuate its purposes hereunder, subject to the following:
construction placed upon any term or provision of the plan by the Plan
Administrator or any action of the Plan Administrator taken in good
faith shall, upon the Board's review and approval thereof, be final and
conclusive upon all parties hereto, whether employees, participants or
other persons concerned. By way of specification and not limitation
and except as specifically limited hereafter, the Plan Administrator is
authorized:
(1) To construe this plan;
(2) To determine all questions affecting the eligibility of any employee
to participate herein;
(3) To compute the amount and source of any benefit payable
hereunder to any participant or beneficiary;
(4) To authorize any and all disbursements;
(5) To prescribe any procedure to be followed by any participant and/
or other person in filing any application or election;
(6) To prepare and distribute, in such manner as may be required by
law or as the Plan Administrator deems appropriate, information
explaining the plan;
(7) To require from the employer or any participant such information
as shall be necessary for the proper administration of the plan;
(8) To appoint and retain any individual to assist in the administration
of the plan, including such legal, clerical, accounting and actuarial
services as may be required by any applicable law or laws; and
(9) To select an individual retirement plan provider (either the state or
a federally regulated financial institution) and invest funds in
connection with the rollover of mandatory distributions as
described in § 93-8B.
B. The Plan Administrator shall have no power to add to, subtract from or
modify the terms of the plan or change or add to any benefits provided
by the plan, or to waive or fail to apply any requirements of eligibility
for benefits under the plan. Further, the Plan Administrator shall have
no power to adopt, amend, or terminate the plan, to select or appoint
any trustee or to determine or require any contributions to the plan,
said powers being exclusively reserved to the Council.
A. The Committee shall act by a majority of its members at the time in
office and such action may be taken either by vote at a meeting or in
writing without a meeting.
§ 93-15 PENSIONS § 93-16
93:229
§ 93-17. Expenses; indemnification.
B. The Committee shall, from time to time, appoint such agents as it may
deem advisable.
C. The Committee may, from time to time, authorize any one or more of its
members to execute any document or documents including any
application, request, certificate, notice, consent, waiver or direction
and shall notify the Council, in writing, of the name or names of the
member or members so authorized. In the absence of a designation, the
Chief Administrative Officer shall be deemed to be so authorized. Any
trustee or other fiduciary appointed hereunder shall accept and be fully
protected in relying upon any document executed by the designated
member or members (or the Chief Administrative Officer in the absence
of a designation) as representing a valid action by the Committee until
the Committee shall file with such fiduciary a written revocation of such
designation.
D. The Committee or its delegate, shall maintain and keep such records as
are necessary for the efficient operation of the plan or as may be
required by any applicable law, regulation or ruling and shall provide
for the preparation and filing of such forms or reports as may be
required to be filed with any governmental agency or department and
with the participants and/or other persons entitled to benefits under the
plan but only to the extent that the Council shall delegate such duties
and responsibilities to the Committee.
A. Plan Administrator costs. The ordinary expense of the administration of
this plan, including the compensation of an actuary for computing
retiree benefits, payment of annual custodian fees and associated costs,
and payments of retirement allowances, shall be paid by the fund. Any
extraordinary expenses, such as the cost of annual actuarial studies or
cost of litigation involving the plan or its officers in performance of their
duties, shall be paid by the Municipality of Monroeville.
B. Hold harmless. No member of the Council, the Plan Administrator, the
enrolled actuary, nor any other person involved in the administration of
the plan shall be liable to any person on account of any act or failure to
act which is taken or omitted to be taken in good faith in performing
their respective duties under the terms of this plan. To the extent
permitted by law, the employer shall, and hereby does agree to,
indemnify and hold harmless the Plan Administrator and each
successor and each of any such individual's heirs, executors and
administrators, and the delegates and appointees (other than any
person, bank, firm or corporation which is independent of the employer
and which renders services to the plan for a fee) from any and all
liability and expenses, including counsel fees, reasonably incurred in
any action, suit or proceeding to which he is or may be made a party by
reason of being or having been a member, delegate or appointee of the
Plan Administrator, except in matters involving criminal liability,
intentional or willful misconduct. If the employer purchases insurance
§ 93-16 § 93-17
93:230
§ 93-18. Approval of benefits.
The Committee shall review and approve or deny any application for
retirement benefits within 30 days following receipt thereof or within such
longer time as may be necessary under the circumstances. Any denial of an
application for retirement benefits shall be in writing and shall specify the
reason for such denial.
§ 93-19. Appeal procedure.
Any person whose application for retirement benefits is denied, who
questions the amount of benefit paid, who believes a benefit should have
commenced which did not so commence or who has some other claim
arising under the plan ("claimant"), shall first seek a resolution of such
claim under the procedure hereinafter set forth.
to cover claims of a nature described above, then there shall be no right
of indemnification except to the extent of any deductible amount under
the insurance coverage or to the extent of the amount the claims exceed
the insured amount.
A. Any claimant shall file a notice of the claim with the Plan Administrator
which shall fully describe the nature of the claim. The Plan
Administrator shall review the claim and make an initial determination
approving or denying the claim.
B. If the claim is denied in whole or in part, the Plan Administrator shall,
within 90 days (or such other period as may be established by
applicable law) from the time the application is received, mail notice of
such denial to the claimant. Such ninety-day period may be extended by
the Plan Administrator if special circumstances so require for up to 90
additional days by the Plan Administrator's delivering notice of such
extension to the claimant within the first ninety-day period. Any notice
hereunder shall be written in a manner calculated to be understood by
the claimant and, if a notice of denial, shall set forth: 1) the specific plan
provisions on which the denial is based; 2) an explanation of additional
material or information, if any necessary, to perfect such claim and a
statement of why such material or information is necessary; and 3) an
explanation of the review procedure.
C. Upon receipt of notice denying the claim, the claimant shall have the
right to request a full and fair review by the Council of the initial
determination. Such request for review must be made by notice to the
Council within 60 days of receipt of such notice of denial. During such
review, the claimant or a duly authorized representative shall have the
right to review any pertinent documents and to submit any issues or
comments in writing. The Council shall, within 60 days after receipt of
the notice requesting such review, (or in special circumstances, such as
where the Council in its sole discretion holds a hearing, within 120 days
of receipt of such notice), submit its decision in writing to the person or
persons whose claim has been denied. The decision shall be final,
§ 93-17 PENSIONS § 93-19
93:231
§ 93-20. Operation of the pension fund.
§ 93-21. Powers and duties of employer.
conclusive and binding on all parties, shall be written in a manner
calculated to be understood by the claimant and shall contain specific
references to the pertinent plan provisions on which the decision is
based.
D. Any notice of a claim questioning the amount of a benefit in pay status
shall be filed within 90 days following the date of the first payment
which would be adjusted if the claim is granted, unless the Plan
Administrator allows a later filing for good cause shown.
E. A claimant who does not submit a notice of a claim or a notice
requesting a review of a denial of a claim within the time limitations
specified above shall be deemed to have waived such claim or right to
review.
F. Nothing contained herein is intended to abridge any right of a claimant
to appeal any final decision hereunder to a court of competent
jurisdiction under 2 Pa. C.S.A. § 752. No decision hereunder is a final
decision from which such an appeal may be taken until the entire
appeal procedure of this § 93-19 of the plan has been exhausted.
A. The Committee is hereby authorized to hold and supervise the
investment of the assets of the pension fund, subject to the provisions of
the laws of the commonwealth and of this plan and any amendment
thereto.
B. The pension fund shall be used to pay benefits as provided in the plan
and, to the extent not paid directly by the employer, to pay the expenses
of administering the plan pursuant to authorization by the employer.
C. The employer intends the plan to be permanent and for the exclusive
benefit of its employees. It expects to make the contributions to the
pension fund required under the plan. The employer shall not be liable
in any manner for any insufficiency in the pension fund; benefits are
payable only from the pension fund, and only to the extent that there
are monies available therein.
D. The pension fund will consist of all funds held by the employer under
the plan, including contributions made pursuant to the provisions
hereof and the investments, reinvestments and proceeds thereof. The
pension fund shall be held, managed, and administered pursuant to the
terms of the plan. Except as otherwise expressly provided in the plan,
the employer has exclusive authority and discretion to manage and
control the pension fund assets. The employer may, however, appoint a
trustee, custodian and/or investment manager, at its sole discretion.
§ 93-19 § 93-21
93:232
A. With respect to the pension fund, the employer shall have the following
powers, rights and duties, in addition to those vested in it elsewhere in
the plan or by law, unless such duties are delegated.
(1) To retain in cash so much of the pension fund as it deems advisable
and to deposit any cash so retained in any bank or similar financial
institution (including any such institution which may be appointed
to serve as trustee hereunder), without liability for interest
thereon.
(2) To invest and reinvest the principal and income of the fund and
keep said fund invested, without distinction between principal and
income, in securities which are at the time legal investments for
fiduciaries under the Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Investment Act, or
as the same may be subsequently modified or amended.
(3) To sell property held in the fund at either public or private sale for
cash or on credit at such times as it may deem appropriate; to
exchange such property; to grant options for the purchase or
exchange thereof.
(4) To consent to and participate in any plan of reorganization,
consolidation, merger, extension or other similar plan affecting
property held in the fund; to consent to any contract, lease,
mortgage, purchase, sale or other action by any corporation
pursuant to any such plan.
(5) To exercise all conversion and subscription rights pertaining to
property held in the fund.
(6) To exercise all voting rights with respect to property held in the
fund and in connection therewith to grant proxies, discretionary or
otherwise.
(7) To place money at any time in a deposit bank deemed to be
appropriate for the purposes of this plan no matter where situated,
including in those cases where a bank has been appointed to serve
as trustee hereunder, the savings department of its own
commercial bank.
(8) In addition to the foregoing powers, the employer shall also have all
of the powers, rights, and privileges conferred upon trustees by the
Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Investment Act, or as the same may be
subsequently modified or amended, and the power to do all acts,
take all proceedings and execute all rights and privileges, although
not specifically mentioned herein, as the employer may deem
necessary to administer the pension fund.
(9) To maintain and invest the assets of this plan on a collective and
commingled basis with the assets of other pension plans
maintained by the employer, provided that the assets of each
respective plan shall be accounted for and administered separately.
§ 93-21 PENSIONS § 93-21
93:233
(10) To invest the assets of the pension fund in any collective
commingled trust fund maintained by a bank or trust company,
including any bank or trust company which may act as a trustee
hereunder. In this connection, the commingling of the assets of this
plan with assets of other eligible, participating plans through such
a medium is hereby specifically authorized. Any assets of the plan
which may be so added to such collective trusts shall be subject to
all of the provisions of the applicable declaration of trust, as
amended from time to time, which declaration, if required by its
terms or by applicable law, is hereby adopted as part of the plan, to
the extent of the participation in such collective or commingled
trust fund by the plan.
(11) To make any payment or distribution required or advisable to carry
out the provisions of the plan, provided that if a trustee is
appointed by the employer, such trustee shall make such
distribution only at the direction of the employer.
(12) To compromise, contest, arbitrate, enforce or abandon claims and
demands with respect to the plan.
(13) To retain any funds or property subject to any dispute without
liability for the payment of interest thereon, and to decline to make
payment or delivery thereof until final adjudication is made by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(14) To pay, and to deduct from and charge against the pension fund,
any taxes which may be imposed thereon, whether with respect to
the income, property or transfer thereof, or upon or with respect to
the interest of any person therein, which the fund is required to
pay; to contest, in its discretion, the validity or amount of any tax,
assessment, claim or demand which may be levied or made against
or in respect of the pension fund, the income, property or transfer
thereof, or in any matter or thing connected therewith.
(15) To appoint any persons or firms (including but not limited to,
accountants, investment advisors, counsel, actuaries, physicians,
appraisers, consultants, professional plan administrators and other
specialists), or otherwise act to secure specialized advice or
assistance, as it deems necessary or desirable in connection with
the management of the fund; to the extent not prohibited by
applicable law, the employer shall be entitled to rely conclusively
upon and shall be fully protected in any action or omission taken by
it in good faith reliance upon, the advice or opinion of such persons
or firms, provided such persons or firms were prudently chosen by
the employer, taking into account the interests of the participants
and beneficiaries and with due regard to the ability of the persons
or firms to perform their assigned functions.
(16) To retain the services of one or more persons or firms for the
management of (including the power to acquire and dispose of) all
§ 93-21 § 93-21
93:234
§ 93-22. Appointed trustee.
§ 93-23. Value of the pension fund.
All determinations as to the value of the assets of the pension fund, and as
to the amount of the liabilities thereof, shall be made by the employer or its
appointed trustee, whose decisions shall be final and conclusive and binding
on all parties hereto, the participants and beneficiaries and their estates. In
or any part of the fund assets, provided that each of such persons
or firms is registered as an investment advisor under the
Investment Advisors Act of 1940, is a bank (as defined in that
Act), or is an insurance company qualified to manage, acquire or
dispose of pension trust assets under the laws of more than one
state; in such event, the employer shall follow the directions of such
investment manager or managers with respect to the acquisition
and disposition of fund assets, but shall not be liable for the acts
or omissions of such investment manager or managers, nor shall it
be under any obligation to review or otherwise manage any fund
assets which are subject to the management of such investment
manager or managers. If the employer appoints a trustee, the
trustee shall not be permitted to retain such an investment
manager except with the express written consent of the employer.
B. Common investments. The employer shall not be required to make
separate investments for individual participants or to maintain separate
investments for each participant's account, but may invest
contributions and any profits or gains therefrom in common
investments.
A. Compensation and expenses of appointed trustee. If a trustee is
appointed, the trustee shall be entitled to such reasonable
compensation as shall from time to time be agreed upon by the
employer and the trustee, unless such compensation is prohibited by
law. Such compensation, and all expenses reasonably incurred by the
trustee in carrying out its functions, shall constitute a charge upon the
employer or the pension fund, which may be executed at any time after
30 days' written notice to the employer. The employer shall be under no
obligation to pay such costs and expenses, and, in the event of its failure
to do so, the trustee shall be entitled to pay the same, or to be
reimbursed for the payment thereof, from the pension fund.
B. Periodic accounting. If a trustee is appointed, the pension fund shall be
evaluated annually, or at more frequent intervals, by the trustee and a
written accounting rendered as of each fiscal year end of the fund, and
as of the effective date of any removal or resignation of the trustee, and
such additional dates as requested by the employer, showing the
condition of the fund and all receipts, disbursements and other
transactions effected by the trustee during the period covered by the
accounting, based on fair market values prevailing as of such date.
§ 93-21 PENSIONS § 93-23
93:235
making any such determination, the employer or trustee shall be entitled to
seek and rely upon the opinion of or any information furnished by brokers,
appraisers and other experts, and shall also be entitled to rely upon reports
as to sales and quotations, both on security exchanges and otherwise, as
contained in newspapers and in financial publications.
§ 93-24. Amendment and termination of pension plan or pension
fund.
A. Amendment of the plan. The employer may amend this plan at any time
or from time to time by an instrument in writing executed in the name
of the employer under its municipal seal by officers duly authorized to
execute such instrument and delivered to the Council; provided,
however:
(1) That no amendment shall deprive any participant or any
beneficiary of a deceased participant of any of the benefits to which
he is entitled under this plan with respect to contributions
previously made;
(2) That no amendment shall provide for the use of funds or assets held
under this plan other than for the benefit of employees and no
funds contributed to this plan or assets of this plan shall, except as
provided in Subsection E, ever revert to or be used or enjoyed by
the employer; and
(3) That no amendment to the plan which provides for a benefit
modification shall be made unless the cost estimate described in
§ 93-25C has been prepared and presented to the Council in
accordance with the Act.
B. Termination of the plan. The employer shall have the power to
terminate this plan in its entirety at any time by an instrument in
writing executed in the name of the employer.
C. Automatic termination of contributions. Subject to the provisions of the
Act governing financially distressed municipalities, the liability of the
employer to make contributions to the pension fund shall automatically
terminate upon liquidation or dissolution of the employer, upon its
adjudication as a bankrupt or upon the making of a general assignment
for the benefit of its creditors.
D. Distribution upon termination.
(1) In the event of the termination of the plan, all amounts of vested
benefits accrued by the affected participants as of the date of such
termination, to the extent funded on such date, shall be
nonforfeitable hereunder. In the event of termination of the plan,
the employer shall direct either: (a) that the Plan Administrator
continue to hold the vested accrued benefits of participants in the
pension fund in accordance with the provisions of the plan (other
than those provisions related to forfeitures) without regard to such
§ 93-23 § 93-24
93:236
§ 93-25. Provisions to comply with the Municipal Pension Plan
Funding Standard and Recovery Act (Act 205 of 1984).
termination until all funds have been distributed in accordance
with the provisions; or (b) that the Plan Administrator immediately
distribute to each participant an amount equal to the vested
accrued benefit to the date.
(2) If there are insufficient assets in the pension fund to provide for all
vested accrued benefits as of the date of plan termination, priority
shall first be given to the distribution of any amounts attributable to
mandatory or voluntary employee contributions before assets are
applied to the distribution of any vested benefits attributable to
other sources hereunder.
(3) All other assets attributable to the terminated plan shall be
distributed and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
applicable law and the terms of any instrument adopted by the
employer which effects such termination.
E. Residual assets. If all liabilities to vested participants and any others
entitled to receive a benefit under the terms of the plan have been
satisfied and there remain any residual assets in the pension fund, such
residual assets remaining shall be returned to the employer insofar as
such return does not contravene any provision of law, and any
remaining balance, in excess of employer contributions, shall be
returned to the commonwealth.
F. Exclusive benefit rule. In the event of the discontinuance and
termination of the plan as provided herein, the employer shall dispose
of the pension fund in accordance with the terms of the plan and
applicable law; at no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under
the plan shall any part of the corpus or income of the pension fund,
after deducting any administrative or other expenses properly
chargeable to the pension fund, be used for or diverted to purposes
other than for the exclusive benefit of the participants in the plan, their
beneficiaries or their estates.
A. Actuarial valuations. The plan's actuary shall perform an actuarial
valuation at least biennially. Such biennial actuarial valuation report
shall be made as of the beginning of each plan year occurring in an oddnumbered
calendar year, beginning with the year 1985.
(1) Such actuarial valuation shall be prepared and certified by an
approved actuary, as such term is defined in the Act.
(2) The expenses attributable to the preparation of any actuarial
valuation report or investigation required by the Act or any other
expense which is permissible under the terms of the Act and which
is directly associated with administering the plan shall be an
allowable administrative expense payable from the assets of the
§ 93-24 PENSIONS § 93-25
93:237
§ 93-26. Miscellaneous provisions.
pension fund. Such allowable expenses shall include but not be
limited to the following:
(a) Investment costs associated with obtaining authorized
investments and investment management fees;
(b) Accounting expenses;
(c) Premiums for insurance coverage on fund assets;
(d) Reasonable and necessary counsel fees incurred for advice or
to defend the fund; and
(e) Legitimate travel and education expenses for plan officials;
provided, however, that the municipal officials of the employer,
in their fiduciary role, shall monitor the services provided to
the plan to ensure that the expenses are necessary, reasonable
and benefit the plan; and further provided, that the Plan
Administrator shall document all such expenses item by item,
and where necessary, hour by hour.
B. Duties of Chief Administrative Officer. Such actuarial reports shall be
prepared and filed under the supervision of the Chief Administrative
Officer. The Chief Administrative Officer of the plan shall determine the
financial requirements of the plan on the basis of the most recent
actuarial report and shall determine the minimum municipal obligation
of the employer with respect to funding the plan for any given plan year.
The Chief Administrative Officer shall submit the financial
requirements of the plan and the minimum municipal obligation of the
employer to the Council annually and shall certify the accuracy of such
calculations and their conformance with the Act.
C. Benefit plan modifications. Prior to the adoption of any benefit plan
modification by the employer, the Chief Administrative Officer of the
plan shall provide to the Council a cost estimate of the proposed benefit
plan modification. Such estimate shall be prepared by an approved
actuary, which estimate shall disclose to the Council the impact of the
proposed benefit plan modification on the future financial requirements
of the plan and the future minimum municipal obligation of the
employer with respect to the plan.
A. Plan not a contract of employment. No employee of the employer nor
anyone else shall have any rights whatsoever against the employer or
the Plan Administrator as a result of this plan except those expressly
granted hereunder. Participation in this plan shall not give any right to
any employee to be retained in the employ of the employer, nor shall
interfere with the right of the employer to discharge any employee and
to deal with such employee without regard to the effect such treatment
might have upon participation in this plan.
§ 93-25 § 93-26
93:238
B. Meaning of certain words. For purposes of this plan, the masculine
gender shall include the feminine gender and the singular shall include
the plural, and vice versa, in all cases wherever the person or context
shall plainly so require. Headings of articles and sections are included
solely for convenience of reference and are not to be considered in the
construction of the plan.
C. Construction of document. This plan may be executed and/or
conformed in any number of counterparts, each of which shall be
deemed an original and shall be construed and enforced according to
the laws of the commonwealth, excepting such commonwealth's choice
of law rules.
D. Information to be furnished by the employer. The employer shall furnish
to the Plan Administrator (and where applicable, the trustee)
information in the employer's possession as the Plan Administrator and
the trustee shall require from time to time to perform their duties under
the plan.
E. Severability of provisions. In case any provisions of this plan shall be
held illegal or invalid for any reason, said illegality or invalidity shall not
affect the remaining parts of this plan, and the plan shall be construed
and enforced as if said illegal and invalid provisions had never been
inserted therein.
F. Incapacity of participant. If any participant shall be physically or
mentally incapable of receiving or acknowledging receipt of any
payment of pension benefits hereunder, the Plan Administrator, upon
the receipt of satisfactory evidence that such participant is so
incapacitated and that another person or institution is maintaining the
participant, and that no guardian or committee has been appointed for
the participant, may provide for such payment of pension benefits
hereunder to such person or institution so maintaining the participant,
and any such payments so made shall be deemed for every purpose to
have been made to such participant.
G. Personal liability. Subject to the provisions of the Act and unless
otherwise specifically required by other applicable laws, no past,
present or future officer or agent of the employer or Plan Administrator
shall be personally liable to any participant, beneficiary or other person
under any provision of the plan.
H. Assets of the fund. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to give
any participant or beneficiary any interest in any specific property of
the pension fund or any right except to receive such distributions as are
expressly provided for under the plan.
I. Pension fund for sole benefit of participants. The income and principal
of the pension fund are for the sole use and benefit of the participants
covered hereunder and, to the extent permitted by law, shall be free,
clear and discharged from and are not to be in any way liable for debts,
contracts or agreements, now contracted or which may hereafter be
§ 93-26 PENSIONS § 93-26
93:239
§ 93-27. (Reserved)
§ 93-28. (Reserved)
§ 93-29. (Reserved)
§ 93-30. (Reserved)
contracted, and from all claims and liabilities now or hereafter incurred
by any participant or beneficiary.
J. Benefits for a deceased participant. If any benefit shall be payable
under the plan to or on behalf of a participant who has died, if the plan
provides that the payment of such benefits shall be made to the
participant's estate, and if no administration of such participant's estate
is pending in the court of proper jurisdiction, then the Plan
Administrator, at its sole option, may pay such benefits to the surviving
spouse of such deceased participant, or, if there is no surviving spouse,
to such of participant's then living issue, per stirpes; provided, however,
that nothing contained herein shall prevent the Plan Administrator from
insisting upon the commencement of estate administration proceedings
and the delivery of any such benefits to a duly appointed executor or
administrator.
§ 93-26 § 93-30
93:240
ARTICLE II
Employee Pension Fund
[Adopted 8-10-1982 by Res. No. 82-4182]
§ 93-31. Adoption of plan.
The Municipality of Monroeville hereby elects to join the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Law, under Article IV, Act 15 of 1974, as amended,83
and does hereby agree to be bound by all the requirements and provisions
of the said Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law and the amendments
thereto and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise, placed upon
member municipalities by said Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law and
the amendments thereto.
§ 93-32. Certain officials and members excluded.
Membership in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System for elected
officials shall not be permitted and membership therein for employees
hired on a temporary or seasonal basis shall not be permitted. Officers and
employees paid wholly on a fee basis shall not be eligible for membership in
the system.
§ 93-33. Credit for prior service.
Credit for prior service toward the municipal annuity of each original
member shall be for all years of service to the Municipality of Monroeville.
The Municipality of Monroeville does hereby assume the liability for
payment of 100% of the original member's contributions for all years of
service towards the original member's annuity for the prior service of each
original member.
§ 93-34. Payment by Municipality for prior service.
Payment for the prior service as set forth in § 93-33 hereof shall be made
by the Municipality of Monroeville in accordance with said Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Law and may be spread over a period of 30 years
if the Municipality of Monroeville so elects and with the approval of the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board.
§ 93-35. Extension of statutory provisions.
The Municipality of Monroeville does hereby elect to extend the provisions
of Section 209 of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, Act 15 of
1974,84 so that contributors to the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
System shall have the options and enjoy the protections set forth in
82.Editor's Note: This resolution superseded former Art. II, Employee Pension Fund, adopted
3-13-1973 by Ord. No. 830, amended in its entirety 11-11-1980 by Ord. No. 1253, as
subsequently amended.
83.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq.
84.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.209.
§ 93-31 PENSIONS § 93-35
93:241
Subsection (b) and (c) of Section 209 of the Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement Law, and Section 209 is hereby incorporated and made a part
hereof by reference hereto.
§ 93-36. Outline of benefits. [Amended 9-12-1989 by Res. No.
89-89]
A. Nonuniformed employees hired prior to September 1, 1989. This study
has been based on the following schedule of benefits as permitted
under Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law:
(1) Superannuation (normal retirement): permitted on or after the
attainment of age 65 or after 25 years of service regardless of age.
(2) Early retirement: permitted after the completion of 20 years of
service with no actuarial reduction.
(3) Vesting: vesting 100% after 10 years of service. 10% after eight
years of service if employee is involuntarily terminated. In lieu of a
refund of his own contributions, a member is entitled to receive:
(a) A benefit commencing at superannuation retirement age equal
to his accrued benefit at time of termination.
(b) A benefit commencing at what would have been his early
retirement date had he remained in service.
(4) Benefits payable upon superannuation retirement: 2% multiplied
by years of service (with fractional credit for completion months)
multiplied by final three years' average salary; maximum benefit
equals 50% of final three years' average salary.
(5) Disability benefits: payable to any member who becomes physically
or mentally incapacitated to such a degree that he is not able to
engage in any gainful employment. A service-connected disability
benefit requiring no minimum service period equal to 50% of final
three years' average salary is payable. A non-service-connected
disability benefit for members with at least 10 years of service at
disablement equal to 30% of final three years' average salary is
payable. Benefits are in addition to disability benefits that may be
receivable from any other source and are not to be reduced in any
way on account of benefits receivable from any other source.
(6) Preretirement death benefits: Other than a refund of member
contributions plus interest, death benefits are not provided if an
active member dies prior to having met the eligibility for voluntary
early retirement or superannuation retirement. Once a member has
reached the required service for a voluntary early retirement of the
superannuation retirement age and dies prior to retiring, the
beneficiary will be entitled to benefits under Section 209 of the
Law.
§ 93-35 § 93-36
93:242
(7) Employee contributions: 6% of compensation. If a member
terminates prior to eligibility for vesting or retirement benefits, the
member receives all member contributions, plus interest in a lump
sum.
(8) Military service: Buyback is permitted for intervening and
nonintervening military service. For nonintervening military
service, a member who has been employed in the Municipality for
five or more years would be eligible to purchase up to five years of
military service. The restrictions and qualifications are outlined in
Section 204 of Act 15 of 1974.
(9) Portability: If a member terminates employment and goes to work
for another Municipality in the system, all service credits are
transferred to the new Municipality.
(10) Social security: Benefits are not reduced in any way because of a
member's entitlement to social security benefits.
B. Nonuniformed employees hired after September 1, 1982. This study has
been based on the following schedule of benefits as permitted under
Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law:
(1) Superannuation (normal retirement): Permitted on or after the
attainment of age 65 or after 25 years of service actuarially
reduced for each year under the age of 65.
(2) Early retirement: permitted after the completion of 20 years of
service. Benefits are actuarially reduced for each year prior to age
65 that early retirement takes place.
(3) Vesting: vesting 100% after 10 years of service. In lieu of a refund
of his own contributions, a member is entitled to receive:
(a) A benefit commencing at superannuation retirement age equal
to his accrued benefit at time of termination.
(b) A benefit commencing at what would have been his early
retirement date had he remained in service, equal to his
accrued benefit at time of termination, actuarially reduced for
each year that the benefit commencement date precedes age
65.
(4) Benefits payable upon superannuation retirement: 2% multiplied
by years of service (with fractional credit for completion months)
multiplied by final three years' average salary; maximum benefit
equals 50% of final three years' average salary.
(5) Disability benefits: Payable to any member who becomes physically
or mentally incapacitated to such a degree that he is not able to
engage in any gainful employment. A service-connected disability
benefit requiring no minimum service period equal to 50% of final
three years' average salary is payable. A non-service-connected
§ 93-36 PENSIONS § 93-36
93:243
§ 93-37. Copy filed; effective date.
A duly certified copy of this article shall be filed with the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Board of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and
membership under Article IV for the Municipality of Monroeville in the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be effective the first day of
September 1982.
disability benefit for members with at least 10 years of service at
disablement equal to 30% of final three years' average salary is
payable. Benefits are in addition to disability benefits that may be
receivable from any other source and are not to be reduced in any
way on account of benefits receivable from any other source.
(6) Preretirement death benefits: Other than a refund of member
contributions plus interest, death benefits are not provided if an
active member dies prior to having met the eligibility for voluntary
early retirement or superannuation retirement. Once a member has
reached the required service for a voluntary early retirement of the
superannuation retirement age and dies prior to retiring, the
beneficiary will be entitled to benefits under Section 209 of the
Law.
(7) Employee contributions: 5% of compensation. If a member
terminates prior to eligibility for vesting or retirement benefits, the
member receives all member contributions, plus interest in a lump
sum.
(8) Military service: Buyback is permitted for intervening and
nonintervening military service. For nonintervening military
service, a member who has been employed in the Municipality for
five or more years would be eligible to purchase up to five years of
military service. The restrictions and qualifications are outlined in
Section 204 of Act 15 of 1974.
(9) Portability: If a member terminates employment and goes to work
for another Municipality in the system, all service credits are
transferred to the new Municipality.
(10) Social security: Benefits are not reduced in any way because of a
member's entitlement to social security benefits.
§ 93-36 § 93-37
93:244
ARTICLE III
Other Post-Employment Benefits Retirement Plan
[Adopted 5-9-2006 by Ord. No. 237185]
§ 93-38. Introduction.
§ 93-39. Definitions.
When used herein, the following words shall have the following meanings
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT — The collective bargaining
agreement between the Municipality and a union that covers retiree
medical benefits for union employees of the Municipality.
DEPENDENT — An individual who is a dependent as that term is used in
IRC § 105(b). As of the date of adoption of this plan, a "dependent" was
a dependent as defined in IRC § 152, determined without regard to IRC
§ 152(b)(1), (b)(2), and (d)(1)(B).
HIPAA — The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996,
as amended from time to time. Reference to a specific provision of HIPAA
shall include such provision, any valid regulation or ruling promulgated
thereunder and any comparable provision of future law that amends,
supplements or supersedes such provision.
IRC — The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
PLAN — This plan as it shall be amended from time to time.
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The Municipal Manager or the person or entity
designated by the Municipality to carry out administrative services as are
necessary to implement the plan.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this plan is to help provide life or medical
insurance for each participating retiree, his or her spouse, and his or
her eligible dependents. It is the intention of the Municipality that this
plan qualify as an accident and health plan within the meaning of
Internal Revenue Code § 105 and that the benefits payable under the
plan be eligible for exclusion from gross income under that section.
B. Effective date. The provisions of this plan are effective as of June 1,
2006.
85.Editor's Note: This ordinance also adopted the related Integral Part Trust, appointing the
Municipality as trustee, authorizing the transfer of $6,000,000 in Municipal retiree
benefit funds into the Other Post Employment Benefit ("OPEB") Retiree Benefits Plan
Trust. The Declaration of Trust of the Integral Part Trust is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 93-38 PENSIONS § 93-39
93:245
PLAN YEAR — The twelve-consecutive-month period ending on December
31. The first plan year began on the effective date specified in § 93-38A and
ends on December 31, 2006.
RETIREE — A former employee of the Municipality who terminated
employment with the Municipality after meeting the conditions set forth
in the applicable bargaining agreement (and for nonuniform, nonbargained
former employees, the applicable salary and benefits ordinance) in order to
receive retiree medical insurance or life insurance.
SPOUSE — The retiree's lawful spouse as determined under the laws of
Pennsylvania.
TRUST — The integral part trust that holds the assets of this plan.
TRUSTEE — The trustee or trustees of the integral part trust that holds the
assets of this plan.
UNION — A union representing employees of the Municipality.
§ 93-40. Eligibility.
This plan covers retirees, their spouses, and their dependents. No other
individual shall be entitled to benefits under this plan; provided that the
Plan Administrator may direct that benefits be paid to other individuals
if necessary to comply with a court order. Note, no individual shall be
eligible for coverage under this plan unless under the applicable collective
bargaining agreement (and for nonuniform, nonbargained former
employees, the applicable salary and benefits ordinance) he is entitled to
employer-provided retiree medical insurance or life insurance benefits.
§ 93-41. Benefits.
A. The Plan Administrator shall direct the trustee to use trust funds to
provide retiree medical, vision, dental, or life insurance benefits to
retirees, their spouses, and their eligible dependents. Benefits must be
provided through the purchase of insurance.
B. A former union employee shall not have any right to benefits under this
plan other than retiree medical or life insurance benefits to which he is
entitled under the terms of the applicable collective bargaining
agreement. A former nonunion employee shall not have any right to
benefits under this plan other than retiree medical or life insurance
benefits to which he is entitled under the terms of his employment
arrangement with the Municipality. Furthermore, notwithstanding the
above, no retiree, spouse or dependent shall have any right to benefits
under this plan unless there are funds in the trust sufficient to purchase
insurance.
C. Benefits from another source. Notwithstanding § 93-41A and B, no
person shall have any claim for benefits under this plan to the extent
that he has received or is entitled to receive the same benefits under
§ 93-39 § 93-41
93:246
§ 93-42. Claims.
Claims for benefits under this plan shall be made to the insurance
companies on forms maintained by, and in accordance with procedures
established by, the insurance companies.
§ 93-43. Administration.
another plan, insurance policy, settlement, or other arrangement that is
sponsored, funded, or provided by the Municipality.
A. Plan Administrator. The Plan Administrator shall have authority and
responsibility to control and manage the operation and administration
of this plan. The Plan Administrator shall have discretion to interpret
the terms of the plan, and such interpretation shall be binding on all
parties, subject to § 93-46.
B. Documents. The Plan Administrator shall keep a copy of this plan
document and any other disclosure documents relating thereto
(including, but not limited to, summary plan descriptions) that are in
the public domain on file at his office where participants may inspect
them during the Municipality's regular business hours. Upon request,
the Plan Administrator shall provide a retiree, spouse, or covered
dependent with copies of such documents. When the Plan Administrator
provides such documents, the Plan Administrator may charge the
requesting party a reasonable charge for photocopying these materials.
C. Conflicts between documents. This document contains all of the
operative provisions of this plan. Any conflict between the provisions of
this document and any other document purporting to explain the rights,
benefits, or obligations of the parties hereunder shall be resolved in
favor of this plan document. If there is a conflict between this plan and a
collective bargaining agreement, this plan shall govern, but this section
does not prevent a retiree (or spouse or dependent) from claiming
benefits from the Municipality under an applicable collective
bargaining agreement.
D. Agents and expenses. The Plan Administrator may employ agents to
assist it in its duties and may rely upon the written certificates of any
agent, counsel, accountant, investment manager, actuary or physician.
The Plan Administrator shall be entitled to reimbursement from the
trust (unless the Municipality at its discretion makes reimbursement)
for all other proper charges and expenses incurred in carrying out its
duties under this plan, including compensation of agents and payment
of litigation costs. The Plan Administrator may be paid such reasonable
compensation as shall from time to time be agreed upon in writing by
the Municipality and the Plan Administrator. However, an individual
serving as Plan Administrator who already receives full-time pay from
the Municipality or who is a member of the governing body of the
Municipality shall not receive compensation from the Trust except for
reimbursement of expenses properly and actually incurred.
§ 93-41 PENSIONS § 93-43
93:247
§ 93-44. Amendment and termination.
§ 93-45. General provisions.
E. Uniformity of discretion. Wherever, under the provisions of this plan,
the Plan Administrator is granted discretionary powers which shall
affect the rights and benefits of participants, such discretion shall be
exercised uniformly so that all participants similarly situated shall be
similarly treated.
F. Indemnification. The Municipality shall indemnify the Plan
Administrator and any individual who may be appointed pursuant to
this section against any and all claims, losses, damages, expenses and
liabilities arising from their duties and responsibilities pursuant to the
provisions of this plan, unless the same is determined to be due to gross
negligence or willful misconduct.
A. Amendment.
(1) Any or all of the provisions of this plan may be amended at any time
and from time to time, in whole or in part, by an instrument in
writing by the Municipality. No such amendment shall authorize or
permit any part of the Trust (other than such part as is required to
pay taxes and administration expenses) to be used for or diverted
to purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of the retirees,
their spouses, or their dependents; no such amendment shall cause
or permit any portion of the trust to revert to or become the
property of the Municipality; and no such amendment which affects
the rights or duties of the trustee may be made without the
trustee's written consent.
(2) The trust is intended to be an integral part trust in accordance with
U.S. Treasury regulation § 301.7701-1(a)(3). To the extent that any
amendment is needed for the trust to be or remain an integral part
trust, such amendment will be deemed to have been made on a
timely basis.
B. Termination. This plan may be terminated at any time by the
Municipality and, upon such termination, the trust shall be paid out by
the trustee as and when directed by the Plan Administrator or the
Municipality, in accordance with the provisions of the trust agreement
and the terms of the plan. Notwithstanding § 93-45A, upon termination
of this plan and upon the satisfaction of all liabilities under the plan to
provide benefits or pay administrative expenses, any assets remaining
in the trust shall be returned to the Municipality.
A. Source of funds. The trust shall constitute the sole source of funds that
may be used to purchase insurance under the plan, and the trustee shall
not be liable in any way or in any manner to purchase insurance beyond
those monies that have been contributed to the trust.
§ 93-43 § 93-45
93:248
§ 93-46. Miscellaneous federal laws.
B. Limited effect of plan and trust. Neither the establishment of the plan
nor the trust nor any modification thereof, nor the creation of any fund
or account, nor the payment of any benefits, shall be construed as
giving to any person covered under the plan or other person any legal
or equitable right against the trustee, the Municipality, or any officer or
employee thereof, except as may otherwise be provided in the plan or in
the trust. Under no circumstances shall the term of employment of any
employee be modified or in any way affected by the plan or the trust.
C. Protective clause. Neither the Municipality nor the trustee shall be
responsible for the validity of any contract of insurance issued in
connection with the plan or trust or for the failure on the part of the
insurer to make payments provided by such contract, or for the action
of any person which may delay payment or render a contract null and
void or unenforceable in whole or in part.
D. Construction of plan. This plan shall be construed and enforced
according to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. If any
provision of this trust shall be held illegal or invalid for any reason, such
determination shall not affect the remaining provisions of the plan.
E. Gender and number. Wherever any words are used herein in the
masculine, feminine or neuter, they shall be construed as though they
were also used in another gender in all cases where they would so
apply, and whenever any words are used herein in the singular or plural
form, they shall be construed as though they were also used in the other
form in all cases where they would so apply.
F. Headings. The headings and subheadings of this trust have been
inserted for convenience of reference and are to be ignored in any
construction of the provisions hereof.
G. Spendthrift. The interests and benefits under this plan of any
participant, spouse or dependent shall not be subject to assignment,
alienation, pledge, attachment, garnishment, sequestration or other
legal process, or to the claims of creditors, except as required by law.
A. Continuation coverage. All persons whose health benefits would
otherwise terminate may have rights to continuation coverage at their
own expense due to a qualifying event described in IRC § 4980B. To the
extent that the law or regulations require continuation coverage under
this plan:
(1) Any participant eligible for continuation coverage shall be notified
of such eligibility within the period of time that is the maximum
allowable;
(2) All periods of coverage or election shall be for the minimum
required by law; and
§ 93-45 PENSIONS § 93-46
93:249
(3) Premiums may be chargeable at the maximum rate allowed by law.
B. HIPAA.
(1) Any benefit subject to HIPAA may, with respect to a participant or
beneficiary, impose a preexisting condition exclusion only if:
(a) Such exclusion relates to a condition described in IRC
§ 9801(a)(1);
(b) Such exclusion extends for a period no greater than the period
described in IRC § 9801(a)(2); and
(c) The period of any such preexisting condition exclusion is
reduced by a period no less than the period described in IRC
§ 9801(a)(3).
(2) To the extent required by HIPAA, the Plan Administrator shall
provide a certificate of creditable coverage, provide special
enrollment periods for eligible participants, their spouses, and
their dependents and meet the requirements otherwise mandated
by HIPAA.
§ 93-46 § 93-46
93:250
Chapter 97
PERSONNEL POLICIES
CHARTER REFERENCES
Personnel — See Art. XV. Personnel Board — See Art. XVI.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification of officers and
employees — See Ch. 29.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 43.
Pensions — See Ch. 93.
Police personnel — See Ch. 105.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 116.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 123.
Social security — See Ch. 131.
Employee Safety Manual — See Ch. A364.
Employee Handbook — See Ch. A366.
§ 93-46 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 93-46
97:251

ARTICLE I
Health Care and Life Insurance
[Adopted 8-28-1979 by Ord. No. 1196]
§ 97-1. Health insurance.
Upon acceptance and commencement in the career service of the
Municipality of Monroeville, an employee shall be entitled to the provision
of health insurance, as provided in the existing labor agreement with the
predominant bargaining unit covering that job or, where no bargaining
unit exists, as currently provided by the Municipality to employees not
represented by recognized bargaining units.
§ 97-2. Life insurance.
The Municipality, upon actual commencement of employment, will, in
addition to health insurance, provide life insurance, as provided either by
bargaining agreement or agreement subsequent to established ordinances.
§ 97-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 97-2
97:253

ARTICLE II
Municipal Manager86
[Adopted 6-9-1987 by Ord. No. 1570]
§ 97-3. Compensation. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
Monroeville shall reimburse the Manager of Monroeville at the rate as
provided by ordinance, payable biweekly.
§ 97-4. Compensation for documented expenses.
Monroeville shall compensate the Manager for documented expenses
incurred in the performance of the Manager's duties, including but not
limited to:
§ 97-5. Contribution to retirement account.
Monroeville shall contribute, at the rate of $2,500 per year, payable in
monthly installments to the Manager's retirement account with the
International City Management Association Retirement Corporation, with
the first such payment to be made within 30 days after June 9, 1987, and
continuing during the term of the Manager's appointment.
§ 97-6. Tuition reimbursement.
For a period of up to two years, Monroeville shall reimburse the Manager up
to a maximum amount equal to $2,500 per year for tuition at an institution
of higher education towards the Manager's acquisition of his doctorate
degree.
A. Travel expenses and telephone charges.
B. Appropriate professional organizations' dues, and expenses incurred in
connection with the Manager's attendance at any professional
conferences, courses or seminars, relevant to the Manager's duties
hereunder, which are approved in advance by Monroeville.
86.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2001, adopted 11-12-1996, provided as follows: "The Council
of the Municipality of Monroeville hereby establishes that the appointment, wages, hours,
benefits, and removal of the Municipal Manager shall be accomplished by Ordinance in
conformity with the requirements of Article V of the Home Rule Charter of the
Municipality of Monroeville."
§ 97-3 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 97-6
97:255

ARTICLE III
Police Department Collective Bargaining Agreement
[Adopted 4-11-2006 by Ord. No. 236387]
§ 97-7. Authorization to enter agreement.
The proper officials of the Municipality of Monroeville are hereby
authorized to enter a collective bargaining agreement with the Police
Department Wage Policy Committee, said agreement to be effective January
1, 2005.
§ 97-8. Incorporation of agreement by reference.
A copy of the Agreement is attached hereto, made a part hereof and marked
"Exhibit A."88
87.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. III, Police Department, adopted
1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2244.
88.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file and available for inspection in the office of the Municipal
Manager.
§ 97-7 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 97-8
97:257

ARTICLE IV
Clerical Workers Collective Bargaining Agreement
[Adopted 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 224589]
§ 97-9. Authorization to enter agreement.
The proper officials of the Municipality of Monroeville are hereby
authorized to enter a collective bargaining agreement with the Municipal
Clerical Workers (MCW), said agreement to be effective January 1, 2002.
§ 97-10. Incorporation of agreement by reference.
A copy of the agreement is attached hereto, made a part hereof and marked
"Exhibit A."90
89.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. IV, Police Department Civilian
Employees and Municipal Clerical Workers, adopted 12-8-1987 by Ord. No. 1599.
90.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file and available for inspection in the office of the Municipal
Manager.
§ 97-9 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 97-10
97:259

ARTICLE V
Pennsylvania Social Services Union Collective Bargaining
Agreement91
[Adopted 2-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2251]
§ 97-11. Authorization to enter agreement.
The proper officials of the Municipality of Monroeville are hereby
authorized to enter a collective bargaining agreement with the Public Works
Bargaining Unit, said agreement to be effective September 1, 2002 to
August 31, 2006.
§ 97-12. Incorporation of agreement by reference.
A copy of the agreement is attached hereto, made a part hereof and marked
Exhibit "A."92
91.Editor's Note: Former Art. V, Nonunionized Employees, adopted 12-8-1987 by Ord. No.
1600, expired 12-31-1988 and consequently was removed from the Code.
92.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file and available for inspection in the office of the Municipal
Manager.
§ 97-11 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 97-12
97:261

ARTICLE VI
Disciplinary Policies
[Adopted 9-13-1988 by Ord. No. 1631]
§ 97-13. Scope; counseling sessions.
The disciplinary policy of the Municipality defines fair and progressive
action in order to effectively correct substandard behavior. Consequently,
any disciplinary action will be coupled with a counseling session to explain
the behavioral or performance standard expected.
§ 97-14. Progression of discipline.
§ 97-15. Use of disciplinary action.
Disciplinary action is viewed by the Municipality as a learning situation
rather than as punishment. It is designed to encourage exemplary levels
of performance. If an employee fails to meet performance or behavioral
expectations, the system is designed to eliminate uncorrectable employees.
§ 97-16. Appeals.
A. If the substandard behavior is not inordinately serious or is not covered
by an accepted code of discipline, the progression of discipline will be
as follows:
(1) Oral reprimand (with a note to the personnel file).
(2) Written letter of reprimand.
(3) One day's suspension from work without pay.
(4) Three days' suspension from work without pay.
(5) Termination.
B. If the substandard behavior is not displayed for one year, the
progression through the steps will start over again. However, a
continuing pattern of substandard behavior can result in further
disciplinary action.
A. Employees have the opportunity to appeal disciplinary action via the
various grievance procedures outlined in the applicable collective
bargaining agreement or per the Home Rule Charter.
B. All non-career service employees designated as heads of administrative
units shall have the following appeal rights:
(1) Subsequent to disciplinary action by the Municipal Manager, an
administrative head shall have the right to appeal the Manager's
decision to a Board comprised of the Mayor and seven members of
Council.
§ 97-13 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 97-16
97:263
(2) These procedures will be deemed legal and/or personnel matters in
accordance with the Sunshine Act (Act No. 213 of 1957, as
amended93).
93.Editor's Note: See now 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 97-16 § 97-16
97:264
ARTICLE VII
Hiring of Employees; Preapplication Physicals
[Adopted 3-14-1989 by Ord. No. 1660]
§ 97-17. Histories required in preemployment application.
It is hereby made mandatory that all prospective employees of the
Municipality of Monroeville include all past, physical and mental histories
in the preemployment application of the Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 97-18. Preemployment physical required; scope.
It is hereby made mandatory that all prospective employees of the
Municipality of Monroeville be required to have a physical examination by a
physician recommended by the Municipality. Said examination shall include,
but not be limited to, X rays of the back, neck, shoulder, arm and leg areas
of the body, complete cardiac tests and complete blood tests.
§ 97-19. Medical report.
The Municipal Manager shall be required to receive a medical report from
the physician recommended by the Municipality detailing the findings of the
medical examination and the physician's opinion as to whether or not the
prospective employee will be able to perform the ordinary functions of the
position being applied for and/or identifying any chemical dependencies or
substances used.
§ 97-17 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 97-19
97:265

ARTICLE VIII
Exempt and Nonexempt Employees
[Adopted 7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 237394]
§ 97-20. Modification of statutory benefits.
This article amends the benefits of Monroeville exempt and nonexempt
employees as determined by the Fair Labor Standards Act.
§ 97-21. Incorporation of agreement by reference.
A copy of the agreement is attached hereto, made a part hereof and marked
Exhibit "A."95
94.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. VIII, Exempt and Nonexempt
Employees, adopted 8/9/2005 by Ord. No. 2341.
95.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file and available for inspection in the office of the Municipal
Manager.
§ 97-20 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 97-21
97:267

ARTICLE IX
Refuse Collection Division Collective Bargaining Agreement
[Adopted 4-8-2003 by Ord. No. 225696]
§ 97-22. Authorization to enter agreement.
The proper officials of the Municipality of Monroeville are hereby
authorized to enter into a collective bargaining agreement with the Refuse
Collection Division of the Department of Public Works, said agreement to be
effective June 1, 2003.
§ 97-23. Incorporation of agreement by reference.
A copy of the Agreement is attached hereto, made a part hereof and marked
"Exhibit A."97
96.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. IX, Refuse Collection Division,
adopted 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. 2051, which adopted an agreement with an expiration date
of 5-31-1998.
97.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file and available for inspection in the office of the Municipal
Manager.
§ 97-22 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 97-23
97:269
Chapter 101
PLANNING DEPARTMENT AND PLANNING COMMISSION
CHARTER REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See § C-109.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 324. Zoning — See Ch. 359.
§ 97-23 § 97-23
101:270
ARTICLE I
Department of Municipal Planning
[Adopted 2-14-1956 by Ord. No. 83; amended in its entirety
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
§ 101-1. Department created.
The Department of Municipal Planning is hereby created for the
Municipality of Monroeville, effective February 14, 1957.
§ 101-1 PLANNING DEPARTMENT AND PLANNING § 101-1
101:271

ARTICLE II
Planning Commission
[Adopted 8-10-1976 by Ord. No. 1037]
§ 101-2. Purpose.
It is the intent, purpose and scope of this article to conform the functions of
the Monroeville Planning Commission to the mandates of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of Assembly of July 31, 1968, as
amended,98 hereinafter referred to as the "code"; to protect and promote
safety, health and morals; to accomplish coordinated development; to
provide for the general welfare by guiding and protecting amenity,
convenience, future governmental, economic, practical, social and cultural
facilities, development and growth; to guide uses of land and structures
and types and locations of streets, public grounds and other facilities; and
to minimize problems as may presently exist or which may be foreseen. It
is the further intent of this article that any recommendation made by the
Planning Commission to the Municipal Council shall be advisory only.
§ 101-3. Word usage.
The definitions in Article I, Section 107, of the code99 shall govern this
article. A copy is attached hereto, made a part hereof and marked Exhibit
A.100
§ 101-4. Continuation of existing Commission.
The Planning Commission created by Article I of this chapter shall continue
in existence by virtue of this article and shall exercise all the powers and
duties and be subject to all the limitations conferred by the code.101
§ 101-5. Membership.
The Planning Commission shall continue to have members, all residents
of the Municipality of Monroeville. The members shall serve without
compensation, but may be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable
expenses. Elected or appointed officers or employees of the Municipality
may not serve on the Planning Commission and at the same time receive
compensation for the municipal office held by them. The number of Planning
Commission members and the appointment of members shall be in
accordance with the Home Rule Charter of Monroeville and the
Municipalities Planning Code,102 as amended.
98.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
99.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10107.
100. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file and available for inspection in the office of the Municipal
Manager.
101. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
102. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 101-2 PLANNING DEPARTMENT AND PLANNING § 101-6
101:273
§ 101-6. Removal of members.
Any members of the Planning Commission once qualified and appointed may
be removed from office in accordance with provisions of the Monroeville
Home Rule Charter.
§ 101-7. Organization; bylaws; records.
The Planning Commission shall elect its own Chairman and Vice Chairman
and create and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall
serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. The Planning Commission
may make and alter bylaws and rules and regulations to govern its
procedures consistent with the ordinances of the Municipality and the laws
of the commonwealth. The Planning Commission shall keep a full record of
its business and shall annually make a written report by March 1 of each
year of its activities to the Council.
§ 101-8. Powers and duties.
A. The Monroeville Planning Commission shall have only those powers and
duties as may specifically be referred to it by a majority vote of the
Municipal Council. All matters concerning planning, zoning or
development on which the Municipal Council has the right to vote shall
first be processed administratively by the Department of Community
Development, with respect to the application process, advertising for
public hearing before the Municipal Council where required by law and
review of any applications and submissions therewith. All such matters
may first be reviewed by the Municipal Council at an executive session
or at a meeting of a Planning Committee composed of members of the
Municipal Council. A majority of the Municipal Council may refer any
given matter relative to planning, zoning or development to the
Planning Commission for a review and recommendation relative to an
entire application and/or plan. Any such referral to the Planning
Commission may state a time when Planning Commission input is due
to the Municipal Council. The Planning Commission's review and
recommendation shall be limited to the specific referral or request from
the Municipal Council and shall be advisory only. Whether or not the
Planning Commission reviews any given matter referred to it by the
Municipal Council or such review or recommendation is not submitted
to the Municipal Council within the time requested, the Council may act
upon the application or plan before it for consideration.
B. The Planning Commission shall have no power independent from those
matters which may be referred to it by the Municipal Council, and the
Council may withdraw from the Planning Commission any matters
which had been referred to it.
C. The matters which the Municipal Council may refer to the Planning
Commission shall be limited to the following:
§ 101-6 § 101-8
101:274
(1) Prepare the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the
Municipality as set forth in the code103 and present it for the
consideration of the Council.
(2) Maintain and keep on file records of its actions, which shall be in
the possession of the Council.
(3) Prepare and present for the consideration of the Council and, after
adoption, maintain for the Council an Official Map and make such
recommendations to the Council on proposed changes in such map
as set forth in the code.
(4) Make recommendations to the Council on proposed amendments to
Chapter 359, Zoning, of the Code of the Municipality of Monroeville
as set forth in the code.
(5) Prepare and recommend subdivision and land development
regulations as set forth in the code.
(6) Prepare planned residential development regulations as set forth in
the code.
(7) Make recommendations to the Council on proposed amendments to
the Building Code.104
(8) Prepare and present to the Council a Housing Code and make
recommendations on proposed amendments thereto.
(9) Submit to the Council a recommended capital improvement
program.
(10) Promote a public interest in and understanding of the
Comprehensive Plan and planning.
(11) Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private
agencies and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of
such agencies.
(12) Hold public hearing and meetings.
(13) Require from other departments and agencies of the Municipality
such available information as relates to the work of the Planning
Commission.
(14) In the performance of its functions, enter upon any lands to make
examination and surveys, either after permission has been
obtained from the owner or after public notices.
(15) Do such other act or make such studies as may be necessary to
fulfill the duties and obligations imposed by the code.
103. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
104. Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Building Construction; and Ch. 176, Construction Codes,
Uniform.
§ 101-8 PLANNING DEPARTMENT AND PLANNING § 101-8
101:275
§ 101-9. Municipal Engineer and Planning Director.
The Municipal Engineer shall serve the Planning Commission as
engineering advisor. The Planning Commission shall work in conjunction
with the Municipal Planning Director and Planning Department in
exercising its powers and accomplishing its duties. The Planning Director
and Planning Department shall administer all regulations prepared by the
Planning Commission after the same are approved by the Municipal
Council.
§ 101-10. Administrative and technical assistance.
The Municipal Council may employ administrative and technical services
to aid in carrying out the provisions of the code,105 either as consultants
on particular matters or as regular employees of the Municipality. The
Municipal Council may enter into agreements or contracts for planning
services with any county or regional planning agency. The Planning
Commission may, with the consent of the Council, accept and utilize any
funds, personnel or other assistance made available by the county, the
commonwealth or the federal government or any of their agencies or from
private sources. The Council may enter into agreements or contracts
regarding the acceptance or utilization of the funds or assistance in
accordance with the governmental procedures of the Municipality.
(16) Seek the approval of the Municipal Engineer before doing any act
or making any recommendations involving engineering
considerations, the same with respect to:
(a) The planning expert.
(b) The Fire Official.
(c) The Municipal Solicitor.
105. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 101-8 § 101-10
101:276
Chapter 105
POLICE PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Pension Fund — See Ch. 93, Art. I. Personnel policies — See Ch. 97, Art. III.
§ 101-10 POLICE PERSONNEL § 101-10
105:277

ARTICLE I
Applications and Qualifications
§ 105-1. Eligibility for examination.
In order to be eligible for participation in any examination for any position
with the Police Department, every applicant must submit a completed
application form, together with an application fee of $50 made payable
to the Municipality of Monroeville. All completed applications shall be
submitted to the Municipal Manager before the deadline stated by the
Municipal Manager for that specific examination. The applicant must make
an oath or affirmation that the application is completed truthfully, and the
applicant is subject to the penalties of Title 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904 relating to
unsworn falsification to authorities.
§ 105-2. Discrimination.
The Municipality of Monroeville is an equal opportunity employer. It is the
Municipality's policy to grant equal employment opportunities to qualified
persons without regard to race, religion, color, national origin, gender,
age, veteran's status, marital status or non-job-related physical or mental
handicap or disability. The Municipality of Monroeville will provide equal
opportunities in employment and promotion.
§ 105-3. Availability of applications.
Application forms shall be available to all interested persons in the office of
the Municipal Manager and from such other offices and personnel that the
Municipal Manager, from time to time, may choose to designate. Application
forms may be mailed upon written request. However, the Municipality
assumes no responsibility for missed filing deadlines due to a delay in the
mail.
§ 105-4. Age and residency requirements.
All applicants for the Police Department must have reached their twentyfirst
birthday before the deadline for submitting completed applications.
Applicants must move or establish permanent residence in the Municipality
within six months of completing their probationary period.
§ 105-5. General qualifications for applicants.
A. Every applicant for a position as a police officer in the Police
Department shall possess a diploma from an accredited high school or
graduate equivalency diploma. In addition, every applicant must be a
United States citizen, possess a valid drivers license, be physically and
mentally fit to perform the full duties of a police officer and be certified
as a police officer as stated in Act 120, Pennsylvania Municipal Police
Officers' Education and Training Program;106 and
106. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2161 et seq.
§ 105-1 POLICE PERSONNEL § 105-5
105:279
§ 105-6. Rejection of applicant.
The Municipal Manager may refuse to examine or, if examined, may refuse
to certify as eligible after examination any applicant who is found to lack
any of the minimum qualifications for examination prescribed in these
rules and regulations for the particular position for which the applicant
has applied. In addition, the Municipal Manager may refuse to certify any
applicant who is physically or mentally unfit to perform the full duties of the
position applied for or who is a habitual substance abuser, who is guilty of
any crime involving moral turpitude or of infamous or notoriously disgraced
conduct, as defined by PA Crime Code Subchapter B and Chapter 59, or who
has been dismissed from public service for delinquency or misconduct in
office or has been convicted of a serious misdemeanor or a felony or who is
affiliated with any group whose policies or activities are subversive to the
forms of government set forth in the constitutions and laws of the United
States and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 105-7. Recording and filing application.
Applications for positions in the Police Department shall be received at
the Municipal Building only after official advertisement has been made
and before the deadline for receiving applications, which must be set forth
in a public advertisement. Applications will be received by the municipal
officer designated in the public advertisement or that officer's designee.
That person shall record the receipt of all applications and provide each
applicant with notice of the time and place for the first portion of the testing
procedure, the written examination. Any application containing material
errors or omissions may, at the discretion of the Municipal Manager, be
B. In addition to Subsection A, every applicant shall have at least 12
months (2,080 hours) of full-time police work experience with a federal,
state or municipal law enforcement agency or 24 months (at least 1,000
hours per twelve-month period) of part-time police work experience
with a federal, state or municipal law enforcement agency; or
C. In addition to Subsection A, every applicant shall possess an associate's
degree or 60 semester hours from an accredited college or university
with a major study concentration in criminal justice, police science,
criminology or other directly related major and 12 months (2,080
hours) of full-time police work experience with a federal, state or
municipal law enforcement agency or 18 months (at least 1,000 hours
per twelve-month period) of part-time police work experience with a
federal, state or municipal law enforcement agency; or
D. In addition to Subsection A, every applicant shall possess a bachelor's
degree from an accredited college or university with a major study
concentration in criminal justice, police science, criminology or other
directly related major and 12 months (at least 1,000 hours) of part-time
police work experience with a federal, state, or municipal law
enforcement agency.
§ 105-5 § 105-7
105:280
returned to the applicant for correction prior to the deadline for filing
applications after which no new applications or amended applications will
be accepted.
§ 105-8. Hearing for disqualified applicants.
Any applicant who believes that he or she is aggrieved by the actions of the
Municipal Manager in refusing to examine or to certify his or her as eligible
after examination may request a hearing before the Municipal Manager.
Within 10 days after such request, the Municipal Manager shall designate a
time and place for the hearing. The applicant or aggrieved party must make
his or her request for a hearing in writing within 10 calendar days of the
date when the party knew or should have known of the Municipal Manager's
action which is being challenged.
§ 105-9. Public notice.
The Municipal Manager shall conspicuously post in the Municipal Building
notice of the time and place of every examination, together with the
information as to the type of position to be filled, the requirements for that
position, where the application may be obtained for the examination and
the deadline for filing those applications. In addition, at least 30 days prior
to each examination, publication of the notice shall occur in at least one
newspaper circulating generally in the Municipality.
§ 105-7 POLICE PERSONNEL § 105-9
105:281

ARTICLE II
Examination and Grading Procedure for Police Officers
§ 105-10. General examination requirements.
The examination for police officer will consist of a written and an oral
examination which will be graded on a one-hundred-point scale, with the
written examination representing 70% of the final score and the oral
examination representing 30% of the final score. In addition, each applicant
will undergo a physical fitness test, a drug-screening test, a polygraph
test and a background investigation. These tests and investigation will be
graded on a pass/fail basis for every applicant. After an applicant has been
extended an offer of employment, final appointment shall be contingent
upon the applicant passing a medical physical, which will include a drugscreening
procedure, and a psychological test.
§ 105-11. Notice of examination.
The Municipal Manager shall appoint a written examination administrator,
an oral examination administrator, a physical fitness examiner, a physical/
medical examiner, a polygraph examiner and a psychological examiner
to conduct the appropriate examinations required by these rules and
regulations.
§ 105-12. Written examinations.
The written examination shall be graded on a one-hundred-point scale,
and an applicant must score 80% or higher to continue in the application
process. Applicants scoring less than 80% shall be rejected. Within 30 days
after the administration of the written examination, all applicants shall be
given written notice of their test results and passing applicants shall be
scheduled for an oral examination appointment.
§ 105-13. Oral examination.
Every applicant who scored 80% or higher and receives one of the top/
highest scores on the written examination shall be given an oral
examination which will be graded on a one-hundred-point scale, with a
score of 80% or higher necessary for passing. The oral examination shall
involve questioning applicants on how they would handle situations relevant
to police work. Within 30 days after the applicants' oral examinations, they
shall be informed of the score in their oral examination and total overall
score, and each passing applicant shall be informed of the date for physical
testing.
§ 105-14. Veterans' preference points.
Pursuant to the Veterans' Preference Act,107 any applicant for the position
of police officer who qualifies as a soldier under this Act shall receive an
107. Editor's Note: See 51 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et seq.
§ 105-10 POLICE PERSONNEL § 105-14
105:283
additional 10 points on top of his or her total score if the applicant had
received passing scores under §§ 105-10, 105-12 and 105-13.
§ 105-15. Residence preference points.
§ 105-16. Physical fitness testing.
An applicant for the position of police officer must meet the following:
A. Any applicant for the position of police officer who can establish to the
satisfaction of the Municipal Manager that he or she has resided
continually and uninterrupted within the territorial limits of the
Municipality of Monroeville for at least two years prior to the deadline
for submission of an application for examination shall receive an
additional 10 points on top of his or her total score if the applicant had
received passing scores under §§ 105-10, 105-12 and 105-13. In no
case, however, shall residence preference points be used to diminish,
remove or otherwise cause a veteran who has been awarded veteran's
preference points pursuant to § 105-14 to lose his/her position on the
list of passing candidates; or to lose his/her position on the list of
eligibles pursuant to Article III of these rules and regulations to an
applicant who satisfies the residency requirement contained herein.
B. Eligibility for residence preference points will be investigated by the
Municipal Manager or his/her designee. The documents presented must
represent the period of time for which the applicant is claiming
residence preference points. Inability to produce the required
verification of residence documents for the continuous period of
residency will result in the forfeiture of residence preference points and
an adjustment in the final score. Documents that will be investigated to
prove Monroeville residency will include, but are, not limited to, a copy
of a lease or mortgage in the applicant's name plus one of the following
(also in the applicant's name): earned income tax records; property tax
records; voters registration information; drivers license information;
insurance statements; telephone bills; gas, electric or water utility bills;
checking or savings account statements; cable television bills; or credit
card statements. The Municipal Manager reserves the right to accept
other documents, in lieu of the above, under special circumstances
which validate various living arrangements, such as residing with
parents, etc., as determined by the Municipal Manager. As in the case of
any intentional misrepresentation of a material fact on an employment
application, applicants who claim Municipality of Monroeville residence
preference points and who are determined to have intentionally
misrepresented facts concerning residency in the Municipality of
Monroeville shall be disqualified and their names shall be removed
from the eligible list, and they may be subject to criminal sanctions.
A. Stretcher carry. Applicants will be paired off and required to carry a
stretcher with a simulated patient weighing approximately 200 pounds,
over a distance of 100 feet. Those applicants failing on the first attempt
§ 105-14 § 105-16
105:284
§ 105-17. Drug screening.
§ 105-18. Background investigation.
will be allowed to retake the exercise with a person who has
successfully completed the exercise.
B. Body drag. An applicant is required to remove a simulated motor
vehicle operator weighing approximately 200 pounds from behind the
steering wheel of a motor vehicle and drag the simulated operator to a
point 50 feet from the motor vehicle.
C. Quarter-mile run. An applicant is required to run a distance of 1/4 mile
on a premeasured course in less than 110 seconds.
D. Window climb. An applicant is required to climb through a six-foot high
level window without assistance onto a three-foot level platform on the
other side of the window and then to the ground. Applicants must then
circle around a marker 20 feet beyond the window and return up the
three-foot high platform and out the window onto the ground below.
E. Trigger pull. Within a thirty-second time limit per hand, an applicant is
required to repeatedly pull 15 times for each hand the trigger of a
double action, nonfunctional revolver with arms horizontally extended.
F. Motor vehicle push. An applicant is required to push an average sized
motor vehicle a distance of 25 feet on a premeasured level course.
A. Every applicant who has received one of the highest scores on the
written examination, oral examination and passed the physical fitness
test will receive a drug-screening test.
B. The drug-screening test shall be capable of identifying marijuana,
cocaine and every major drug of abuse, including heroin,
amphetamines, barbiturates and anabolic steroids. Personnel utilized
for testing shall be certified as qualified to collect urine samples or
adequately trained in collection procedures.
A. The Municipal Manager shall request the Chief of Police or the Chief's
designee to conduct a background investigation on each applicant who
has scored high enough to become a candidate for the list of eligibles.
The background investigation should include interviews with the
applicant's family, acquaintances, current and former neighbors,
references, current and former teachers and school officials. In
addition, the applicant's credit history and record of criminal
convictions shall be investigated. The applicant may be interviewed
directly when the information collected during the background
investigation requires clarification or explanation.
B. After the background investigation is completed, the Chief or designee
shall make written recommendation to the Municipal Manager on
whether the applicant is appropriate for consideration for appointment
§ 105-16 POLICE PERSONNEL § 105-18
105:285
§ 105-19. Polygraph examination.
as a police officer. Appropriateness of the applicant shall be based on
the criteria set forth in § 105-6 of these rules and regulations. This
recommendation shall be in writing, and, if the recommendation is
to disqualify, then a detailed written explanation of the reasons for
disqualification must be included. The Municipal Manager shall make
the final determination on whether the information collected during the
background investigation warrants rejection of the candidate. Within
30 days after the Municipal Manager considers the recommendation
of the Chief of Police or designee, each applicant will be informed of
whether he or she has passed the background investigation.
A. Every applicant who has scored high enough to become a candidate for
the list of eligibles for the position of police officer shall fill out a
personal data questionnaire and undergo a polygraph examination.
Polygraph examinations will only be administered to applicants who
have scored among the highest after the written examination, oral
examination, physical fitness test and the addition of veterans and/or
residence preference points.
B. The polygraph examiner shall provide a written report to the Municipal
Manager stating whether any of the applicant's responses to questions
from the applicant's personal data questionnaire are deceptive. The
written report on each examination shall be submitted to the Municipal
Manager within five days after the date of the examination.
C. The examiner shall ask questions based on the information contained in
the personal data questionnaire. Before administering the test, the
polygraph examiner shall ask each applicant whether there is any more
information related to the personal data questionnaire that the
applicant would like to provide. There shall also be a post-test review,
during which the polygraph examiner shall again ask the participant, if
deception is indicated, whether there is any information that the
applicant is withholding.
D. If the polygraph examiner shall deem any of the applicant's responses
to be deceptive, the polygraph examiner must tell the applicant
immediately and give the applicant an opportunity to explain, deny or
admit the deception. If the applicant denies being deceptive or if the
explanation is found unsatisfactory by the polygraph examiner, the
applicant will be given the opportunity to retake the test with a second
polygraph examiner. Notice of the opportunity to retest shall be given in
writing to the applicant. The second polygraph examiner will not have
access to the results of the first test prior to readministering the
polygraph. If the second polygraph examiner also finds the applicant
deceptive, the applicant will be considered as having failed the
examination.
E. An applicant who has failed both tests may appeal to the Municipal
Manager for a third examination before a polygraph examiner of the
§ 105-18 § 105-19
105:286
Municipality's choice, and the decision to give the applicant an
opportunity to take a third test, at the applicant's expense, resides
solely within the discretion of the Municipal Manager. If the applicant
is awarded an opportunity to take a third test and passes, then the
applicant will be considered as having passed the polygraph test. If
the applicant is found deceptive on a third test, the applicant will be
rejected.
§ 105-19 POLICE PERSONNEL § 105-19
105:287

ARTICLE III
Certification of List of Eligibles and Appointments
§ 105-20. Creation of eligibility.
§ 105-21. Appointment.
A. At the completion of the examination requirements set forth in Article
II, written examination, oral examination, drug-screening test, physical
fitness test, background investigation and polygraph examination, the
Municipal Manager shall rank all passing applicants on a list with the
applicant receiving the highest score at the top of the list and the
applicant receiving the lowest passing score at the bottom of the list.
Applicants who qualify for veterans' preference points and/or residency
preference points shall have those points added to their passing score
prior to being ranked on the eligibility list. In case of tied scores, the tie
will be broken by giving preference to the applicant who submitted a
final completed application first. If both tied applicants submitted their
complete application on the same day, then the applicants shall be
ranked in order by surname.
B. The eligibility list should be valid for one year from the date the
Municipal Manager ranks all passing applicants, assigns veteran's
preference points and/or residency preference points and formally
adopts the eligibility list. The Municipal Manager may, at his/her sole
discretion, by a vote of the majority of Council at a duly authorized
Council meeting, extend the list for an additional year. The Municipal
Manager may, at his/her sole discretion, void an eligibility list at any
time for any reason.
A. The Municipal Manager may fill any vacancy in the Police Department,
which occurs as a result of expansion of the police force, retirement,
resignation, disability or death by the reappointment or reinstatement
of a former employee of the Police Department who had been
furloughed. Except for medical/physical and psychological
examinations, no other testing shall be required for a furloughed
employee or a rehired or reappointed employee.
B. If no furlough list exists or if positions remain to be filled after all of the
officers on the furlough list were offered reemployment, every vacant
position shall be filled only in the following manner:
(1) The Municipal Manager will determine if a vacancy exists that
should be filled. Three names will be certified from the list of
eligibles.
(2) If three names are not available, then the Municipal Manager shall
certify the name(s) remaining on the list.
(3) The Municipal Manager shall make an appointment from one of the
three names certified, with reference to the merits and fitness of
§ 105-20 POLICE PERSONNEL § 105-21
105:289
§ 105-22. Medical/physical and psychological examination.
After the appointing authority selects a candidate from the certified list of
three for appointment to the vacant position, that candidate shall submit
to a medical/physical examination and a psychological examination by the
appropriate experts of the Municipality's choice. If the candidate
successfully passes the medical/physical and psychological examinations,
then that candidate shall be appointed to the vacant position in the Police
Department. The appointment shall be contingent upon successfully passing
the medical/physical and psychological examinations. The examiners shall
certify that the candidate is medically/physically and psychologically fit for
police work. Failure to pass any of the examinations shall result in the
candidate being rejected from consideration. The rejected candidate may
appeal the decision under § 105-8.
§ 105-23. Probationary period.
Every successful applicant to the position of police officer with the Police
Department must serve a probationary period of at least six months, but
not more than 12 months. During the probationary period, a newly hired
officer may only be dismissed for cause for the reasons set forth in § 105-6.
However, at the end of the probationary period, if the conduct of the
probationer has not been satisfactory to the Municipal Manager, the
probationer shall be notified, in writing, that the appointment will not be
permanent. At that time, a newly hired officer's employment shall end. Any
officer who is not informed in writing that his or her performance has been
unsatisfactory shall receive a permanent appointment to the new position.
Any probationer who is notified in writing that appointment will not be
made permanent has no rights of appeal under these rules and regulations.
the candidates. However (for initial appointment to the position of
police officer), when one of the three applicants on the certified list
is a veteran, that applicant shall be selected.
C. The Municipal Manager may object to one or more of the persons
certified for reasons set forth in § 105-6 of these rules and regulations.
If the candidate to whom the Municipal Manager objects fails to timely
exercise the rights of appeal under § 105-8 or if the Municipal Manager
declines to uphold the appeal, the Municipal Manager shall strike the
name of that candidate from the eligibility list and certify the next
highest name for inclusion on the list of three candidates for each name
stricken off.
§ 105-21 § 105-23
105:290
ARTICLE IV
Promotions and Testing
§ 105-24. General qualifications for Corporal, Sergeant and
Lieutenant.
§ 105-25. Rejection of applicants for promotion.
The Municipal Manager may refuse to examine or, if examined, refuse to
certify as eligible after examination, any applicant who is found to lack any
of the minimum qualifications prescribed in these rules and regulations for
the particular position for which the applicant has applied.
§ 105-26. Hearing for disqualified applicants.
Rejected or disqualified applicants for promotion have the same rights of
appeal as stated in § 105-8 of these rules and regulations.
A. All applicants for a promotional position, except the Chief and Assistant
Chief, shall have not received a formal written reprimand for one year
prior to the deadline for submitting their names to the list of eligibles
wishing to be tested for the vacant position and not have been
suspended without pay at any time three years prior to the deadline for
submitting their names to a list. Any formal written reprimand or
suspension to which the applicant has timely appealed pursuant to the
grievance procedure or these rules and regulations shall be
disregarded unless the appeal is resolved prior to creation of the
eligibility list.
B. All applicants shall have continuous prior service with the Monroeville
Police Department as follows:
(1) An applicant for the position of Corporal shall have at least two
years' service with the Department.
(2) An applicant for the position of Sergeant shall be a Corporal and
have had at least one year of experience in that rank within this
Department.
(3) An applicant for the position of Lieutenant shall be a Sergeant and
have had at least one year of experience in that rank within this
Department.
§ 105-24 POLICE PERSONNEL § 105-26
105:291

ARTICLE V
Examination and Grading Procedures for Promotions
§ 105-27. General examination requirements.
The examination for the positions of Corporal, Sergeant and Lieutenant
shall include a written and oral examination which will be graded on a
one-hundred-point scale, with the written examination representing 50%
and the oral examination representing 50% of the final score. After an
applicant has been extended an offer of promotion, the Municipal Manager
may make the offer of promotion contingent upon the applicant passing
a medical/physical examination (including a drug/alcohol screening) and a
psychological examination.
§ 105-28. Written and oral examinations.
The requirements of §§ 105-12 and 105-13 of these rules and regulations
will govern the grading, scoring and passing requirements of the promotion
examinations, excluding the physical fitness requirements.
§ 105-29. Veterans' preference points for promotion.
Veterans' preference points are awarded to those who qualify for the initial
appointment to police officer. Veterans' preference points shall not be
provided for promotions because such an award overvalues military
services.
§ 105-30. Creation of promotion eligibility lists.
§ 105-31. Promotion appointment.
A. At the conclusion of the examination requirements the Municipal
Manager shall rank all applicants on a list, with the applicant receiving
the highest score at the top of the list and the applicant receiving the
lowest score at the bottom of the list.
B. The eligibility list should be valid for one year from the date the
Municipal Manager ranks all passing applicants and formally adopts
the eligibility list. The Municipal Manager, at his/her discretion, may
extend the list for an additional year or may void the eligibility list at
any time for any reason.
A. The Municipal Manager will determine if a vacancy exists in the ranks
and should be filled. Three names will be certified from the list of
eligibles.
B. If three names are not available, then the Municipal Manager shall
certify the name(s) remaining on the list.
C. The Municipal Manager shall make an appointment from one of the
three names certified, with reference to the merits and fitness of the
candidates.
§ 105-27 POLICE PERSONNEL § 105-31
105:293
§ 105-32. Probationary period.
Every successful applicant to a promotional position with the Police
Department must serve a probationary period of at least six months, but
not more than 12 months. A promoted officer, during probation, may be
returned to a prior rank only for the reasons set forth in § 105-6 of these
rules and regulations; however, at the end of the twelve-month probationary
period, if the conduct of the probationer has not been satisfactory to the
Chief of Police or the Municipal Manager, the probationer shall be notified
in writing that the appointment will not be permanent. The promoted officer
shall return to the previous rank held. Any officer not notified in writing that
his or her performance has been unsatisfactory, shall receive a permanent
promotion to the position.
§ 105-33. Appointment of Chief of Police and Assistant Chief of
Police.
§ 105-34. Provisional appointments.
Provisional appointments shall be made in accordance with Article X, § C-47
of the Home Rule Charter. No successive provisional appointments shall be
made to the same position.
§ 105-35. Suspension, removal or discharge; reduction in rank or
demotion.
No person appointed to a position in the Police Department pursuant to
these rules and regulations may be suspended, removed or discharged,
reduced in rank or demoted, except in accordance with the provisions of
Articles XV and XVI of the Home Rule Charter.
D. The Municipal Manager may object to one or more of the persons
certified for reasons set forth in § 105-6 of these rules and regulations,
if the candidate to whom the Municipal Manager objects fails to timely
exercise the rights of appeal under § 105-8 or if the Municipal Manager
declines to uphold the appeal, the Municipal Manager shall strike the
name of that candidate from the eligibility list and certify the next
highest name for inclusion on the list of three candidates for each name
stricken off.
A. In the case of a vacancy in the office of the Chief of Police, the Manager,
with the advice and consent of Council, may select an individual to fill
the position of Chief of Police.
B. If a vacancy occurs in the office of the Assistant Chief of Police, the
Manager will be responsible for searching and appointing a qualified
individual to the position of Assistant Chief of Police.
§ 105-31 § 105-35
105:294
Chapter 109
PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS
CHARTER REFERENCES
Budget and fiscal matters — See Art. XI. Contracts — See Art. XIV.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 43. Intergovernmental cooperation — See Ch. 69.
§ 109-1. Purchasing authority designated.
The purchasing authority shall be vested in the Director of Administration,
except that purchases or contracts exceeding the sum of $500 shall be
approved and signed by the Municipal Manager as pursuant to Article
XIV, § C-76, of the Monroeville Home Rule Charter. Nothing in this section
shall diminish the authority of the Municipal Council to determine, change
and approve expenditures nor that of the Municipal Manager pursuant to
applicable ordinances and laws.
§ 109-2. Scope of power of purchasing authority.
§ 109-3. Additional powers and duties of purchasing authority.
In addition to other powers and duties conferred by this chapter, the
purchasing authority shall:
A. The purchasing authority shall have the power and duty and it shall be
his duty to purchase or contract for all supplies or contractual services
within the dollar limit specified for activities which derive their support
wholly or in part from the Municipality in accordance with purchasing
procedures as prescribed by this chapter and such rules and
regulations as the authority shall adopt for the internal management
and operation of the purchasing function and such other rules and
regulations as shall be prescribed by the Municipal Manager and by the
Municipal Council.
B. Unauthorized purchases. Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful
for any municipal officer or officers to order the purchase of any
supplies or make any contract within the purview of this chapter other
than through the Department of Administration, and any purchase
ordered or contract made contrary to the provisions hereof shall not be
approved by the municipal officials, and the Municipality shall not be
bound thereby.
§ 105-35 PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS § 109-3
109:295
§ 109-4. Committee on Standardization and Specification.
There is hereby established in the Department of Administration of the
Municipality the Committee on Standardization and Specification.
A. Minimum Expenditure Act. Procure for the Municipality the highest
quality of supplies and contractual service at the least expense to the
Municipality.
B. Encourage competition. Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to
obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases and
sales.
C. Rules and regulations. Establish and amend, when necessary, all rules
and regulations authorized by this chapter and any others necessary to
its operation.
D. Purchasing analysis. Keep informed of current developments in the field
of purchasing prices, market conditions and new products and secure
for the Municipality the benefits of the research done in the field of
purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions, national technical
societies, trade associations having national recognition and private
businesses and organizations.
E. Forms. Prescribe and maintain such forms as he shall find reasonably
necessary to the operation of this chapter.
F. Standard nomenclature. Prepare and adopt a standard purchasing
nomenclature for using agencies and suppliers.
G. Vendors catalog file. Prepare, adopt and maintain a vendors catalog file.
Said catalog shall be filed according to materials and shall contain
descriptions of vendors' commodities, prices and discounts.
H. Quantity purchases. Make purchases in sufficient quantity in order to
take full advantage of discounts.
I. Federal and state tax exemptions. Act so as to procure for the
Municipality all federal and state tax exemptions to which it is entitled.
J. Disqualification of bidders. Have the authority to disqualify vendors
who default on their quotations or are irresponsible bidders from
conducting any business with the Municipality for a period of time not
to exceed three years.
A. Composition. The Committee shall consist of the following seven
officials or their duly designated representatives, who shall serve
without additional compensation: the Municipal Engineer, Director of
Recreation and Parks, Chief of Police, Fire Official, Director of
Community Development, Superintendent of Streets and
Superintendent of Special Services. The Municipal Manager shall have
the authority to make interim appointments should a vacancy occur in
any of the above-named positions.
§ 109-3 § 109-4
109:296
B. Capacity of purchasing authority. The purchasing authority shall
enforce the written specifications adopted by the Committee. He shall
attend all meetings of the Committee as Chairman and shall have the
authority to present his recommendations on any proposed
standardization or specification. However, he shall not have the power
to vote.
C. Committee duties. It shall be the duty of the Committee:
(1) Classification. To classify all supplies used by the various branches
of municipal government.
(2) Standardization. To adopt standards to ensure that the minimum
number of quantity, sizes and varieties of supplies consistent with
the successful operation of municipal government are purchased.
(3) Specification. To prepare and adopt written specifications for all
such standard supplies.
(4) Meetings. To hold official meetings at such times as are necessary
to carry out the responsibilities of the Committee, but at least twice
annually.
D. Effect of adoption.
(1) After its adoption, each standard specification shall, until revised or
rescinded, apply in terms and effect to every future purchase and
contract for the item designated in the specification.
(2) Exception. The purchasing authority, with the approval of the
Committee, shall have the authority to exempt any department of
the Municipality from using the supply described in the standard
specifications.
E. Laboratory facilities. The Committee shall have the authority to make
use of the laboratory and engineering facilities of the Municipality and
the technical staffs thereof in connection with its work of preparing and
adopting standards and written specifications.
F. Consultation with using agencies. The Committee shall consult with the
department heads and other officials of the using department to
determine their precise requirements and shall endeavor to prescribe
those standards which meet the needs of the majority of such
departments.
G. Nature of specifications. All specifications shall be definite and certain
and shall permit competition; provided, however, that the provisions of
this subsection shall not apply to noncompetitive types and kinds of
supplies as identified in § C-75 of the Home Rule Charter.
H. Use of consultants. When, in the opinion of the Committee, expert
advice is required to develop specifications, a recommendation should
be forwarded to that effect to the Municipal Manager, for final action by
§ 109-4 PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS § 109-4
109:297
§ 109-5. Requisitions and estimates.
All department heads shall file with the purchasing authority detailed
requisitions or estimates of their requirements for supplies and contractual
services in such manner, at such times and for such future periods as the
purchasing authority shall prescribe.
§ 109-6. Encumbrance of funds.
Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing authority shall not issue
any order for delivery on a contract or open market purchase until the
department head shall have certified that there is to the credit of the
using department concerned a sufficient unencumbered departmental
appropriation balance to defray the amount of such order.
§ 109-7. Conflicts of interest; gifts and rebates.
§ 109-8. Competitive bids.
All purchases and contracts for supplies and contractual services and all
sales of personal property which have become obsolete and unusable shall,
the Municipal Council, setting forth the reasons for such
recommendation and any other information which may be necessary.
A. Unforeseen requirements. A department head shall not be prevented
from filing with the purchasing authority at any time a requisition or
estimate for any supplies and contractual services which were not
foreseen when the detailed estimates were filed.
B. Revisory power in agent. The purchasing authority shall examine each
requisition or estimate and shall have the authority to revise it as to
quantity, quality or estimated cost. But revision as to quality shall be in
accordance with the standards and specifications established pursuant
to this chapter.
A. Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this chapter in
which the purchasing authority or any officer of employee of the
Municipality is financially interested, directly or indirectly, shall be
void, except that before the execution of a purchase order or contract,
the Council shall have the authority to waive compliance with this
section when it finds such action to be in the best interest of the
Municipality.
B. Gifts and rebates. The purchasing authority and every officer and
employee of the Municipality are expressly prohibited from accepting,
directly or indirectly, from any person, company, firm or corporation to
which any purchase order or contract is or might be awarded any
rebate, gift, money or anything of value whatsoever except when given
for the use and benefit of the Municipality.
§ 109-4 § 109-8
109:298
except as specifically provided herein, be based wherever possible on
competitive bids.
§ 109-9. Formal contract procedure.
All supplies and contractual services, except as otherwise provided herein,
when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed $2,500, shall be purchased by
formal, written contract from the lowest responsible bidder after due notice
inviting proposals. All sales of personal property which has become obsolete
and unusable, when the estimated value shall exceed $2,500, shall be sold
by formal written contract to the highest responsible bidder after due notice
inviting proposals.
A. Notice inviting bids.
(1) Newspaper.
(a) Notice inviting bids shall be published once in at least one
official newspaper in the Municipality and at least five days
preceding the last day set for the receipt of proposals.
(b) Scope of notice. The newspaper notice required herein shall
include a general description of the articles to be purchased or
sold and shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be
secured and the time and place for opening bids.
(2) Bidders' list. The purchasing agent shall also solicit sealed bids
from all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested
their names be added to a bidders list by sending them a copy of
the newspaper notice or such other notice as will acquaint them
with the proposed purchase or sale. In any case, invitations sent to
the vendors on the bidders' list shall be limited to commodities that
are similar in character and ordinarily handled by the trade group
to which the invitations are sent.
(3) Bulletin board. The agent shall also advertise all pending purchases
or sales by a notice posted on the public bulletin board in the
Municipal Building.
B. Bid deposits. Whenever deemed necessary by the purchasing authority,
bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids.
Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of their surety if the
purchasing authority required one. A successful bidder shall forfeit any
surety required by the agent upon failure on his part to enter into a
contract within 10 days after the award.
C. Bid opening procedure.
(1) Sealed. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the agent and shall be
identified as a bid on the envelope.
(2) Opening. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated
in the public notices. Once opened any member of the public can
§ 109-8 PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS § 109-9
109:299
examine any bid for a reasonable time period in the presence of the
agent.
(3) Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted for
public inspection. Any member of the public shall have the right to
be present during tabulation.
D. Rejection of bids. The purchasing authority shall have the authority to
reject all bids, parts of all bids or all bids for any one or more supplies
or contractual services included in the proposed contract when in the
public interest and after consultation with the Department of Law. The
purchasing authority shall immediately thereafter provide a written
report of such actions stating the reasons for such rejection.
(1) Bidders in default to the Municipality. The purchasing authority
shall not accept the bid of a contractor who is in default on the
payment of taxes, licenses or other moneys due the Municipality or
any governmental agency.
(2) The purchasing authority shall have the authority to disqualify
vendors who default to their quotations or are irresponsible
bidders from conducting any business with the Municipality for a
period of time not to exceed three years.
E. Award of contract.
(1) Authority in agent. The purchasing authority shall have the
authority to award contracts within the purview of this chapter,
after approval by the Municipal Council for purchases in excess of
$2,500.
(2) Lowest responsible bidder. Contracts shall be awarded to the
lowest responsible bidder. In determining the lowest responsible
bidder the following, in addition to prices, shall be considered.
(a) The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required.
(b) Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or
interference.
(c) The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder.
(d) The quality of performance of previous contracts or services.
(e) The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws
and ordinances relating to the contract or service.
(f) The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service.
§ 109-9 § 109-9
109:300
§ 109-10. Open market procedure.
All purchases of supplies, contractual services and sales of personal
property which have become obsolete and unusable and of less than the
estimated value of $2,500 shall be made in the open market without
newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedure prescribed
by § 109-9 for the award of formal contracts.
(g) The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required.
(h) The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service for the use of the subject of the contract.
(i) The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
(3) Award to other than low bidder. When the award is not given to the
lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for
placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the purchasing
authority and filed with the other papers relating to the
transaction.
(4) Tie bids.
(a) Local vendors. If all bids received are for the same total
amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the
contract shall be awarded to a local bidder.
(b) Outside vendors. Where Subsection E(4)(a) is not in effect, the
purchasing authority shall award the contract to one of the tie
bidders by drawing lots in public.
(5) Performance bonds. Before entering into a contract, the purchasing
authority shall have the authority to require a performance bond in
such amount as he shall find reasonably necessary to protect the
best interests of the Municipality. The purchasing authority will
develop a set standard in percentage amounts, giving professional,
technical and legal reasons for approval by the Municipal Manager
and Municipal Council.
F. Prohibitions against subdivision. No contract or purchase shall be
subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section.
A. Minimum number of bids. All open market purchases shall, wherever
possible, be based on at least three competitive bids and shall be
awarded to the lowest responsible bidder in accordance with the
standards set forth in § 109-9E(2) above.
B. Notice inviting bids. The purchasing authority shall solicit bids by
either direct mail request to prospective vendors, by telephone and/or
by public notice posted on the bulletin board of the Municipal Building.
§ 109-9 PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS § 109-10
109:301
§ 109-11. Petty cash fund.
There is hereby appropriated from the Municipal Treasury $500, which
shall be known as the "petty cash fund." From this fund all purchases of
not more than $20 each shall be paid if made by a department head for
incidentals and approved by the agent.
§ 109-12. Control and supervision of storerooms and warehouses.
The agent shall control and supervise storerooms and warehouses. The
purchasing authority shall maintain a perpetual inventory record of all
materials, supplies or equipment stored in storerooms and warehouses.
§ 109-13. Price agreement contracts.
The head of the using agency shall have the authority to submit requisitions
to the agent for supplies available under the terms of a price agreement
contract made by the agent.
§ 109-14. Emergency procedures.
C. Recording. The purchasing authority shall keep a record of all open
market orders and the bids submitted in competition thereon, and such
records shall also be open to public inspection.
A. Accounting. At the end of each month, the purchasing authority shall
render a statement showing the actual expenditures for each
department made out of the petty cash fund, and the Municipal
Treasurer shall reimburse the fund for those expenditures in the same
manner as other expenditures of the departments are paid.
B. Rules and regulations. The purchasing authority shall promulgate rules
and regulations for use of the petty cash fund.
A. By agent.
(1) In case of an apparent emergency which requires immediate
purchase of supplies or contractual services, the Municipal
Manager shall be empowered to authorize the purchasing authority
to secure, by open market procedures as herein set forth, at the
lowest obtainable price, any supplies or contractual services
regardless of the amount of the expenditure.
(2) Recorded explanation. A full report of the circumstances of an
emergency purchase shall be filed by the agent with the Municipal
Council and shall be entered in the minutes of the Council and shall
be open to public inspection.
B. By head of department. In case of actual emergency, with the approval
of the Municipal Manager, the department head may purchase directly
any supplies whose immediate procurement is essential to prevent
§ 109-10 § 109-14
109:302
§ 109-15. Inspections; testing.
The purchasing authority shall inspect, or supervise the inspection of, all
deliveries of supplies or contractual services to determine their
conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract.
§ 109-16. Surplus supplies and equipment.
All departments shall submit to the purchasing authority, at such times and
in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies
and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete,
worn out or scrapped.
delays in the work of the using agency which may vitally affect the life,
health or convenience of citizens.
(1) Recorded explanation. Each department head shall send to the
purchasing authority a requisition and a copy of the delivery
record, together with a full written report of the circumstances of
the emergency. The report shall be filed with the Council as
provided in Subsection A(2) above.
(2) Emergency procedure. The purchasing authority shall prescribe
the rules and regulations under which emergency purchases by
department heads may be made.
A. Inspection by using agency. The purchasing authority shall have the
authority to authorize departments having the staff and facilities for
adequate inspection to inspect all deliveries made to the departments
under rules and regulations which the purchasing authority shall
prescribe.
B. Tests. The purchasing authority shall have the authority to require
chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples
of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and
conformance with the specifications. In the performance of such tests,
the purchasing authority shall have the authority to make use of
laboratory facilities of any department of the municipal government or
of any outside laboratory.
A. Transfer. The purchasing authority shall have the authority to transfer
surplus stock to other departments.
B. Sale.
(1) The purchasing authority shall have the authority to sell, trade or
exchange all supplies which have become unsuitable for public use.
(2) Competitive bidding. Sales under this subsection shall be made to
the highest responsible bidder and in conformance with § 109-9 or
109-10, whichever is applicable.
§ 109-14 PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS § 109-17
109:303
§ 109-17. Cooperative purchasing.
The purchasing authority shall have the authority to join with other units of
government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the
Municipality would be served.
§ 109-18. Administration of budget.
The responsibility for administering the annual budget of the Municipality
is vested in the Municipal Manager. The Municipal Manager can delegate
this authority and responsibility to the respective department heads.
§ 109-19. Records to be kept.
§ 109-20. Selection of professional consultants.
A. Procedure. Managing the budget involves ensuring that all purchases
are made within the policy guidelines established by the Municipal
Council for the work to be performed in that year. This requires
monitoring each department's purchases against the total
appropriation for that department to ensure that sufficient funds are
available for each purchase.
B. Department head responsibility. Before requesting any goods or
service, it is the responsibility of each department head to ensure that
the proposed expenditure is necessary for the competition of the work
program authorized in the annual budget and that budgeted funds are
available. By signing the requisition order, the department head is
signifying that this is true. If a department exceeds its budget, a
detailed request for additional funds will be sent to the Municipal
Manager explaining why the funds are necessary and why the budget
was exceeded.
C. On a bimonthly basis, the Director of Administration will review the
fiscal status of the department with the department head and submit a
report of each meeting to the Municipal Manager.
A. Department heads. Each department head is responsible for
maintaining all records necessary to validate a departmental purchase
for a period of three months after final payment for that purchase has
been made.
B. Purchasing authority. The purchasing authority is responsible for
maintaining a complete record of all municipal purchases for a period of
seven years following the completion of the annual financial audit.
A. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COUNCIL COMMITTEE — An ad hoc committee of the Municipal
Council appointed by the Deputy Mayor having jurisdiction of the
involved project.
§ 109-17 § 109-20
109:304
FIRM — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association or
other legal entity permitted by law to practice architecture,
engineering or land surveying or to provide management consultant
services in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Those services within the scope of
practice of architecture, engineering, land surveying, finance, planning,
management and administration, as defined by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or those performed by any architect,
professional engineer, registered land surveyor, management or finance
consultant, planner, etc., in connection with this professional
employment or practice.
STAFF COMMITTEE — The Committee on Standardization and
Specification.
B. Roster of consultants.
(1) The purchasing authority or designated staff will maintain a roster,
classified by category of professional service, of qualified firms
interested in performing professional services for the Municipality.
Names of firms will be placed on the roster upon their request, at
the request of members of the Municipal Council or when
recommended by municipal departments.
(2) Each firm meeting the following minimum qualifications shall be
deemed to be a qualified firm and meeting the qualifications of the
Municipality:
(a) Duly authorized to conduct business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in its particular profession.
(b) Professional registration by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania when required.
(c) At least one staff professional assigned to each project.
Adequacy of personnel will be determined on a contract-bycontract
basis against the Municipality's estimate of manpower
required to perform the work in the desired time frame.
(3) Resumes and data.
(a) Each person or firm listed on the roster shall be responsible for
maintaining a current resume describing his or its
qualifications and experience with the purchasing authority's
office.
(b) Data which should be included is as follows:
[1] The firm name, address and telephone numbers.
[2] The year established and former firm names.
[3] The types of services for which it is qualified.
§ 109-20 PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS § 109-20
109:305
[4] The names of principals of the firm and states in which
they are registered.
[5] The names of key personnel, with experience of each and
length of time in the organization.
[6] The number of staff available for assignment.
[7] Outside consultants and associates usually retained.
[8] A list of completed projects on which the firm was
principal consultant.
[9] Current projects underway and the estimated cost of each.
[10] Data gathering methods, if appropriate.
[11] Evaluation techniques, if appropriate.
C. Classes of services. Projects will be divided into two classes, as follows:
(1) Class A: Services for projects where fees will exceed $2,500. The
members of the Council Committee will act as the screening and
selection committee and recommend the firm and appropriate
contract to the Municipal Council for its approval.
(2) Class B: Services for projects where fees will not exceed $2,500.
The firm will be selected by a Staff Committee, which will
recommend the firm and appropriate contract to the Municipal
Council for its approval.
D. General procedures and responsibilities.
(1) Project initiation. When a department of the Municipality identifies
a project for which professional services will be necessary, the
department will draft a scope of services for the specific project.
This scope of services will be submitted to the Committee on
Standardization and Specification for authorization to initiate the
project and a determination as to whether the Council Committee
or the Staff Committee will act as the screening and selection
committee.
(2) Expressions of interest. The purchasing authority will contact those
firms on the roster for a written expression of interest in the
specific project. The request should invite comment as to the
special experience of the firm for the project being considered and
describe previous experience with similar projects and the
availability of the firm to provide required service within any time
limitation.
(3) A request for proposal will be advertised in a newspaper of general
circulation as defined by § 109-9 of this chapter.
(4) Initial screening and requests for proposals.
§ 109-20 § 109-20
109:306
(a) The expressions of interest will then be presented to the
appropriate screening and selection Committee for initial
screening. Factors to be determined in the initial screening will
include:
[1] Specialized experience in the type of work required.
[2] The record of the firm in accomplishing work on other
projects in the required time.
[3] The quality of work previously performed by the firm for
the Municipality.
[4] Recent experience showing accuracy of cost estimates.
[5] Community relations, including evidence of sensitivity to
citizen concerns.
[6] The geographic location of the principal offices of the firm.
(b) The Committee shall designate at least three firms which will
be requested to present detailed proposals on the project.
(5) Detailed proposals.
(a) Firms submitting detailed proposals will be asked to provide a
resume of the proposed project supervisor, the name of the
principal who would be responsible for the work, the amount of
work presently under way, the ability of the firm to meet
required time schedules and a description of how the project
would be conducted, as well as other facts they wish to present
in favor of their firm.
(b) A contract form will be provided to each firm asked to provide
a detailed proposal so that the firm can be fully informed of the
parameters of the proposed project and general municipal
contracting policies. The contract form will be prepared by the
department responsible for the project with the assistance of
the Solicitor.
(6) Interview and selection. Upon receipt of the detailed proposals, the
selection and screening Committee will be convened to review the
proposals, interview the prospective firms and make the final
selection as to the firm for the project.
(7) Contract negotiation.
(a) The selected firm will then be requested to come in for a final
conference with the screening and selection Committee to
define precisely the scope of service to be provided and to
submit a proposal covering the compensation requirements for
the work. A fee is then negotiated for the project, which is fair
and reasonable. A contract is prepared and submitted to the
§ 109-20 PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS § 109-20
109:307
§ 109-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this
chapter, as determined after hearing before the District Justice having
jurisdiction thereof or other proper judicial body, shall be fined a sum
not to exceed $5,000 or the maximum allowable under other application
provisions of law, whichever is greater. Said fine shall be applicable for each
and every offense and, in default of payment thereof, the violator shall be
committed to the Allegheny County Jail for a period of not more than 30
days.
Chapter 116
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 6.
Solicitor for review and then submitted to the Municipal
Manager for presentation to the Municipal Council for
approval.
(b) If, after reasonable effort, a contract cannot be negotiated, the
negotiations with the designated firm shall be terminated, and
negotiations shall be started with the next firm recommended.
E. Prohibition against contingent fees.
(1) Each contract entered into by the Municipal Council for
professional services shall contain a prohibition against contingent
fees as follows:
"The consultant providing professional services warrants that he
has not employed or retained any company or person, other than
a bona fide employee working solely for him, to solicit or secure
a person, company, corporation, individual or firm, any fees,
commission, percentage, gift or any other consideration
contingent upon or resulting from the award or making of this
agreement."
(2) For the breach or violation of the foregoing provision, the
Municipal Council shall have the right to terminate the agreement
without liability and, at its discretion, to deduct from the contract
price or otherwise recover the full amount of such fee, commission,
percentage, gift or consideration.
F. The Municipal Council in its sole and absolute discretion may waive any
and all aforementioned procedural requirements when deemed in the
best interests of the Municipality.
§ 109-20 § 109-21
116:308
§ 116-1. Requirements established.
All municipal employees and officials shall be domiciled in the Municipality
within six months of their initial appointment or employment and shall
continuously maintain their domicile in the Municipality throughout their
term of employment by the Municipality. All municipal employees and
officials presently appointed or employed by the Municipality shall be
domiciled in the Municipality within six months of the effective date of this
chapter and shall thereafter continuously maintain their domicile in the
Municipality throughout the term of their employment by the Municipality
unless otherwise agreed by contract with the Municipality. It is the intent
of this chapter that all employees of the Municipality be domiciled, live and
reside in the Municipality.
Chapter 123
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
CHARTER REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation of various
positions — See §§ C-11, C-31, C-35 and C-69.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 93.
Personnel policies and benefits — See Ch. 97.
Social security — See Ch. 131.
Chapter 127
SENIOR CITIZENS ACTIVITY CENTER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 274.
§ 127-1. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide a framework for
the orderly utilization of the Monroeville Senior Citizens Activity Center
by all senior citizen residents, guests and friends in a safe, hospitable
and effective manner. It is intended that no senior citizen be unreasonably
denied use of the center. Use of the center cannot be denied simply for
failure to join or be admitted (due to quotas) to one of the several clubs or
organizations for senior citizens.
§ 109-21 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 127-2
123:309
§ 127-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MONROEVILLE COUNCIL OF SENIOR CITIZENS, INC. — A nonprofit
corporation composed of representatives from each of the senior citizen
organizations in Monroeville and Pitcairn representing 100 senior citizens
or more and having officers and an executive committee.
SENIOR CITIZEN — Any resident of Monroeville or Pitcairn who has
reached an age of 55 or more.
SENIOR CITIZEN FRIEND — Any person who has reached an age of 55 or
more.
§ 127-3. License to operate facility.
The Municipality of Monroeville will provide an exclusive license to operate
the Monroeville Senior Citizens Activity Center, in accordance with these
policies, regulations and rules, to the Monroeville Council of Senior
Citizens, Inc.
§ 127-4. Duties of Municipality.
A. General. The Municipality of Monroeville shall provide the facility and
technical assistance for the operation of senior citizen programs. The
Monroeville Council of Senior Citizens, Inc., shall provide for the
operation of programs for senior citizens within the facility.
B. Specified responsibilities of the Municipality of Monroeville:
(1) Discuss and act on program support needs. A representative from
the Municipal Council will serve as an ex officio member of the
Monroeville Council of Senior Citizens, Inc., for the purpose of
discussing and communicating program support needs, as well as
other matters affecting the center's utilization and the senior
citizens program in general in Monroeville.
(2) Building maintenance and repair. The Municipality shall provide for
building and grounds maintenance and repairs, as well as the
responsibility for utility costs and proper insurances.
(3) Approval of policies, regulations and rules.108 The Municipality of
Monroeville, through the Municipal Council, shall approve all
policies, regulations and rules governing operation of the center
when recommended for initiation or change by the Monroeville
Council of Senior Citizens, Inc., and shall serve a final arbitrator on
disputes which may arise over facility operation with the public and
the Monroeville Council of Senior Citizens, Inc.
108. Editor's Note: The rules and regulations, as well as the bylaws, of the Monroeville Council
of Senior Citizens, Inc., are on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Municipal Manager.
§ 127-2 § 127-5
127:310
§ 127-5. Duties of Monroeville Council of Senior Citizens, Inc.
A. Program provision. The Monroeville Council of Senior Citizens, Inc.,
shall provide a varied program of senior citizen related activities based
upon the needs of Monroeville senior citizens, which could include
social entertainment, leisure learning and competitive, health, welfare,
educational and limited travel opportunities for the senior citizens of
Monroeville utilizing the Senior Citizens Activity Center as the location
or staging area for such activities.
B. Schedule of building activities. The Monroeville Council of Senior
Citizens, Inc., shall be responsible for scheduling all activities within
the Senior Citizens Activity Center.
C. Staffing the center. The Monroeville Council of Senior Citizens, Inc.,
shall be responsible for the staffing of the building so that the person or
persons responsible for the building and contents are present during all
scheduled activities. Staff persons shall be generally familiar with
operational policy of the center and may be volunteers.
D. Expansion of equipment and facilities. In accordance with this
responsibility, the Monroeville Council of Senior Citizens, Inc., has the
opportunity to submit a multiyear plan of improvements to the
Monroeville Municipal Council through the Municipal Manager for
approval prior to undertaking any expansion or upgrade. Once
approved, the responsibility for fundraising and implementation is that
of the Monroeville Council of Senior Citizens, Inc.
E. Provision of public information on center activities and annual report.
(1) The Monroeville Council of Senior Citizens, Inc., shall provide a
system of public information for events, programs and activities of
the center, which shall be available to all users of the center and
the general senior citizen public.
(2) An annual written report detailing center activities utilization and
highlights shall be provided to the Municipal Council for review.
F. Financial planning and control. The Monroeville Council of Senior
Citizens, Inc., shall submit an annual financial plan (budget) by
November 1 of each year, identifying revenues and expenditures for
previous years, as well as plans for the upcoming year, to the Municipal
Manager. The municipal accounting system shall be utilized for all
financial transactions. The Monroeville Council of Senior Citizens, Inc.,
may adopt policies and procedures for disbursement and control of
finances. The Municipality of Monroeville shall provide assistance in
this regard and shall provide an annual independent audit of the
Monroeville Council of Senior Citizens, Inc., financial transactions
related to the center's operation.
G. Plan for center utilization by senior citizens with special problems. The
Monroeville Council of Senior Citizens, Inc., shall develop, in
§ 127-5 SENIOR CITIZENS ACTIVITY CENTER § 127-5
127:311
§ 127-6. Enforcement of regulations.
The executive committee of the Monroeville Council of Senior Citizens,
Inc., shall be the enforcement authority for operational policies, regulations
and rules for the center and shall have the authority to cause wrongful
acts contrary to the above-mentioned policies, regulations and rules to
be terminated or expel the perpetrators of such wrongful acts from the
center or to call the Municipal Police Department to arrest and detain such
individual or individuals.
§ 127-7. Forfeiture of license.
Failure to reasonably abide by the provisions of this chapter shall result
in forfeiture of the exclusive license granted upon majority vote by the
Municipal Council.
consultation with a representative from the Monroeville Human Needs
and Resources Advisory Board, programs, and with the Monroeville
Recreation and Parks Board activities, which are accessible to all senior
citizens, including those with special physical, emotional and social
needs or problems.
H. Development and enforcement of center policies, regulations and rules.
The Monroeville Council of Senior Citizens, Inc., shall develop, with the
advice and input from the representative from the Municipal Council,
policies, regulations and rules for the center's operation, for approval
by the Monroeville Municipal Council, to include but not be limited to
the following topics:
(1) Use policy.
(2) Scheduling procedures.
(3) The days and hours of operation.
(4) The setting of fees, if any.
(5) Alcoholic beverages.
(6) Fundraising activities.
(7) Use of surrounding grounds.
(8) Prohibited activities and conduct.
§ 127-5 § 127-7
127:312
Chapter 131
SOCIAL SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 93.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 97.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 123.
§ 131-1. Legislative findings.
It is the considered opinion of this body that the extension of the social
security system to employees and officers of the Municipality of Monroeville
will be of great benefit not only to the employees and officers of the
Municipality, by providing that said employees and officers may participate
in the provisions of the old age and survivors insurance system, but will
also be of great benefit to the Municipality of Monroeville by enabling it to
attract and retain in employment the best of personnel and thus increase
the efficiency of its government.
§ 131-2. Legislative authority.
The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in regular session, enacted a statute, known as Act. No.
491,109 which is the enabling act provided for in § 218 of Public Law 734,
81st Congress, which designated the Secretary of Labor and Industry of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act as the state agency to implement
the coverage of employees and officers under said old age and survivors
insurance system.
§ 131-3. Participation authorized.
The Municipality of Monroeville is hereby authorized to participate in such
social security system program and to execute and deliver to the state
agency a plan, or plans, and agreement, required under § 6 of said enabling
act110 and the Social Security Act, to extend coverage to employees and
officers of the Municipality of Monroeville and do all other necessary things
to effectuate coverage of employees and officers under the old age and
survivors insurance system.
§ 131-4. System of payroll deduction.
The Municipal Secretary is hereby authorized to establish a system of
payroll deduction, to be matched by equal payments by the Municipality of
Monroeville, to be made into the Contribution Fund of the Social Security
109. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq.
110. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 206.
§ 127-7 SOCIAL SECURITY § 131-4
131:313
Act through the office of the state agency, and to make charges of this
tax to the fund or funds from which wage or salary payments are issued
to employees of the Municipality of Monroeville. Such payments are to
be made in accordance with the provisions of the law and regulations
promulgated by the state agency and the Federal Security Administrator.
Such payments which are delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2 of
1% per month until such time as payments are made.
§ 131-5. Appropriation of funds; execution of agreement.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the
Municipality of Monroeville in the necessary amounts to pay into the
contribution fund as provided in § 4 of the enabling act111 and in accordance
with the plan, or plans, and agreement. Authority is given to the President
of Council and the Municipal Secretary of the Municipality of Monroeville
to enter into and execute an agreement with the state agency, which
agreement shall be in accordance with Act. No. 491112 and with paragraph
218 of the Social Security Act. Such plan and agreement shall provide that
the participation of the Municipality of Monroeville shall commence as of
January 1, 1951.
PART II, GENERAL LEGISLATION
Chapter 147
AIRPLANES AND FLYING OBJECTS, RADIO-CONTROLLED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 263.
Noise control — See Ch. 264.
Park, recreation and conservation
areas — See Ch. 274.
§ 147-1. Unlawful acts.
The use, operation or flying of radio-controlled or uncontrolled-powered
model airplanes, rockets or other flying objects of similar nature is deemed
to be a public nuisance and a danger to life and property and is therefore
prohibited within the Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 147-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
111. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 204.
112. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq.
§ 131-4 § 147-2
147:314
POWERED — Any such model airplanes, rockets or other flying objects of a
similar nature that are given motive force to fly, either wholly or partially,
through electricity, gasoline-driven engines or other chemical means.
§ 147-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or shall
cause or direct others to violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon summary conviction thereof before any District Justice, pay a fine for
each such violation in a sum not exceeding $600, together with the costs of
prosecution, and, upon failure to pay such fine and costs forthwith, shall be
confined in the Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 151
ALARM DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 162.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 176.
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 206.
Noise control — See Ch. 264.
§ 147-2 ALARM DEVICES § 147-3
151:315

ARTICLE I
Burglar Alarms
[Adopted 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 1928113]
§ 151-1. Definitions.
The following definitions apply for the purposes of this article:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any device designed for the detection of an
unauthorized entry on the premises or unlawful act and which, when
activated, gives a signal, either visual, audible or both, or transmits or
causes to be transmitted a signal.
CALENDAR YEAR — January 1 through December 31.
CHARGE — An amount assessed a subscriber protected by an alarm system
for a false alarm only.
FALSE ALARM — An alert by an alarm system which, upon investigation,
discloses that no burglary, attempted burglary, breaking, breaking and
entering, robbery or other acts for which it is designed to initiate police
investigation or action has occurred. It shall not include alerts caused by
power outages or weather conditions.
SUBSCRIBER — An owner or lessor of a premises equipped with an alarm
system.
§ 151-2. False alarms; charges; failure to pay.
A. Whenever a false alarm is received for a premises served by an alarm
system, the subscriber shall be charged an amount in accordance with
Ch. 194, Fees. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
B. The failure of a subscriber to pay a false alarm charge shall result in the
filing of a citation before the issuing authority to institute a summary
criminal proceeding.
113. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. I, Burglar Alarms, adopted
8-10-1971 by Ord. No. 752.
§ 151-1 ALARM DEVICES § 151-2
151:317

ARTICLE II
Combustion Detection Devices
[Adopted 2-14-1978 by Ord. No. 1106]
§ 151-3. Installation required.
In every one- and two-family dwelling, within 30 days after title transfer or
change of occupancy, a product of combustion detection shall be installed.
§ 151-4. Product standards.
Such products of combustion detection shall contain the Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., listing seal and be installed in accordance with National
Fire Protection Standard Number 74.
§ 151-3 ALARM DEVICES § 151-4
151:319

ARTICLE III
Alarm Installation and Use
[Adopted 4-14-1998 by Ord. No. 2074114]
§ 151-5. Definitions.
A. The following definitions apply for purposes of this article:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any device designed for the detection of an
unauthorized entry on the premises, unlawful act, fire or any
emergency that alerts a municipal organization of its own commission
or occurrence and when activated gives a signal, either visual, audible
or both, or transmits or causes to be transmitted a signal.
APPROVED — Meeting the requirements of this article and approved
by the Municipality.
CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM — A system or group of systems, the
operations of which are signaled to, recorded in, maintained and
supervised from an approved central station, in which there are
competent and experienced observers and operators in attendance at
all times whose duty it shall be, upon receipt of a signal, to take
such action as shall be required under the rules established for their
guidance. Such systems shall be controlled and operated by a person,
firm or corporation whose principal business is the furnishing and
maintaining of supervised protective signaling service and who has no
interest in the protected properties.
COMMUNICATION CENTER — That building or portion of a building
used to house the central operating part of the alarm system, usually
the place where the necessary testing, switching, receiving,
retransmitting and power supply devices are located, and is the public
safety answering point of the Municipality.
DIGITAL COMMUNICATOR — An electronic device which is
interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a
predetermined telephone number and transmit a coded signal.
HOUSEHOLD WARNING SYSTEM — A system of devices that produce
an audible alarm signal in the household for the purpose of notifying
the occupants of the presence of an emergency so they may evacuate
the premises.
LOCAL SYSTEM — A system that gives a signal, either visual, audible,
or both, on the interior or exterior portion of the property/business
but does not leave that structure/business by wire or radio wave to a
remote receiving location.
MEDICAL ALARM — Any device which, when activated, gives a signal,
either visual, audible, or both, or transmits or causes to be transmitted
a signal to signify the need for emergency medical services personnel.
114. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. III, Alarm
Installation and Use, adopted 6-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1757, as amended.
§ 151-5 ALARM DEVICES § 151-5
151:321
NUISANCE ALARM — Any alarm signal that alerts a municipal
organization which is not the result of an actual or threatened
emergency requiring their immediate response. Nuisance alarms
include negligently or accidentally activated signals; signals which are
the result of faulty, malfunctioning or improperly installed or
maintained equipment; signals which are purposely activated to
summon emergency services in nonemergency situations; and alarm
signals for which the actual cause is not determined. Alarms occurring
within the first three months of initial installation of a system due to
system malfunction shall not be considered nuisance alarms, provided
that the Municipal Fire Official is presented with sufficient evidence
to verify that the causes of these alarms are being investigated, and
corrective action is being taken.
PROPRIETARY PROTECTIVE SIGNALING SYSTEM — A protective
signaling system under constant supervision by competent and
experienced personnel in a central supervising station at the property
protected. The system includes equipment and other facilities required
to permit the operators to test and operate the system and, upon
receipt of a signal, to take such action as shall be required under the
rules established for their guidance by the authority having jurisdiction.
The system shall be maintained and tested by the owner, personnel
or an organization satisfactory to the authority having jurisdiction.
Noncontiguous properties under a single ownership may be considered
as the property and be connected to a single central supervising
station.
PUBLIC FIRE SERVICE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — A municipal
fire alarm system, telephone facilities and Fire Department radio
facilities, all of which fulfill two principal functions: that of receiving
fire alarms or other emergency calls from the public and that of
retransmitting these alarms and emergency calls to fire companies and
other interested agencies.
PUBLIC SAFETY ANSWERING POINT — A communication center that
serves the consolidated incoming and outgoing communication needs of
the emergency medical service, the fire service, the police service and
other emergency services of the Municipality.
REMOTE STATION PROTECTIVE SIGNALING SYSTEM — A system of
electrically supervised circuits employing a direct circuit connection
between signaling devices at the protected premises and signalreceiving
equipment in a remote station, such as a municipal
communication center or fire alarm headquarters, or other location
acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction.
SINGLE-UNIT SIGNALING EQUIPMENT — Any self-contained sensing
and signaling device which does not send a signal by wire or radio
waves.
TAPE DIALER — An electronic device which is interconnected to a
telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone
§ 151-5 § 151-5
151:322
§ 151-6. Communications center established.
The Eastern Regional Communication Center (ERCC) is hereby established
as the recognized remote station protection signaling system of the
Municipality, public fire service communication system of the Municipality
and the public safety answering point of the Municipality.
§ 151-7. Single-unit signaling equipment.
Single-unit signaling equipment is exempt from the provisions of this
article.
§ 151-8. Annual permits; fee.
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaged in
selling, installing and/or maintaining any alarm system in the Municipality
of Monroeville or engaged in monitoring any non-BOCA fire alarm system
of the Municipality shall obtain an annual permit from the Municipality
of Monroeville to engage in such activity. Said permit shall contain the
identity, the principal place (address) of business and telephone number of
the permittee, the identities of all employees doing work in the Municipality
and the name of the permittee's bonding company, if any. The annual fee
for said permit shall be $250, except that the fee may be waived in the
case of those entities installing and/or maintaining their own proprietary
alarm system which is not required by the provisions of the 1996 BOCA
Building and Fire Prevention Codes. All subject systems shall be reported to
the Municipality.
§ 151-9. Central stations; permit required; fee.
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity having a listed
central station and desiring to monitor any BOCA-required fire alarm
system in the Municipality of Monroeville shall apply for an annual permit
from the Municipality of Monroeville to become an approved central station
of the jurisdiction. Said permit application shall contain the identity, the
principal place (address) of business and telephone number of the
permittee, the identities of all employees doing work arising in the
Municipality and the name of the permittee's bonding company, if any. The
annual fee for said permit shall be $250. A recognized central station of
the jurisdiction shall provide at no cost to the Municipality two separate
methods of retransmitting signals to the Public Safety Communications
Center of the Municipality. One of the retransmission means shall be
supervised so that interruption of retransmission circuit communication
integrity will result in a trouble signal at the central station. The
number and transmit a prerecorded voice message of an alarm
condition.
B. Definitions not defined in this article shall be as defined in NFPA 72
(1993).
§ 151-5 ALARM DEVICES § 151-9
151:323
retransmission means shall meet the requirements of Section 4-3.4.4.2 of
NFPA 72 (1993).
§ 151-10. Registration required; permit; fee.
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity installing,
owning, possessing and/or using an operative alarm system in the
Municipality of Monroeville shall register said system with the Municipality
of Monroeville and receive a permit for said system as required by the Fire
Prevention Code and/or Monroeville Police Department. The permit shall
A. The retransmission means may be supervised but are not limited to:
(1) A supervised circuit (channel) provided with suitable voicetransmitting,
receiving and automatic recording equipment. The
circuit may be a telephone circuit that cannot be used for any other
purpose, is provided with a two-way ring-down feature for
supervision between the Municipal Public Safety Communications
Center and the central station with terminal equipment located on
the premises at each end and twenty-four-hour standby power
provided.
(2) Other means may be approved when equivalency can be shown to
the Fire Official, and such means is approved by the Fire Official
and Eastern Regional Communication Center.
B. All approved central stations of the jurisdiction shall meet the
requirements of this section regardless of the number of alarm systems
within the Municipality being monitored by any recognized central
station.
C. No central station shall be eligible for approval by the Municipality
unless it is listed by an approved agency.
D. Each approved central station shall, by January 31 of each year, reapply
for approved central station status. The application shall be in a form as
prescribed by the Fire Official of Monroeville in consultation with the
Executive Director of the Eastern Regional Communications Center.
The annual permit fee shall be $250. Each annual renewal request shall
be accompanied by a detailed list of all clients serviced within the
Municipality and a registration fee of $25 per client. Each client list
shall contain the name, address and telephone number of each client as
well as each client's emergency contact names and phone numbers.
E. Each approved central station terminating monitoring service of a
client, for any reason, shall notify the Monroeville Fire Official and the
Executive Director of the Eastern Regional Communication Center
within 10 days of such termination. Upon termination of the monitoring
service of a fire alarm system required to be monitored by the 1996
BOCA Building Code, the Monroeville Fire Official shall also be notified
of such termination by the central station. Failure to follow this
procedure will result in withdrawal of central station approval.
§ 151-9 § 151-10
151:324
contain the name, principal address and telephone number of the permittee,
address where the alarm is installed, the type of alarm system, identity and
address of the signaling equipment manufacturer and the names, addresses
and telephone numbers of persons to contact in an emergency. The
registration permit fee shall be $100, and the permit shall be effective for
the duration of the possession and/or use of the system by the original
permittee.
§ 151-11. Connection to communications center.
Specific requirements pertaining to the connection of various types of alarm
systems to the Municipal Public Safety Communications Center shall be as
follows:
§ 151-12. Equipment standards.
A. All fire-signaling protective annunciating devices, units or systems as
required by the 1996 BOCA Basic Building and Fire Prevention Codes
shall be connected to the recognized remote station protective
signaling system of the Municipality at the Eastern Regional
Communication Center (ERCC) by means of approved central stations
only.
B. All fire-signaling protective annunciating devices, units or systems not
required by the 1996 BOCA Basic Building and Fire Prevention Codes
may connect to the Eastern Regional Communication Center by means
of an approved method.
C. All holdup alarms shall connect to the Eastern Regional Communication
Center. Holdup alarms may be connected by approved central station
only.
D. Any burglary alarm may connect to the Eastern Regional
Communication Center by means of an approved central station or
other central stations.
E. Any emergency medical alarm may connect to the Eastern Regional
Communication Center by means of an approved central station or
other central station.
F. In the event that one given alarm system reports more than one type of
alarm condition by means of a single connection, then only one permit
shall be required for that connection.
A. Alarm equipment shall meet standards established by the
Underwriters' Laboratory, Factory Mutual Insurance Association,
Factory Insurance Association or National Fire Protection Association.
Any commercial fire alarm installer shall certify system installation, in
writing, to the Fire Official before placing said system into service.
Such written certification shall be in the form of Figure 1-7.2.1, Fire
Alarm System Certification and Description Certificate of NFPA 72
(1993 Edition). All fire alarm systems shall be under the supervision of a
§ 151-10 ALARM DEVICES § 151-12
151:325
§ 151-13. Installation standards; automatic reset; tape dialers.
No fire alarm may be installed contrary to the provisions of the 1996 BOCA
Basic Code, Fire Prevention Code and NFPA Standard 72 of 1993. No
alarm may be installed contrary to the provisions of the National Electrical
Code NFPA 70 (1996). Further, all local alarms shall be equipped with an
automatic reset after 1/2 hour of alarm status and have another secure
means of being reset. No tape dialers may be sold, installed or used in
Monroeville which are programmed to dial the Eastern Regional
Communication Center number.
§ 151-14. Nuisance alarms.
responsible, qualified person or organization satisfactory to the Fire
Official, who shall, under contractual agreement, make all inspections,
tests and repairs promptly. Said person or organization shall comply
with all applicable laws, licenses, ordinances, rules or regulations.
B. No commercial fire alarm system shall be approved for service by the
Fire Official until he is presented with a written copy of a contractual
agreement (between system owner and qualified service provider)
which states required service maintenance and testing is to be provided
and at what scheduled time periods. Said maintenance agreement shall
be for a minimum five-year period and shall be renewable. The service
maintenance company (or person), and the fire alarm system owner
shall notify the Fire Official upon the cancellation, expiration or
nonrenewal of any fire alarm service maintenance agreement. Failure
to notify the Fire Official of any change in status of a fire alarm service
maintenance agreement/contract shall result in a fine of $25 per day, to
be assessed against the fire alarm system owner, for each day until
evidence of a new agreement/contract is presented to the Fire Official.
Upon first issuance, or renewal of any service maintenance agreement,
a copy shall be forwarded to the Fire Official.
A. If there are more than two nuisance alarms per ninety-day period from
a fire alarm system, the Fire Official may assess a fine pursuant to this
section, against an alarm system owner for the third and any
subsequent nuisance alarms according to the following schedule:
(1) Third nuisance alarm: $75.
(2) Fourth nuisance alarm: $150.
(3) Fifth nuisance alarm: $300.
(4) Sixth nuisance alarm and any subsequent nuisance alarm: $600.
B. The Fire Official shall be notified, in writing, of any chargeable nuisance
alarm by the Fire Chief within three days of its occurrence. Notice of
citation regarding any nuisance alarm shall be given to the system
owner in writing. For the sixth and any subsequent alarm from a
particular alarm system (in any ninety-day period), the Fire Official may
§ 151-12 § 151-14
151:326
§ 151-15. Testing.
The Executive Director of the Eastern Regional Communication Center,
Monroeville Fire Official or Municipal Fire Chief may order a test of a fire
alarm system at any time; the Chief of Police or the Executive Director of
the Eastern Regional Communication Center may order a test of any nonfire
alarm system at any time during normal business hours or after a real
or nuisance alarm has occurred.
§ 151-16. Revocation or suspension of system permit.
In addition to other authority, with 30 days' written notice, the Monroeville
Fire Official or Executive Director of the Eastern Regional Communication
Center, after consultation and approval from the Monroeville Fire Official,
may revoke or suspend any fire alarm system permit issued pursuant hereto
upon determining that:
assess an additional fine of $300 for each day after the date of such
nuisance alarm, until the fire system owner provides satisfactory
evidence of the suspected cause determination and attempted repairs.
Satisfactory evidence shall be in written form from a qualified alarm
service company and shall state the suspected causes and attempted
remedies. With respect to any nuisance alarm for which an alarm
system owner is cited, such owner shall have the right to appeal the
decision of the Fire Official according to the procedures established
in Section 121.0 of Ordinance No. 2021115 and Section F-113.0 of
Ordinance No. 2022116 and/or the legal procedures as established by
law for proceedings at the Pennsylvania Local District Court level. The
imposition of any such additional daily fines shall be suspended during
the pendency of any appeal proceedings. If a fire alarm system owner
appeals under Ordinance No. 2021,117 Ordinance No. 2022118 and/or at
the Pennsylvania Local District Court level, then any fines shall be held
in abeyance until final resolution of the appeal process; if any appellant
is successful in such appeal process, no fine shall be assessed; if the
appellant is unsuccessful in such appeal process, total fines shall be
calculated from the day of the filing of the formal appeal and all days
preceding the formal appeal. There shall be a fine assessed of $50
per occurrence for the unauthorized resetting of an alarm system from
an alarm to a secure condition. Any nuisance alarm from a non-fire
system shall be subject to the penalties established by Ordinance 1928
of 1995.119
A. The application for the permit contains a statement of material fact
which is false;
115. Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Building Construction.
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. 206, Fire Prevention.
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Building Construction.
118. Editor's Note: See Ch. 206, Fire Prevention.
119. Editor's Note: See Art. I, Burglar Alarms, of this chapter.
§ 151-14 ALARM DEVICES § 151-16
151:327
§ 151-17. Revocation or suspension of non-fire permit.
In addition to other authority, with 30 days' written notice, the Chief of
Police or the Executive Director of the Eastern Regional Communication
Center, after consultation and approval from the Monroeville Chief of Police,
may revoke or suspend any non-fire permit issued pursuant hereto upon
determining that:
§ 151-18. Violations and penalties.
Upon 30 days' notice, in writing, from the Fire Official to comply with the
provisions of this article regarding fire alarm systems, any person, firm,
partnership or corporation failing to meet the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine of $300 per day upon being found in violation of
this article after a hearing before the Local District Justice. Upon 30 days'
notice, in writing, from the Chief of Police to comply with the provisions of
this article relating to non-fire alarm systems, any person, firm, partnership
or corporation failing to meet the provisions of this article shall be subject
to a fine of $300 per day upon being found in violation of this article after
a hearing before the Local District Magistrate. This section shall not apply
to orders pertaining to nuisance alarms as permitted by § 151-14 of this
article.
§ 151-19. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this article shall be construed, interpreted or applied to
abrogate, nullify or abolish any law, ordinance or code adopted by the
Municipality governing the construction, alteration, addition, repair,
removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of alarms
specifically provided herein when any provision of this article is found to be
in conflict with any building, zoning, safety, health or other applicable law,
ordinance or code of the Municipality existing on the effective date of this
B. The permittee has failed to comply with the provisions of this article or
other related administrative regulations, ordinances, resolutions or
statutes; or
C. An alarm system is negligently installed, used or maintained. More than
12 nuisance alarms within any three-hundred-sixty-five-day period shall
be one measure of negligent use and/or maintenance.
A. The application for the permit contains a statement of material fact
which is false;
B. The permittee has failed to comply with the provisions of this article or
other related administrative regulations, ordinances, resolutions or
statutes; or
C. An alarm system is negligently installed, used or maintained. More than
12 nuisance alarms within any three-hundred-sixty-five-day period shall
be one measure of negligent use and/or maintenance.
§ 151-16 § 151-19
151:328
article or hereafter adopted, the provision of which established the higher
standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and welfare of the
public shall prevail.
§ 151-20. Effective date.
The effective date of this article shall be July 1, 1998, or 90 days after
enactment, whichever comes last. The Monroeville Fire Official may grant
an extension not to exceed 90 days to any alarm system failing to meet the
full requirements of this article by that date. Such requests for an extension
must be made in writing and state the reasons for the request. Such request
must be approved by the Fire Official. Failure to comply with this article in
the stipulated time period shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in
this article.
§ 151-19 ALARM DEVICES § 151-20
151:329
Chapter 153
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 151-20 § 151-20
153:330
ARTICLE I
Transfer of Liquor Licenses
[Adopted 4-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2182]
§ 153-1. Request for approval.
Any applicant who desires to purchase a liquor license and then transfer
it into the Municipality of Monroeville or acquire a liquor license for the
economic development must first submit to the Municipality of Monroeville
(the receiving Municipality) a request for approval of the intermunicipal
transfer of the license or issuance of an economic development license.
§ 153-2. Fee and application.
Said request shall be accompanied with an application fee in the amount of
$500; a copy of said application is attached hereto marked Exhibit No. A120
and made part of this chapter.
§ 153-3. Receipt of application.
Said application must be received at least 30 days prior to any public
hearing held by the Municipality for review and comment on said transfer
or issuance.
§ 153-4. Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board application.
Appended to the application shall be a complete and executed copy of
the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board application submitted to the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, which application shall be made part of
the review by the Municipality.
§ 153-5. Public hearing.
The Municipality of Monroeville shall, within 45 days of the request for
approval, hold a public hearing pursuant to public notice concerning the
request for approval and render a decision, by resolution, to approve or
disapprove the applicant's request for intermunicipal transfer of a liquor
license or the issuance of a license for economic development.
§ 153-6. Approval or denial.
The Municipality shall approve the request unless it finds that in doing
so it would adversely affect the welfare, health, peace and morals of the
Municipality or its residents.
120. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the office of the Municipal Manager.
§ 153-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 153-7
153:331
§ 153-7. Appeals.
A decision by the Municipality of Monroeville to deny the request may
be appealed to the Court of Common Pleas in the county in which the
Municipality is located.
§ 153-7 § 153-7
153:332
Chapter 155
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Mercantile (business) licenses — See Ch. 256.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 278.
§ 155-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Mechanical Device
License Ordinance."
§ 155-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings set forth below:
BUSINESS — Carrying on or exercising, whether for gain or profit or
otherwise, within the Municipality of Monroeville any trade or business,
including but not limited to profession, vocation, service, construction,
communication or commercial activity, and making sales to persons or
rendering services from or attributable to a Monroeville office or place of
business.
MECHANICAL DEVICE — Any device, machine or apparatus for the playing
of games and amusements for which a charge for the privilege of playing
is made. This includes but is not limited to devices commonly known as
"pinball machines" on which games are played, movie projectors, devices
commonly known as "kiddie rides" and pool tables.
MUSIC MACHINES — Any device, machine or apparatus for the playing of
music for which a charge for the privilege of playing is made. This includes
but is not limited to devices commonly known as "jukeboxes."
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, unincorporated association
or corporation, nonprofit or otherwise. Whenever used in any provision
prescribing a fine or a penalty, the word "person," as applied to
partnerships, shall mean the partners thereof, and, as applied to
corporations and unincorporated associations, shall mean the officers
thereof.
TAX YEAR — The twelve-month period from January 1 to December 31.
§ 155-3. License application. [Amended 4-9-1985 by Ord. No. 1462;
4-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1977]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation desiring to procure a license
as provided in this chapter shall apply therefor on or before March 15 of
each year in writing to the Manager of the Municipality. Said application
§ 153-7 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 155-3
155:333
shall set forth the name or names, the residence or residences of the person
or persons, firm or corporation so applying to, either with the present and
previous occupation of the applicant and the length of residence at the
present place of residence, the exact name of the owner of the premises
upon which said machine or machines are to be installed and, if the owner
of the premises is not the applicant, then the applicant shall set forth the
length of time which the premises has been leased or otherwise occupied
and whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States of America.
The applicant shall also set forth the description, kind and nature of the
machine or machines to be installed and used. The information required
by this section shall be furnished over the signature or signatures of the
applicant or applicants and shall be verified by oath and affirmation.
§ 155-4. Inspections.
The Municipal Manager or his designated representative shall have the
right at all times to inspect any premises having any mechanical device or
music machine as defined herein, and any person or business in possession
and/or control of any such premises shall permit such inspection at
reasonable times.
§ 155-5. License fees. [Amended 3-12-1991 by Ord. No. 143;
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
§ 155-6. Issuance of sticker; display. [Amended 4-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 1977]
Upon payment of the license fee as provided by this chapter, the Municipal
Manager of the Municipality shall issue a sticker setting forth the number
of the permit for each machine so licensed, the date of issue and the kind
and nature of the machine so licensed, which sticker shall be attached to
the machine or device so permitted, in such manner that the same may be
at all times clearly observable and readable.
§ 155-7. Gambling devices.
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling device or any mechanism which has been judicially
determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary to law.
§ 155-8. Other license fees. [Amended 3-12-1991 by Ord. No. 1743;
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
A license fee as provided in Chapter 194, Fees, is required for any business
having only one mechanical device and a license fee as provided in Chapter
194, Fees, is required for any business having only one music machine.
However, if a business has two mechanical device machines, two music
A. Mechanical device. The fee shall be as provided in Chapter 194, Fees.
B. Music machine. The fee shall be as provided in Chapter 194, Fees.
§ 155-3 § 155-8
155:334
machines or two machines consisting of a combination of the above, a
license fee as set forth in § 155-5 of this chapter must be paid for all such
mechanical devices and music machines.
§ 155-9. Violations and penalties.
Any persons or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction before the District Justice for the
Municipality of Monroeville, be subject to a fine of not less than $200 and
not more than $500, for each offense, or be sentenced and committed to the
county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each and every day that any
machines, as provided under the terms of this chapter, shall be operated
and used in violation thereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
and shall be subject to separate and distinct penalties thereon.
§ 155-10. Legislative authority.
This chapter has been passed under the authority vested in the Council of
the Municipality of Monroeville by Act 511 of the 1965 General Assembly
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, effective January 1, 1966, and its
amendments,121 the terms and provisions of which are hereby accepted and
adopted in accordance with the provision thereof.
§ 155-11. Continuation of tax.
The tax herein levied and imposed shall continue in force on a calendar-year
basis following December 31, 1976, without annual reenactment until such
time as the Council of the Municipality of Monroeville shall change the rate
of tax or, by appropriate ordinance, repeal such tax.
Chapter 162
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 151.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 176.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 187.
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 202.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 206.
Land disturbance — See Ch. 243.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 254.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 290.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 316.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 324.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 328.
Zoning — See Ch. 359.
121. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 155-8 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 155-11
162:335

ARTICLE I
BOCA National Building Code
[Adopted 2-11-1997 by Ord. No. 2021122]
§ 162-1. Standards adopted by reference.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Municipal Manager of the Municipality of Monroeville, being marked
and designated as the "BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth
Edition," as published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc., and modified by this article, be and is hereby adopted
as the Building Code of the Municipality of Monroeville in the State of
Pennsylvania for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of said BOCA National Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 162-3 of this
article.
§ 162-2. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Ordinance No. 1582 of the Municipality of Monroeville and all other
ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 162-3. Amendments to standards; fees; violations and penalties;
compensation of Board.
A. The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
(1) Section 102.4 is amended as follows:
102.4 Exception 1: Where differences occur between this code
and the Allegheny County Department of Health, Article XV,
Plumbing Rules and Regulations, the more stringent provision
shall apply, as approved by the Allegheny County Health
Department Plumbing Division.
(2) Section 113.2.1.1 is added as follows:
113.2.1.1. Approved electrical inspection agencies: Only
electrical inspection agencies fulfilling and conforming to the
requirements of Monroeville Ordinance No. 1939, listed in
Appendix A1,123 shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements as
to qualifications and reliability for the purpose of performing
electrical inspections.
(3) Section 113.2.1.1.2 is added as follows:
122. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 162, Building Construction,
adopted 9-8-1987 by Ord. No. 1582, as amended.
123. Editor's Note: Appendix A1 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 162-1 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 162-3
162:337
113.2.1.1.2 Approved plumbing inspection agencies: Only
plumbing inspectors employed and/or approved under the
Allegheny County Health Department Plumbing Division, Article
XV, Plumbing Rules and Regulations, listed in Appendix A1,124 shall
be deemed to satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and
reliability for the purpose of performing plumbing inspections.
(4) Section 121.2.1 is amended as follows:
121.2.1 Qualifications: Qualifications of the Board of Appeals
shall conform to Monroeville Ordinance No. 1614.125
(5) The following definition is added to Section 202.0:
202.0 Amusement arcades: An area where four or more
mechanical, electrical or physical devices are present, such as but
not limited to games of chance for amusement only, jukeboxes,
amusement rides and devices used for similar purposes.
(6) Section 303.3 is amended as follows:
303.2 Use Group A-2 structures: This use group shall include
all buildings and places of public assembly, without theatrical
stage accessories, designed for occupancy as dance halls,
nightclubs, amusement arcades and for similar purposes,
including all rooms, lobbies and other spaces connected thereto
with a common means of egress and entrance.
(7) Table 417.2, Permitted Control Areas, is amended.126
(8) Section 506.0, Area Modifications, is amended as follows:
506.1 Street frontage increase: Where a building or structure
has more than 25% of the building perimeter fronting on a street
or other unoccupied space, the area limitations specified in Table
503 shall be increased 2% for each 1% of such excess frontage.
The unoccupied space shall be on the same lot or dedicated for
public use, shall not be less than 30 feet (9,144 mm) in width and
shall have access from a street posted by a fire lane not less than
20 feet (5,486 mm) in width.
(9) Section 903.1.1 is added as follows:
124. Editor's Note: Appendix A1 is located at the end of this chapter.
125. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 176, Construction Codes, Uniform, § 176-4.
126. Editor's Note: Table 417.2 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 162-3 § 162-3
162:338
903.1.1 Installations: Before any fire alarm, detection or fire
suppression system is installed, enlarged or extended a permit
shall be secured from the Fire Official. Plans and specifications
shall be required per Section 903.1.2. A fee for each plan
examination, building permit, occupancy permit, and inspection
shall be paid in accordance with the annual fee ordinance of the
Municipality of Monroeville, Pennsylvania.
(10) Section 904.3 is amended as follows:
904.3 Use Group A-2: Where a Use Group A-2 is more than 2,000
square feet (465 m2) in area or is located either above or below
the level of exit discharge of exits that serve the Use Group A-2
fire area, an automatic fire suppression system shall be provided
as follows:
1. Throughout the entire story or floor level where the A-2 Use
Group is located;
2. Throughout all stories and floor levels below the A-2 Use
Group; and
3. Throughout all intervening stories and floor levels between the
A-2 Use Group and the level of exit discharge of exits that
serve the Use Group A-2 fire area, including the level of exit
discharge.
(11) Section 904.5.1 is added as follows:
904.5.1 Fuel dispensing areas: All fuel dispensing areas for
motor vehicles shall be provided throughout with an automatic fire
suppression system at each dispensing device, in accordance with
NFPA No. 17 listed in Appendix A1 of this code.127
(12) Section 917A.0 is added as follows:
917A.0 Water supplies: Per Section F-502.OA BOCA Fire
Prevention Code/1996; Tenth Edition.
(13) Section 921.0, Fire Extinguishers, is amended as follows:
921.2 Where required: A portable fire extinguisher shall be
installed in the following locations in accordance with NFPA No.
10 listed in Chapter 35:
1. In all occupancies in Use Groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, E, F, I-2,
M, R-1, R-2, and S;
2. In all areas containing commercial kitchen exhaust hood
systems;
3. In all areas where fuel is dispensed;
127. Editor's Note: Appendix A1 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 162-3 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 162-3
162:339
4. In all areas where a flammable or combustible liquid is used in
the operation of spraying, coating or dipping;
5. In all occupancies in Use Group I-3 at staff locations. Access
to portable extinguishers shall be permitted to be locked;
6. On each completed floor of buildings under construction,
other than occupancies in Use Group R-3;
7. In any laboratory, shop or other room occupied for similar
purposes; and
8. Where required by the fire prevention code listed in Chapter
35.
(14) Section 922.1.1 is added as follows:
922.1.1 Single-story buildings: All single story buildings shall
comply with Section 923.0.
Exception:
1. All R Use Groups.
(15) Section 923.0 Smoke and Heat Vents, is amended as follows:
923.1 General: All buildings and cell use groups 10,000 square
feet in area not exceeding one story or 65 feet in height shall be
equipped with smoke and heat vents constructed and installed in
accordance with this section.
Exception:
1. Buildings of R Use Group.
(16) Section 923.2.1 is amended as follows:
923.2.1 Releasing devices: Smoke and heat vents shall open
automatically by activation of a photocell smoke detector and a
heat-responsive device rated at 135° F. to 220° F. above ambient.
The releasing mechanism shall be capable of operation such that
the vent shall fully open when the vent is exposed to a timetemperature
gradient that reaches an air temperature of 500° F.,
within five minutes. Vents shall also be capable of being opened by
an approved manual operation.
(17) Table 923.2, Smoke and Heat Vent Size and Spacing, is
amended.128
(18) Section 924.0 Supervision, is amended as follows:
128. Editor's Note: Table 923.2 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 162-3 § 162-3
162:340
924.1 Fire suppression systems: All automatic fire suppression
systems required for occupancies in Use Groups A, B, E, F, H, I, M,
R or S shall be secured by:
1. Locking open all valves on connections to water supply pipes
to fire protection devices.
2. In compliance with Municipality of Monroeville fire system
alarm ordinance as approved.
Exceptions:
1. Underground gate valves with roadway valves.
2. Halogenated extinguishing systems that are not an integral
part of a required automatic fire suppression system.
3. Carbon dioxide extinguishing systems that are not an integral
part of a required automatic fire suppression system.
4. Limited area sprinkler systems (see Section 907.6.3).
5. Occupancies in Use Group R complying with Section 906.2.2
and supervised in accordance with N.F.P.A. 13R listed in
Chapter 35.
924.2 Fire alarm systems: All required fire alarm systems shall
transmit alarm and trouble signals to an approved central-station
system, proprietary system or remote-station system.
Exceptions:
1. Fire alarm and automatic fire detection systems in occupancies
in Use Group R in buildings that are less than five stories in
height.
2. Single- and multiple-station detectors as required by Section
920.0.
3. Smoke detectors in occupancies in Use Group I-3 (see Section
918.7. 1).
4. Smoke detectors in patient sleeping rooms in occupancies in
Use Group I-2 (see Section 409.5. 1).
(19) Section 1008.0, Occupant Load, is amended as follows:
(a) Section 1008.1 is amended as follows:
1008.1 Design occupant load: In determining required
facilities, the number of occupants for whom exit facilities
shall be provided shall be established by the largest number
computed in accordance with Section 1008.1.2.
(b) Section 1008.1, Actual number, is deleted.
(c) Table 1008.1.2, Maximum Floor Area Allowances Per
Occupant, is amended.129
§ 162-3 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 162-3
162:341
(d) Section 1008.1.3, Number by combination, is deleted.
(20) Section 1010.4 is amended as follows:
1010.4 Emergency escape and rescue: Every sleeping room
below the fourth story in occupancies in Use Groups R and I-1
shall have at least one operable window or exterior door approved
for emergency escape or rescue. Each emergency escape and
rescue window shall have a minimum net clear opening of 5.7
square feet (0.53 m2). The net clear opening shall be at least 24
inches (610 mm) in height and at least 20 inches (508 mm) in
width. The net clear opening dimensions shall be obtained by the
normal operation of the window from the inside. Where windows
are provided for emergency escape and rescue, the windows shall
have the bottom of the clear opening not more than 44 inches
(1,118 mm) above the floor.
Bars, grilles or screens placed over emergency escape windows
shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of
a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal
operation of the window.
Exceptions:
1. The minimum net clear opening for grade floor windows shall
be five square feet (0.47 m2).
2. An outside window or an exterior door for emergency escape is
not required in buildings where the sleeping room is provided
with a door to a corridor having access to two remote exits in
opposite directions.
(21) Section 2901.1 is amended as follows:
2901.1 Scope: (After plumbing code listed in Chapter 35) And to
the requirements of the Allegheny County Department of Health,
Article XV, Plumbing Rules and Regulations, listed in Appendix
A1,130 pursuant to Exception 1 of 102.4 of this code.
(22) Section 2909.0 is added as follows:
2909.0 Grease Traps and Interceptors: Grease traps and
interceptors shall be installed where required and in conformance
to Monroeville Ordinance No. 1940, listed in Appendix A1, in
addition to the Allegheny County Department of Health Plumbing
Rules and Regulations, Article XV, listed in Appendix A1.
(23) Add the following to Section 3102.4.3 Permit Exceptions: "except
as required by Monroeville Ordinance No. 1443 listed in Appendix
A1."
129. Editor's Note: Table 1008.1.2 is located at the end of this chapter.
130. Editor's Note: Appendix A1 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 162-3 § 162-3
162:342
§ 162-4. Severability.
Nothing in this article or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court or any
rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 162-2 of this article; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
§ 162-5. When effective.
The office of the Manager shall certify to the adoption of this article and
cause the same to be published as required by law; and this article shall
take full force and effect immediately after this date of final passage and
approval. With the exception that buildings or structures, or portions
thereof of which plans have previously been submitted to the Building
Department of the Municipality of Monroeville or the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry, shall be permitted to be constructed
(24) Add the following to Section 3102.13.1 Certificates: "and to the
requirements of Monroeville Ordinance 1939 listed in Appendix
A1."
B. A fee for each plan examination, building permit, occupancy permit and
inspection shall be paid in accordance with the annual Fee Ordinance of
the Municipality of Monroeville, Pennsylvania.
C. Any person who shall violate a provision of this article or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an
approved plan or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
summary offense, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
D. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after
having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be liable to a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $500.
E. Compensation of Board of Survey: The third member of the Board shall
receive for services a fee of $200, to be paid by the appellant.
F. Area limit. The area limitations specified in Table 501 shall apply to the
maximum horizontally projected area of all buildings fronting on a
street, or public space not less than 30 feet (9,144 mm) in width
accessible to a public street. The area must be within the entire
boundaries of the Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 162-3 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 162-5
162:343
under the provisions of the code in force at the time of approval by the
involved departments.
§ 162-6. Applicability.
All plans not previously submitted for approval or already approved as of
the legal adoption of this article shall meet the provisions of the BOCA
National Building Code/1996.
§ 162-5 § 162-6
162:344
ARTICLE II
CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code
[Adopted 2-11-1997 by Ord. No. 2025]
§ 162-7. Standards adopted by reference.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the municipal offices
of the Municipality of Monroeville, being marked and designated as the
"CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code, 1995 Edition," as published by
the Council of American Building Officials, be and is hereby adopted as the
One and Two Family Dwelling Code of the Municipality of Monroeville for
the control of buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said CABO
One and Two Family Dwelling Code are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof, as if fully set forth herein, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 162-9 of this article.
§ 162-8. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Any and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are
hereby repealed.
§ 162-9. Amendments to standards.
A. Section 104.2 is amended to add the following thereto: "Where
differences occur between provisions of this code and the BOCA
National Building Code/1996, Monroeville Ordinance No. 2021, the
more stringent provision shall apply as determined by the Code
Official."
B. Section 106.4 is amended as follows:
106.4 Penalty: Any person who shall violate a provision of this article
or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty
of a summary offense, punishable by a fine of not more than $500
or by imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
C. Section 111.2 is amended as follows:
111.2 Permit fees: A fee for each plan examination, building permit,
occupancy permit and inspection shall be paid in accordance with the
annual fee ordinance of the Municipality of Monroeville, Pennsylvania.
D. Section 118.2 is added as follows:
§ 162-7 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 162-9
162:345
§ 162-10. Severability.
Nothing in this article or in the CABO One and Two Family Dwelling
Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
impending in any court or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any
cause or causes of action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance
hereby repealed as cited in § 162-8 of this article; nor shall any just or legal
right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
§ 162-11. When effective.
The office of the Manager shall certify to the adoption of this article and
cause the same to be published as required by law; and this article shall
take full force and effect immediately after this date of final passage and
approval.
118.2 Stop-work orders: Any person who shall continue any work in
or about the structure after having been served with a stop-work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than
$300 nor more than $500.
E. Section 107.1 is amended to add the following thereto: "The
qualifications of the Board of Appeals shall conform to Monroeville
Ordinance No. 1614 and Section 121.0 of Ordinance No. 2021, as
amended."131
131. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 176, Construction Codes, Uniform, § 176-4.
§ 162-9 § 162-11
162:346
Chapter 166
(RESERVED)
Chapter 169
CABLE TELEVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A363.
§ 162-11 (RESERVED) § 162-11
166:347

ARTICLE I
Regulation of Rates
[Adopted 10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 1860]
§ 169-1. Adherence to federal regulations.
The Municipality of Monroeville shall follow all rules and regulations
adopted by the Federal Communications Commission pursuant to 47 U.S.C.
§ 543(b) in all instances where the Municipality of Monroeville regulates
rates of any multichannel video distributor or cable system pursuant to the
Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act enacted by the
United States Congress in October, 1992 (Pub. L. No. 102 - 385, 106 Stat.
1460; October, 1992).
§ 169-1 CABLE TELEVISION § 169-1
169:349

ARTICLE II
Public Input on Rates
[Adopted 10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 1861]
§ 169-2. Filing of rates for public inspection; publication of notice.
Immediately upon the filing by a cable system or multichannel video
distributor of FCC Form 393 covering either initial cable basic tier and
accompanying equipment rates, or any proposed increase therein, a copy
of the Form 393 shall immediately be placed on file for public inspection at
Monroeville Municipal Building, 2700 Monroeville Boulevard, Monroeville,
Pennsylvania 15146, and shall be available for review during normal
business hours. Notice that the Form 393 is available for public inspection
shall contemporaneously be published in a local daily newspaper of general
circulation.
§ 169-3. Time limit for filing written comments; extension.
A. Any person desiring to comment upon any of the rates proposed in the
Form 393 may do so by filing written comments with the Municipality of
Monroeville, 2700 Monroeville Boulevard, Monroeville, Pennsylvania
15146 (Attention: Municipal Manager) no later than 15 days following
the initial date upon which the Form 393 material was placed on public
notice. Written comments can be filed in any form convenient to the
person commenting.
B. If the Municipality of Monroeville tolls the effective date of any initial or
proposed cable rate for either 90 or 150 additional days, then the time
in which any person may comment upon the initial proposed rate or the
requested rate increase shall be extended an additional 30 days, so that
all comments must be submitted in writing to the Municipality no later
than 45 days after the Form 393 has been placed on public notice.
§ 169-2 CABLE TELEVISION § 169-3
169:351
Chapter 173
CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parades and motorcades — See Ch. 270. Transient retail businesses — See Ch. 346.
§ 173-1. Unlawful acts.
From and after the passage of this chapter it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons, firm, corporation or organization to set, establish,
conduct, operate or maintain a circus or carnival within the Municipality of
Monroeville.
§ 173-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof by summary proceedings
before any District Justice, be fined in a sum not to exceed $600, together
with costs of prosecution, and, in default thereof, be committed to the
Allegheny County Jail for a period of not more than 30 days. Each and
every day on which a violation of this chapter occurs or takes place shall be
construed to be a separate violation thereof, and each such violation shall
be subject to the penalties provided herein.
Chapter 176
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 162.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 187.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 206.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 254.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 290.
§ 176-1. Opt in.
This Municipality hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101
through 7201.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 169-3 § 176-2
173:352
§ 176-2. Adoption of standards by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401
through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the Municipal Building Code of this
Municipality.
§ 176-3. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Code and Ordinances referred to
above within this Municipality shall be undertaken in any of the following
ways as determined by the Governing Body of this Municipality from time
to time by resolution:
§ 176-4. Board of Appeals.
A. By the designation of an employee of the Municipality to serve as the
Municipal Code Official to act on behalf of the Municipality.
B. By the retention of one or third-party agencies to act on behalf of the
Municipality for electrical inspection only; and the Allegheny County
Health Department Plumbing Division for plan review and plumbing
inspections.
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement.
A. A Board of Appeals is established by this chapter of the Governing Body
of this Municipality in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the
purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and
administration is undertaken jointly with one or more other
municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be established by joint action
of the participating municipalities. Said Board shall be known as "The
Uniform Construction Code Board of Appeals" ("UCC Board of
Appeals").
B. The Building Officials and Code Administrators Board of Appeals is
hereby abolished and replaced with the Uniform Construction Code
Board of Appeals. Said UCC Board shall consist of five members
appointed by the Municipality of Monroeville: one for five years, one for
four years, one for three years, one for two years and one for one year.
Thereafter, each new member shall serve for five years or until a
successor has been appointed.
C. The Board of Appeals shall consist of five individuals and shall be
qualified by training and experience to pass on matters pertaining to
building construction. Training and experience may consist of licensure
as an architect or engineer, experience in the construction industry, and
training or experience as an inspector or plan reviewer. Council shall
§ 176-2 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 176-4
176:353
§ 176-5. Effect on other provisions.
§ 176-6. Powers and duties of UCC Board of Appeals.
appoint the Director of Building and Engineering Services as an ex
officio nonvoting member to the Board of Appeals.
A. All building code ordinances or portions which were adopted by this
Municipality on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or exceed the
requirements of the code are affirmed and shall continue in full force
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this Municipality not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
A. The UCC Board of Appeals, pursuant to Pa. Act 45 of 1999,132 shall hear
and rule on appeals, requests for variances and requests for extensions
of time. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true
intent of the Act or Uniform Construction Code has been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of the Act or Uniform Construction Code do
not fully apply or an equivalent form of construction is to be used.
B. Appeals, variances and extensions of time.
(1) An owner or owner's agent may seek a variance or extension of
time or appeal a Building Code Official's decision by filing a petition
with the Building Code Official or other person designated by the
Board of Appeals on a form provided by the Municipality.
(2) The postmark date or the date of personal service will establish the
filing date of the appeal and request for variance or extension of
time.
(3) An appeal or request for variance or extension of time to a Board of
Appeals will automatically suspend an action to enforce an order to
correct until the matter is resolved. An action under Subsection
403.84 (relating to unsafe building, structure or equipment)133 may
not be stayed.
(4) A Board of Appeals shall decide an appeal, variance request or
request for extension of time by reviewing documents and written
brief or argument unless the owner or owner's agent requests a
hearing.
132. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
133. Editor's Note: See 34 Pa. Code § 403.84.
§ 176-4 § 176-6
176:354
(5) A Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing within 60 days from the
date of an applicant's request unless the applicant agreed in
writing to an extension of time.
(6) A Board of Appeals shall only consider the following factors when
deciding an appeal under Section 501(c)(2) of the Act:134
(a) The true intent of the Act or Uniform Construction Code was
incorrectly interpreted.
(b) The provisions of the Act do not apply.
(c) An equivalent form of construction is to be used.
(7) A Board of Appeals may consider the following factors when ruling
upon a request for extension of time or request for variance:
(a) The reasonableness of the Uniform Construction Code's
application in a particular case.
(b) The extent to which the granting of a variance or an extension
of time will pose a violation of the Uniform Construction Code
or an unsafe condition.
(c) The availability of professional or technical personnel needed
to come into compliance.
(d) The availability of materials and equipment needed to come
into compliance.
(e) The efforts being made to come into compliance as quickly as
possible.
(f) Compensatory features that will provide an equivalent degree
of protection to the Uniform Construction Code.
(8) If the owner or owner's agent requests a hearing, the Board of
Appeals shall schedule a hearing and notify the owner or owner's
agent and Building Code Official of the date, time and place of the
hearing.
(9) The Board of Appeals may:
(a) Deny the request in whole or in part.
(b) Grant the request in whole or in part.
(c) Grant the request upon certain conditions being satisfied.
(10) The Board of Appeals shall provide a written notice of its decision
to the owner and to the Building Code Official.
134. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.501(c)(2).
§ 176-6 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 176-6
176:355
§ 176-7. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Municipality for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be established by
the Governing Body by resolution.136
§ 176-8. Modifications to Code; when effective. [Added 11-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 2313; amended 5-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2334]
(11) An owner shall file an appeal, request for variances and request for
extension of time relating to accessibility with the Accessibility
Advisory Board under Subsection 403.142 (relating to Accessibility
Advisory Board).135
A. Section 104, Application, Subsection (b), Exclusions, Subpart (3), of the
Construction Code Ordinance137 is amended to read as follows: "Any
utility and/or miscellaneous structure that has a building area of 120
square feet or less and is accessory to a detached one-family dwelling
shall be excluded. However, the permitting requirements set forth in
the code shall apply to any utility and/or miscellaneous structure,
including but not limited to, carports, detached private garages,
greenhouses, and sheds, that are accessory to detached one-family
dwellings with an area greater than 120 square feet."
B. If gas, electric, or plumbing are installed in any utility and/or
miscellaneous structure, regardless of its size, the permitting
requirements of the code are applicable. See International Residential
Code, §§ G2401.1, P2501, E3301, and E3303.
C. The Municipality of Monroeville has enacted this amendment in
accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 503, Changes in
Uniform Construction Code, (b) through (k). See 35 P.S. § 7210.503.
D. Aggrieved parties shall have 30 days from the date of enactment of this
amendment to file a written challenge with the Department of Labor
and Industry (hereinafter the "Department") and the Municipality of
Monroeville. The challenge shall state the reason or reasons for the
challenge.
E. This amendment shall not take effect for a period of 35 days following
its enactment.
F. If a challenge is filed in writing with the Department within 30 days, the
Department has five business days from the end of the thirty-day filing
period to notify the Municipality of Monroeville of the challenge. There
may be no enforcement of this amendment until a ruling is issued by the
135. Editor's Note: See 34 Pa. Code § 403.142.
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. 194, Fees.
137. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.104(b)(3).
§ 176-6 § 176-8
176:356
Chapter 180
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animal Control Officer — See Ch. 11.
Noise control — See Ch. 264.
Park, recreation and conservation
areas — See Ch. 274.
Zoning — See Ch. 359.
Secretary or 45 days after the filing date of the last challenge to this
amendment, whichever occurs first.
§ 176-8 DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS § 176-8
180:357

ARTICLE I
Fowl
[Adopted 11-11-1965 by Ord. No. 501]
§ 180-1. Chickens, hens and roosters.
No person, firm or corporation shall keep any chickens, hens or roosters
within 200 feet of any occupied residential building other than the
residence of the owner of such fowl.
§ 180-2. Ducks, geese, peacocks and peahens.
No person, firm or corporation shall keep any ducks, geese, peacocks or
peahens within 1,000 feet of any occupied residential building other than
the residence of the owner of such fowl.
§ 180-3. Noisy fowl or birds.
No person, firm or corporation shall keep any other type of fowl or bird that
may be inclined to make loud or raucous noises within 1,000 feet of any
occupied residential building other than the residence of the owner of such
fowl.
§ 180-4. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to persons who keep not more
than two of such fowl or birds as pets, provided that written permission for
such keeping is first granted by the Municipal Manager. Such permission
shall be granted by the Municipal Manager only upon investigation and
when it appears to him that the keeping of such pet fowl shall in no way
cause a noise nuisance to be established within 1,000 feet of the owner's
home. Such permission, once granted, may be revoked by the Municipal
Manager if it should appear to him that such a noise nuisance has been
established.
§ 180-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this article, upon conviction thereof before the Mayor or any District
Justice, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs
of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense and may be punishable
as such.
§ 180-1 DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS § 180-5
180:359

ARTICLE II
Dogs and Cats
[Adopted 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 2000138]
§ 180-6. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them
in this section:
ANIMAL — A dog, cat or other domesticated companion animal (pet).
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Agent(s) designated by the Municipality of
Monroeville to enforce this article.
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the
owner or a member of his immediate family or guardian, either by leash,
cord, chain or otherwise.
CAT — Domestic feline, Felis domesticus.
DOG — Domestic canine, Canis familiaris.
HARBOR — To provide food and shelter for any dog, cat or domesticated
animal on a periodic or temporary basis.
IMPOUND — To a apprehend, catch, trap, net or if necessary to kill any
animal by the Animal Control Officer or the Police Department.
OWNER/GUARDIAN — A person having right of property or custody of
any animal; and/or one who has an animal in his care or custody or who
knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied
by said person.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
trust, estate or other legal entity.
§ 180-7. License and identification required.
§ 180-8. Animal health and safety.
A. No person shall keep, harbor or maintain a dog over the age of six
months unless the owner obtains a license from the Allegheny County
Treasurer or his or her authorized agent.
B. No person shall keep, harbor or maintain a dog or cat unless the owner
identifies the animal with an identification collar or tag that clearly and
legibly states the animal owner's name, address and telephone number.
A. All dogs and cats over six months of age shall be vaccinated against
rabies in accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal Rabies
138. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Pets, adopted 9-8-1981 by Ord.
No. 1280.
§ 180-6 DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS § 180-8
180:361
§ 180-9. Animal conduct and nuisances prohibited.
Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunizations, published by the
National Association of State and Public Health Veterinarians.
B. Proof of rabies vaccination must be presented, on demand, to the
Animal Control Officer or an officer of the Monroeville Police
Department.
C. The owner of a dog or cat shall keep all premises occupied or used by
the animals in a clean and sanitary condition. Failure to provide
adequate food, water or space shall subject the animals to seizure by
the Animal Control Officer or the Monroeville Police Department.
("Adequate" shall mean sufficient for the age, size and number of
animals on the premises.)
D. No person shall be cruel or inhumane to a dog or cat. Said cruelty and
inhumanity shall consist of teasing, beating, torturing, mutilating,
poisoning, cruelly killing or clearly failing to provide food, water or
shelter for an animal or abandoning any animal of which that person
has charge as owner/guardian or otherwise.
E. Any person operating a motor vehicle which strikes and injures or kills
a dog or cat shall stop and promptly report the incident to the
Monroeville Police Department. The operator of such motor vehicle
shall report to the police his or her name, address, telephone number,
insurance carrier and policy number and license number.
A. No person as owner or guardian of a dog or cat shall permit the animal
to run at large beyond the boundaries of the private premises of the
owner or guardian. The Animal Control Officer and/or the Police
Department shall seize and detain any animal running at large and
unaccompanied by the owner or guardian.
B. No dog shall be permitted upon the public streets or upon public
property unless restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length
and accompanied by an adult or minor capable of controlling said
animal.
C. No dog or cat shall be tied near a public building or other public facility
which would intimidate person(s) from approaching or passing such
areas.
D. No dog or cat shall be kept, maintained, harbored or permitted entry
into a place of business which stores and/or sells goods for human
consumption. Exception shall be made for guide dogs, hearing dogs, aid
dogs for the handicapped and dogs used by Municipal and State Police
Departments.
E. No dog or cat shall be permitted to bite, chase, leap at or jump upon or
otherwise harass bicyclists, motor vehicles and/or pedestrians passing
through a public right-of-way.
§ 180-8 § 180-9
180:362
§ 180-10. Seizure and impounding.
§ 180-11. Violations and penalties.
F. No dog or cat shall be permitted to engage in habitual and continuous
loud howling, barking or crying or otherwise conduct itself in such a
manner as to annoy any person other than the animal owner regardless
of whether or not the dog is on the owner's premises. ("Habitual and
continuous" shall be defined as more than 10 minutes at any one time.)
The Animal Control Officer and/or the Police Department shall request
that the owner or guardian of any animal engaged in habitual and
continuous nuisance noisemaking to immediately quiet the animal and/
or move it indoors.
G. No dog or cat shall be permitted to urinate or defecate on public or
private property other than that property owned by the animal's owner
or guardian. If such animal should defecate upon the private property of
another or public property, the owner or guardian of said animal shall
be responsible for the immediate cleanup and proper disposal of the
feces.
H. No dog or cat shall be permitted to damage, deface or destroy any
property or article not belonging to the animal's owner. Any injuries,
expenses and/or damages caused by said animal which are not due to
the contributory negligence of another person shall be the sole
responsibility of the animal's owner.
A. The Animal Control Officer and/or the Monroeville Police shall have the
power to seize and impound any dog or cat found to be running at large
or of an immediate danger or health risk to itself, other animals or the
general public.
B. The Animal Control Officer and/or the Monroeville Police shall have the
power to immediately destroy any animal where proper complaint or
other evidence has verified the fact that said animal is mad or suffering
from rabies.
C. After the impounding of any animal, if the animal is licensed and/or
properly identified, the owner shall be notified and given a period of 10
days to redeem said animal upon payment of all costs, charges and
penalties incurred and assessed by the Municipality of Monroeville.
D. After the impounding of any animal, licensed or unlicensed, identified
or unidentified, if said animal is not redeemed within 10 days, said
animal may be made available for public or private sale or euthanized in
some humane manner.
A. Whoever violates any one or more of the provisions of § 180-7 of this
article shall be fined $25, plus costs, for a first offense and $50, plus
costs, for a second offense.
§ 180-9 DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS § 180-11
180:363
B. Whoever violates any one or more of the provisions of § 180-8 of this
article shall be fined $50, plus costs, for a first offense and $75 for a
second offense.
C. Whoever violates any one or more of the provisions of § 180-9 shall first
be issued a letter of warning by the Animal Control Officer; a fine of
$50, plus costs, shall be imposed for a second offense and a fine of $75,
plus costs, shall be imposed for a third offense.
D. Fines and penalties for subsequent offenses of any of the provisions of
this article shall be determined and assessed in accordance with the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania by the Animal Control
Officer or an officer of the Monroeville Police Department.
§ 180-11 § 180-11
180:364
Chapter 187
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 162.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 176.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 206.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 254.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 290.
§ 187-1. Definitions.
All definitions shall be as defined in the latest edition of the National
Electrical Code, National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 70).
§ 187-2. Required inspections and tests; placard; reports.
A. Required inspections and tests. Compliance with the requirements of
the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70) shall be considered sufficient
evidence of safe electrical installation. All wiring and equipment shall
be inspected and approved by a Monroeville-approved duly qualified
inspector before electrical service is supplied. The minimum required
inspections shall be:
(1) Service inspection, which shall be performed as to the
requirements of the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70) and the
appropriate utility service provider before power is supplied.
(2) During installation. During the installation of electrical systems
and equipment, an approved inspection agency shall make
inspections to ensure compliance with the National Electrical
Code.
(3) Before concealing work. Work in connection with an electric system
shall not be covered or concealed until it has been inspected by a
Monroeville-approved inspector and permission to conceal has
been approved.
(4) A final inspection and test. Upon completion of the work, a
Monroeville-approved inspector shall inspect the work and cause
tests to be made of the installation and operation of the entire
system to ensure compliance with all requirements of the National
Electrical Code.
(5) Any other inspection as deemed necessary by the Monroeville
Building Department or Fire Official. When deemed necessary by
the appropriate code official, electrical service to the hazardous
installation or equipment may be ordered to be terminated until
such time as the hazardous condition is alleviated or corrected.
§ 180-11 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 187-2
187:365
§ 187-3. Insurance requirements for approval of reports.
The Municipality requires the following conditions to be met by any person,
firm, agency or corporation (herein called "agency") before recognition,
acceptance and/or approval will be given by the Municipality to such
agency's inspection reports:
B. The required inspections as detailed above shall be evidenced by the
placement of a permanently affixed placard placed on the inside door of
the service-disconnecting enclosure. Said placard shall detail the type
of inspection and contain the date and name of the approved inspector
(both printed and written). Further evidence of inspections shall be in
the form of municipal cut-cards submitted to the Monroeville Building
Department a minimum of each 30 days by each approved inspection
agency for each inspection performed within the Municipality. Failure
to placard or submit municipal cut-cards will cause the Municipality to
withdraw said agency's or inspector's inspection approval.
C. Each inspector or agency shall, by January 31 of every year, furnish the
Monroeville Building Department with a complete written report of all
inspections conducted in Monroeville the previous year. The report
shall include, at a minimum, the name or owner of the inspected
premises, address, type and date of inspection and the name of the
inspector performing the inspection.
A. Each agency or inspector wishing to perform inspections within the
Municipality of Monroeville shall, by January 31 of every year, submit
an application in the form required by the Monroeville Building
Department, stating its intent to conduct inspections within
Monroeville for the coming year. Each application shall be accompanied
by a fee of $100 per agency and an additional $25 per inspector named
to perform inspections in Monroeville. Inspectors shall meet the
qualifications as set forth in § 187-4 of this chapter. Inspections
performed by nonregistered inspectors shall not be accepted by the
Municipality.
B. The agency shall carry and furnish the Municipality with certificates of
insurance to be in effect, and expiration dates, and agrees to give 30
days' written notice in advance of change in or cancellation of such
insurance coverage. The minimum required insurance shall be:
(1) Workers' compensation insurance, as required by Pennsylvania law.
(2) General comprehensive liability insurance, providing limits of not
less than $3,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence for
bodily injury and death and for property damage for agencies
wishing approval for inspection of commercial properties and
structures.
(3) General comprehensive liability insurance, providing limits of not
less than $1,000,000 combined single limit per occupancy for
§ 187-2 § 187-3
187:366
§ 187-4. Qualifications of inspectors.
bodily injury and death and for property damage for agencies
wishing approval for inspection of residential single-family (R-4)
properties and structures.
(4) Comprehensive automobile liability insurance (including owned,
nonowned and hired vehicles), providing limits of not less than
$500,000 combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury
and death and including property damage.
(5) Excess liability coverage, providing limits of not less than
$5,000,000 each loss/aggregate for those inspectors or agencies
wishing approval for inspection of commercial properties and
structures.
(6) Excess liability coverage, providing limits of not less than
$2,000,000 each loss/aggregate for those agencies wishing
approval for inspection of residential single-family (R-4) properties
and structures.
(7) Errors and omissions liability coverage, providing limits of not less
than $1,000,000 per occupant for all inspectors or agencies
wishing approval for inspections of any category.
A. All inspectors performing inspections within the Municipality of
Monroeville must have obtained or passed the national certification
program for construction code inspectors, Test 2A, Electrical One- and
Two-Family Dwellings; Test 2B, Electrical General; or Test 2C,
Electrical Plan Review. The category of certification shall determine the
inspections permitted to be performed by that inspector or agency.
Inspectors certified only in the 2A, One- and Two-Family Dwellings,
category may only perform inspections of one- and two-family dwellings
(R-4) as defined in the BOCA National Building Code.
B. Inspectors certified in the 2A, One- and Two-Family Dwellings, category
and 2B, Electrical General, category may perform inspections of oneand
two-family dwellings (R-4) as well as commercial structures
deemed not to be of a specialized nature by the Monroeville Building
Department. Structures of a specialized nature shall be those as
detailed in Chapter 5, Special Occupancies, Articles 500 through 555,
of the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70), 1990 Edition.
C. Inspectors wishing to perform inspection of specialized structures must
be certified in the 2B, Electrical General, and the 2C, Electrical Plan
Review, categories of the national certification program for
construction code inspectors. In order to perform specialized
inspections, a detailed plan review analysis of the proposed work must
be submitted to the Monroeville Building Department by the inspector
or agency before commencing any inspection.
§ 187-3 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 187-5
187:367
§ 187-5. Requirements for continued agency inspection approval.
A. The agency shall require all electrical installation to meet the standards
of the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70), state regulations,
regulations of the public utility service provider and the regulations of
the Municipality of Monroeville.
B. The agency shall, within 30 days of adoption of this chapter, upon
hiring, and by January 30 of each year, submit the names of all
inspectors and certify that they are qualified to conduct inspections.
Certifications to conduct inspections in a desired category shall be
evidenced by submitting a copy of the national certification program for
construction code inspectors test pass/fail score report sheet to the
Monroeville Building Department. Inspectors shall be approved to
inspect only those categories as detailed in § 187-4 of this chapter in
which they have received a "pass" score.
C. The agency shall not approve electrical installations which are deemed
by another inspection agency to be in violation of applicable codes,
rules and/or ordinances unless such violations have been corrected by
qualified personnel and the corrective action has been certified to the
Monroeville Building Department by the original inspection agency.
D. The Municipality of Monroeville Building Department shall be promptly
notified in writing when new inspectors are hired and/or when
inspectors leave the employ of the agency.
E. The agency and all its inspectors must be familiar with the codes,
regulations and ordinances referenced in this chapter and shall be
available for answering customer and contractor questions and for code
interpretations concerning electrical installations.
F. Inspectors may not inspect his/her own work or work of anyone having
business relationships with said inspector, agency or other agency
employees.
G. The agency shall not represent itself or its employees to be, nor shall
individual inspectors be permitted to represent themselves as, agents
or employees of the Municipality of Monroeville or in any way affiliated
with or acting on behalf of the Municipality of Monroeville.
H. Each inspector shall follow up and assure final inspection of all new
construction and major electrical modifications or additions within 12
months of first inspection, or upon completion in the event that
construction extends beyond 12 months.
I. The agency shall maintain a local office in or near the Municipality and
provide local supervision for field inspectors. The Municipal Building
Department shall establish rules to enforce this section.
J. The agency shall furnish the Monroeville Building Department with
written reports of inspections a minimum of each 30 days and shall
§ 187-5 § 187-5
187:368
§ 187-6. Metallic raceways required.
In all commercial structures or buildings, whether new, additions or
alterations of, the use of nonmetallic sheathed cables for electrical systems
shall be prohibited. Only metallic raceways, as defined by the National
Electrical Code (NFPA 70), shall be permitted to be installed. The inspector
or agency shall not certify any installation not meeting the above
requirements. In the case of alteration to existing structures, only the newly
installed portions need meet this requirement.
§ 187-7. Removal of inactive conductors.
In all structures in which electrical circuits or conductors, low or high
voltage, are deactivated (other than temporarily), such deactivated circuits
or conductors shall be removed from the structure. All work shall conform
to the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70).
§ 187-8. Right of entry.
A municipal-approved inspector or agency shall have authority to enter any
building structure or premises within the Municipality of Monroeville at any
and all reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections as provided
for in this chapter.
§ 187-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation, inspector or agency who violates a
provision of this chapter or who fails to comply with any of the requirements
thereof shall be guilty of a summary offense, punishable by a fine of not
more than $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed
a separate offense. Said violation may be cause to have installation and/or
inspection approval withdrawn by the Municipality of Monroeville for a time
period as determined by Municipal Council.
Chapter 194
FEES
maintain record of its inspections at its local office for three years
and shall keep a permanent record at its home office location and
annually submit the report as required by § 187-2 of this chapter to the
Municipal Building Department.
K. An approved inspector or agency shall annually, and upon change,
submit a fee schedule to the Monroeville Building Department.
L. Inspection approval may be withdrawn by the Municipality at any time
upon evidence that an agency does not comply with the above
conditions.
§ 187-5 FEES § 194-1
194:369
§ 194-1. Administration fees.
Administration fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Annual budget $20.00
Outside court stenographer At cost
In house court stenographer $2.00 per page
Home Rule Charter $10.00
Mailing fee: actual postage plus handling
fee of
$2.50
No lien letter $20.00
Notary service $5.00
Photo copies (per page) $0.25
Return check charge (NSF) $25.00
State audit collector's fee $15.00
Tax certification $20.00
Zoning certification letter:
All residential zoned properties $10.00
Plus employee research time
billed at hourly rate as
calculated in formula for
calculating personnel rates
section of this chapter
Commercial and industrial zoned
properties
$20.00
Plus employee research time
billed at hourly rate as
calculated in formula for
calculating personnel rates
section of this chapter
§ 194-2. Animal control fee.
Type Fee
Animal control boarding fee $15.00/day
§ 194-3. Building/construction fees.
A. Building and other structure permit fees. The Schedule of Fees
hereinafter set shall be charged in the respective use group categories
as defined by the most recently adopted edition of the BOCA Building
Code for issuance of permits for the construction of buildings and other
structures within the Municipality of Monroeville where permits are
required pursuant to any ordinance or other action of the Municipality.
§ 194-1 § 194-3
194:370
(1) Building permit:
(a) Use group: R-4 Residential and those buildings and structures
in U, Utility and Miscellaneous, which are accessory to the R-4,
Residential Use Group.
[1] Twenty-five cents per square foot of gross floor area.
[2] Minimum building permit fee: $40.
(b) Use group: All others, including: A, Assembly; B, Business; E,
Educational; F, Factory and Industrial; H, High Hazard; I,
Institutional; M, Mercantile, R-1, Residential; R-2, Residential;
R-3, Residential; S, Storage; and those buildings and
structures in U, Utility and Miscellaneous, which are accessory
to the above listed use groups.
[1] Thirty cents per square foot of gross floor area.
[2] Minimum building permit fee: $80.
(c) Reinspection fee: For reinspection of scheduled inspection that
work is not complete:
[1] Use group: R-4 Residential and those buildings and
structures in U, Utility and Miscellaneous, which are
accessory to the R-4 Residential Use Group.
[a] Reinspection fee: $40.
[2] Use group: All others, including: A, Assembly; B, Business;
E, Educational; F, Factory and Industrial; H, High Hazard;
I, Institutional; M, Mercantile, R-1, Residential; R-2,
Residential; R-3, Residential; S, Storage; and those
buildings and structures in U, Utility and Miscellaneous,
which are accessory to the above listed use groups.
[a] Reinspection fee: $50.
(d) Review fee: For review of building plans and site plans for
which a building permit has not been issued, the cost shall be
as follows:
Type of Review Fee
Building Official (per formula for calculating
personnel rates section)
Building Inspector (per formula for calculating
personnel rates section)
Fire Official (per formula for calculating
personnel rates section)
Director of Building and
Engineer
(per formula for calculating
personnel rates section)
§ 194-3 FEES § 194-3
194:371
Type of Review Fee
Director of Community
Development
(per formula for calculating
personnel rates section)
Consulting Municipal
Engineer
(per formula for calculating
personnel rates section)
(2) Building occupancy permit:
(a) Use group: R-4, Residential, and those buildings and structures
in U, Utility and Miscellaneous, which are accessory to the R-4
Residential Use Group: $30 per residential unit.
(b) Use group: R-1, R-2, R-3, Residential Use Groups, and those
buildings and structures in U, Utility and Miscellaneous, which
are accessory to the above listed use groups: $100, plus $30
per residential unit.
(c) All others, including: A, Assembly; B, Business; E, Educational;
F, Factory and Industrial; H, High Hazard; I, Institutional; M,
Mercantile; S, Storage; and those buildings and structures in
U, Utility and Miscellaneous, which are accessory to the above
listed use groups:
[1] A flat fee of $100 for a new or revised building site for
which a site inspection has not been conducted, plus $100
and $0.05 per square foot of gross floor area.
[2] For all other, $100 plus $0.05 per square foot of gross floor
area.
B. Roof replacement, repair and alteration. The permit application fee for
replacement, repair or alteration of the roof of an existing structure
shall be as follows:
(1) For structures classified in use group categories R-3 and R-4 in the
BOCA Basic Building Code, as adopted by the Municipality of
Monroeville: the sum of $35.
(2) For structures classified other than use group categories R-3 and
R-4 in the BOCA Building Code, as adopted by the Municipality of
Monroeville: the fee of $130.
C. Application or rezoning and zoning ordinance changes.
(1) A fee of $1,000 plus $50/acre shall be charged by the Municipality
of Monroeville for applications for change of zoning and for
changes to the text of the Zoning Ordinance.139
(2) Additional costs can be assessed for stenographic, legal and expert
services when required.
139. Editor's Note: See Ch. 359, Zoning.
§ 194-3 § 194-3
194:372
D. Application for conditional uses. A fee of $500 plus $0.02 per square
foot area of structure or the cubic yards of earth moved and $800 for
conditional uses with no structure shall be charged by the Municipality
of Monroeville for the acceptance of applications for consideration of
conditional uses as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.
E. Petitions to vacate street. A fee of $325 shall be charged by the
Municipality of Monroeville for the acceptance of a petition to vacate
any street or portion thereof. Where two or more touching streets are
included in the same petition, only one such fee shall be charged.
F. Applications for subdivision approval.
(1) A fee of $50 per lot shall be charged by the Municipality of
Monroeville for any subdivision application.
(2) The entire charge shall be due and payable upon presentation of
the preliminary plan. No additional charge shall be made for the
final plan as presented to Municipal Council for approval unless
such final plan contains a larger number of lots than the
preliminary plan. In such event, an additional charge shall be made
at the same rates based upon the additional number of lots in the
final plan.
G. Applications for acceptance of street. A flat fee of $325 per application
shall be charged by the Municipality of Monroeville for the acceptance
of any street or portion thereof. Where two or more touching streets are
involved in the same application, only one such fee shall be charged.
H. Retaining walls.
(1) The permit application fees for retaining walls shall be as follows:
(a) $1.50 for each linear foot of wall three feet or less in height.
(b) $1.75 for each linear foot of wall four feet in height.
(c) $2 for each linear foot of wall five feet in height.
(d) $2.25 for each linear foot of wall six feet in height.
(e) $2.50 for each linear foot of wall exceeding six feet in height.
(2) No permit application fee shall be charged for a permit application
for a retaining wall located on property where the only structures
thereon or to be placed thereon are classified in use groups R-3 or
R-4 in the BOCA Basic Building Code adopted by the Municipality
of Monroeville, unless the purpose of said retaining wall is to
protect adjacent or contiguous property.
I. Interior partitions. The permit application fee for the erection,
installation or removal of any interior partition in an existing structure
shall be $21.50 per 100 square feet (or any fraction thereof) of the
§ 194-3 FEES § 194-3
194:373
surface area of any partition to be erected or installed or of any
partition to be removed or altered, either in whole or part.
J. Mechanical equipment and electric wiring and equipment. The permit
application fee for the replacement or alteration of mechanical
equipment or electric wiring and equipment will be as follows:
(1) Heating and ventilation (including chimneys, flues and vent pipes):
$45.
(2) Elevators, dumbwaiters and conveyor equipment: $210.
(3) Escalators: $210.
(4) Electric wiring and equipment: $110.
(5) Electric wiring and equipment, including boiler rooms, drying
rooms, refuse chutes and vaults, and dust, stock and refuse
conveyor systems: $110.
K. Applications for razing and/or demolition work.
(1) A fee of $80 shall be charged for the application for permit for the
demolition and/or razing work on any structure having a floor area
of 2,000 square feet or less.
(2) A fee of $80 plus $20 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area or
fraction thereof for demolition and/or razing of any structure
having a floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet.
(3) Any applicant receiving a permit under this section shall post a
performance bond with the Municipality in an amount not less than
the amount of the contract for the demolition or razing work. The
same bond shall secure the workmanlike performance of the work
authorized by the permit in accordance with all applicable laws and
ordinances.
(4) Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the applicant shall submit
to the Municipality evidence of notice of the intended work to any
and all property owners who may or could be affected by such
work.
(5) Any individual or entity performing any work pursuant to a permit
issued under this section shall be exempt from any fee if the work
being performed is done pursuant to action initiated by Monroeville
Municipality.
L. Moving of structures within or outside of the Municipality.
(1) A fee of $75 shall be charged for the application for any permit for
the moving of any structure from within the Municipality to outside
the Municipality. This fee shall apply to any structure having a floor
area measured by exterior dimensions of 2,000 square feet or less.
§ 194-3 § 194-3
194:374
(2) A fee of $75 plus $20 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area or
fraction thereof for demolition or razing work of any structure shall
be charged for any such structure having a floor area in excess of
2,000 square feet.
(3) Any applicant desiring to move any such structure shall acquire a
no lien letter before the issuance of any such permit and existing
liens, recorded or unrecorded, shall be paid in full prior to the
issuing of any such permit.
(4) Any applicant receiving a permit under this section shall post a
performance bond with the Municipality naming it as beneficiary,
which bond shall be in an amount not less than the amount of the
contract for the moving of the structure and the placement of the
same upon a designated foundation.
(5) If any structure is moved within the Municipality there shall also be
required in addition to the permit under this section a building
permit in an amount to be determined by the square footage of the
new foundation as per the fee requirements of this chapter.
(6) Prior to the issuance of any permit under this section, the applicant
shall submit to the Municipality evidence of notice to any and all
affected property owners and those having leasehold interest,
which notice shall give ample warning of the intended use of the
structure and discontinuance, no matter how minimal, of utility.
M. The following schedule shall apply to highway and street occupancy
permits and restoration charges:
(1) Issuance fee.
(a) Initial issuance fee: $20.
(b) Each extension of time for completion of permit work: $10.
(2) Drive or street connection.
(a) Residential driveway (each driveway).
[1] Zero feet to 13 feet: $15.
[2] Over 13 feet to 20 feet: $20.
(b) Commercial driveway (each driveway).
[1] Zero feet to 20 feet: $25.
[2] Over 20 feet to 35 feet: $40.
[3] Over 35 feet: $55.
(c) Street connection (each): $55.
§ 194-3 FEES § 194-3
194:375
(3) Restoration or improved road surfaces when performed by
Monroeville.
(a) Restoration of pavement per square yard or fraction thereof:
$55, plus $20 per square yard.
(4) Road occupancy in excess of posted weight limit.
(a) Use of municipal roads shall be permitted upon posting of bond
in the following amount: $20,000 per mile.
N. Subsurface and surface facility installations. The term "line" as used
herein means an underground conductor used in providing electric or
communications service, or an underground pipe used in providing gas,
oil or oil product delivery, sewage, water or other service to one or more
consumers of such service.
(1) The permit application for installation of a line shall be as follows:
(a) Each line of 50 feet or less in length (each new noncontinuous
section): $20.
(b) Additional connected line (each 100 feet or fraction thereof):
$10.
(2) The permit application fee for installation or replacement of a line
from one side of highway to the other side, or from under a paved
roadway to one side (performed independently or with other permit
operations).
(a) Where crossing is made by trenching or tunneling: $35.
(b) Where crossing is made by boring, driving or drilling (boring
pits in berm only): $10.
(c) Where crossing is made by boring, driving or drilling (one
boring pit in road): $25.
(3) The permit application fee for installation or replacement of a
manhole and inlet placed in right-of-way independently or with
other permit operations: $15.
O. Connection of private storm sewer pipe to municipal sewer system
(inlets, manhole) tap-in fee. NOTE: Hydraulic analysis computed by a
registered engineer must accompany all such connections: $100.
P. Facility openings (e.g., service connections if performed independently
or with other permit operations repairs) (each opening) excluding D2:
(1) Improved surface opening: $25.
(2) Berm opening: $10.
(3) Core borings, each: $10.
§ 194-3 § 194-3
194:376
Q. Overhead facility installations (e.g., poles) (guys and/or anchors).
(1) New or original construction facilities.
(a) One to five, minimum fee: $20.
(b) Each additional pole over five: $5.
(2) Replacement or renewal or existing facilities.
(a) One to five, minimum fee: $15.
(b) Each additional pole over five: $5.
(3) Removal of pole: issuance fee only.
R. Engineer inspection fee. The fee for inspection of streets and highways
by the Consulting Municipal Engineer shall be $40 per hour.
S. Applications for site plan approval. For a site plan approving a new
structure or an addition to an existing structure, a fee of $300 shall be
charged plus $0.02 per square foot of the proposed structure or
addition to the existing structure. For a site plan without a structure or
an existing structure to which no addition is proposed, a flat fee of $500
shall be charged.
T. Application for any proceeding before the BOCA Board of Appeals. A
flat fee of $200 shall be charged for the acceptance of applications for
any type of proceeding before the BOCA Board of Appeals.
U. Application for certificate of nonconformance. A flat fee of $25 shall be
charged for the acceptance of any application for a certificate of
nonconformance.
V. Application for sign permits.
(1) A flat fee of $50 plus $2 per square foot per face shall be charged
for any ground sign.
(2) A flat fee of $50 plus $2 per square foot shall be charged for any
wall or roof sign.
(3) A flat fee of $100 is charged for any temporary sign.
(4) A flat fee of $100 is charged for special promotional balloons and
other inflatable signs.
W. All permits issued shall be required as set forth in the BOCA Basic
Building Code and/or Fire Prevention Code as may be amended and
adopted by the Monroeville Municipality and if otherwise lawful shall
be issued in accordance with the fee schedule herein set forth.
X. All fees as set forth in this chapter shall be due and payable at the time
any application is accepted, and any bond required herein or otherwise
§ 194-3 FEES § 194-3
194:377
§ 194-4. Copying fees.
§ 194-5. Equipment rental fees.
Equipment/operator charges (trucks, grader, loader, backhoe, chipper, air
compressor, leaf collector, sweeper, roller, etc.).
§ 194-6. Fire Prevention Code fees.
Fire Prevention Code fees shall be as follows:
shall be posted with the Municipality prior to the issuance of any
permit.
Y. Temporary structures.
(1) All temporary structures to include tents and trailers for a period
not to exceed 60 days.
(a) Tent fee: $100.
(b) Trailer fee: $300.
(2) Any extension of time must be approved by the Zoning Hearing
Board with a subsequent renewal fee of $200.
A. Ordinances consisting of one to 10 pages: $0.25 per page with a
minimum of $2.
B. Any ordinances that must be delivered through the United States mail:
$5.
C. Specific communications and ordinances that require research: A
charge would be made for staff time and reproduction cost at an hourly
rate with a minimum charge of $20.
D. GIS information: $100 per tile (delivered electronically).
A. 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. with one operator (per hour): $70.
B. 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. with two operators (per hour): $95.
C. 3:30 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. and weekends with one operator (per hour): $85.
D. 3:30 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. and weekends with two operators (per hour):
$125.
E. Snow plowing, cindering and street sweeping 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
(per hour): $70.
F. Snow plowing, cindering and street sweeping 3:30 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
and weekends: $85.
G. Materials used: actual cost.
§ 194-3 § 194-6
194:378
Type Fee
Bonfire permit $100.00
Use of torch or flame-producing device $100.00
**Storage in excess of 2,500 cubic feet $100.00
**Cellulose nitrate film $100.00
**Cellulose nitrate plastic $100.00
Install, suppression, alarm and detection system $125.00
Sprinkler systems 20 or less heads $65.00
Sprinkler systems 150 or less heads $130.00
Sprinkler systems 400 or less heads $230.00
Sprinkler systems over 401 heads $305.00
**Airports, heliport and helistops $100.00
**Application of flammable finishes $200.00
**Bowling alleys refinishing and pin refinish $100.00
**Crop ripening or coloring processes $250.00
**Dry-cleaning plants $100.00
**Dust explosion hazards $250.00
**Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging $100.00
**Lumberyards and woodworking plants $100.00
**Oil and gas production $150.00
**Place of public assembly and education $100.00
**Semiconductor fabrication facilities $200.00
**Service stations and garages $100.00
**Vehicle wrecking yards, junk yards and waste material
handling plants
$250.00
**Welding or cutting, calcium carbide and acetylene
generators
$100.00
cut/welding
$250.00
Acety. Gen.
**Combustible fibers $100.00
**Compressed gasses $250.00
**Cryogenic liquids $100.00
**Explosives, blasting agents and ammunition $100.00
**Fireworks $125.00
**Flammable liquids $130.00
§ 194-6 FEES § 194-6
194:379
Type Fee
To install, remove, repair or alter stationary tank(s)
or replace or modify and line, vent, or dispensing
device (per tank)
$130.00
**To store, handle or use Class I liquids in excess of
five gallons in a dwelling unit, or other place of
human occupancy or in excess 60 gallons outside of
any building
$130.00
**To manufacture, process, blend, or refine any
amount of flammable liquids.
$130.00
**To store flammable liquids in stationary tanks $130.00
To place any flammable liquids stationary tank
temporarily out-of-service not exceeding 30 days
$130.00
To place any flammable liquids stationary tank back
into service
$130.00
To store any flammable liquid saturated soil above
ground not exceeding 30 days
$130.00
**Combustible liquids $125.00
To install, remove, repair or alter stationary tank(s)
or replace or modify any line, vent, or dispensing
device (per tank)
$130.00
To store, handle, or use Class II and III combustible
liquids:
**100 gallons or less $30.00
**250 gallons or less $60.00
**251 gallons or more $125.00
**To manufacture, process, blend, or refine any
amount of combustible liquids
$100.00
**To store combustible liquids in stationary tanks $125.00
To place any combustible liquid stationary tank
temporarily out-of-service not exceeding 30 days
$125.00
To place any combustible liquid stationary tank back
into service
$125.00
To store any combustible liquid saturated soil above
ground not exceeding 30 days
$125.00
**Hazardous material and chemicals $255.00
**Liquefied petroleum gases
1,000 gallons or less $100.00
Greater than 1,000 gallons $250.00
**Magnesium $250.00
**Bulk matches (storage) $250.00
§ 194-6 § 194-6
194:380
Type Fee
**Organic coatings $250.00
**Pesticide storage $250.00
Fire Official reports, fire investigation, hazardous
property surveys for property transfer
$30/per hour
Fire alarm malfunction, i.e., failure to maintain $500.00
Nuisance fire alarm 1 to 2 times N/C
3rd time $75.00
4th time $150.00
5th time $300.00
6 or more (per occurrence) $600.00
NOTE:
** Indicates annual permit renewal required.
§ 194-7. Formula for calculating personnel rates.
The formula for calculating personnel rates shall be as follows:
§ 194-8. Land disturbance.
A. Total of employee's hourly rate (per hour or per overtime hour), plus
costs for social security, medicare, workers' compensation insurance,
health, pension, state unemployment compensation tax, life insurance,
longevity and any material cost.
B. Examples of charges billed: police, engineering, public works, etc.
A. Minor excavations/minor timbering and logging operation.
(1) A fee of $15 shall be charged for the application for permit for
minor excavation involving 100 cubic yard of earth or less. A
minimum bond of $80 shall be deposited with the Municipality to
guarantee the completion of the work.
(2) A fee of $125 shall be charged for the application for permit for
minor excavation involving 5,000 cubic yards of earth or less.
(3) A fee of $125 plus $15 for every 1,000 additional cubic yards of
earth moved shall be charged for any minor excavation involving
excavation of more than 5,000 cubic yards of each but less than
required for major excavation as defined by the Monroeville Zoning
Ordinance.140
(4) A fee of $200 shall be charged for the application for permit for any
minor timbering and logging operation.
140. Editor's Note: See Ch. 359, Zoning.
§ 194-6 FEES § 194-8
194:381
§ 194-9. Monroeville Community Pool fees.
N/I denotes "no increase."
(5) A bond of $2,500 per acre shall be deposited with the Municipality
of Monroeville to guarantee the restoration of property.
(6) Additional cost can be assessed for engineering review, legal and
expert service when required.
B. Major timbering and logging operation.
(1) An application fee of $1,000 shall be charged by the Municipality of
Monroeville for any application for a major timbering and logging
operation as defined in the Land Disturbance Ordinance.141
(2) A review fee deposit of $1,000 shall be required at the time of
submission for a major timbering and logging operation as defined
in the Land Disturbance Ordinance.
(3) An appeal to the decision of the Municipal Engineer shall be $1,000
plus $100 per acre.
(4) A review fee deposit of $2,000 shall be required at the time of
submission for an appeal to the decision of the Municipal Engineer.
A. Monroeville Community Pool season pass rates.
Description 2005 2006
Family — resident $150.00 N/I
Family — nonresident $250.00 N/I
Limited family — single parent with residing
children-resident
$110.00 N/I
Limited family — single parent with residing
children-nonresident
$180.00 N/I
Adult — resident (ages 18 to 64 yrs.) $80.00 N/I
Adult — nonresident (ages 18 to 64 yrs.) $130.00 N/I
Teen — resident (13 to 17 years) $35.00 N/I
Teen — nonresident (13 to 17 years) $60.00 N/I
Senior citizen — resident (65 years and over)
[Amended 3-14-2006 by Ord. No. 2362]
$35.00 No charge
Senior citizen — nonresident (65 years and
over)
$75.00 N/I
Half season family — resident $90.00 N/I
Half season family — nonresident $110.00 N/I
141. Editor's Note: See Ch. 243, Land Disturbance.
§ 194-8 § 194-9
194:382
Description 2005 2006
Pass replacement fee $6.00 N/I
Preseason discount (resident pass only) 10% N/I
Referral incentive (discount applied to next
pass)
10% N/I
B. Monroeville Community Pool daily admission charges.
Type of Admission 2005 2006
Adult — resident $5.00 N/I
Adult — nonresident $7.00 N/I
Youth/senior — resident $4.00 N/I
Youth/senior — nonresident $6.00 N/I
Family swim/per person — resident, non-passholder
$3.00 N/I
Family swim/per person — nonresident, nonpass-
holder
$4.00 N/I
C. Other Monroeville Community Pool fees.*
Type 2005 2006
Special organized group rates (during regular
pool hours) discount for groups of 15 or more
20% N/I
Birthday parties (per child, 10 minimum,
includes use of party room)
$8.00** N/I
Deposit (nonrefundable — applied to party
fees)
$20.00 N/I
Facility rental (excluding concession and
party room) 8:00-11:00 p.m.
Resident — 75 people or less $150.00 N/I
Nonresident — 75 people or less $300.00 N/I
Up-charge — per group of 1 to 25
additional people
$40.00 N/I
Additional hour (11:00 p.m. to 12:00
midnight)
$50.00 N/I
Concession stand or party room rental $25.00 N/I
Security deposit (refunded if all permit
conditions met)
$25.00 N/I
Sand volleyball court in conjunction with
pavilion rental
Daylight hours No
additional
charge
N/I
§ 194-9 FEES § 194-9
194:383
§ 194-10. Mechanical device permit fees.
§ 194-11. Planning Department fees.
Planning Department fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Application for rezoning and/or
zoning ordinance change
$1,000.00 plus $50.00 per acre
Review fee for rezoning and/or
zoning ordinance change
$500.00
Type 2005 2006
Under the lights (until 11:00 p.m.) $25.00 N/I
A. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELECTROMECHANICAL DEVICE — A game of chance not requiring
any skill or manual dexterity in order to receive a reward such as extra
playing credits. Also, has the ability to or be converted to knockdown
or eliminate playing credits; and is similar in type, brand or model of
an electromechanical video display device which simulates the game
of poker utilizing the rules that govern the card game of poker; or
simulates slot machines consisting of rolling wheels stopping on
numbers, food, fruits, X's and O's, animals or other items which offer a
winning line combination of the aforementioned; or simulates the game
of bingo; or any other type of games of chance used in casino-style
gambling.
MECHANICAL DEVICE — Any device, machine, or apparatus for
playing of games and amusements for which a charge for the privilege
of playing is made. This includes but is not limited to devices commonly
known as "pinball" machines on which games are played; movie
projectors; devices commonly known as "kiddie rides;" and pool tables.
B. Mechanical device permit fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Mechanical device $200.00 each
Music machines $100.00 each
Electromechanical device (poker, blackjack,
bingo, etc.)
1st three machines (registered) $400.00 each
Additional machines (registered) $500.00 each
Any machines found not to be registered will
be assessed
$1,000.00 each
§ 194-9 § 194-11
194:384
Type Fee
Application for conditional use $500.00 plus $0.02 per square foot
of structure or cubic yard of earth
moved or $800.00 for a conditional
use with no structure shall be
charged
Review fee for conditional use $1,000.00
Applications for site plans $300.00 plus $0.02 per square foot
of the proposed structure or
addition to an existing structure
Review fee for site plans $1,500.00
Application for subdivision $50.00 per lot
Review fee for subdivision $1,500.00
Review fee for minor subdivision $250.00
Subdivision reapproval $200.00
§ 194-12. Police Department fees.
Police Department fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Alarm permit (annual) $240.00
Copy of accident report $15.00
Copy of accident report (resident,
proof of residency required)
$5.00
Plus per-page charge for over two
pages
$1.00
Copy of incident report $15.00
Copy of incident report (resident,
proof of residency required)
$5.00
Plus per-page charge for over two
pages
$1.00
False burglar alarm
1 to 3 false alarms/year Warnings
4 to 10 false alarms/year $25.00 each
Over 10 false alarms/year $50.00 each
Parking in fire lane $20.00 within 48 hours; $35.00
within 10 days
Parking violations $10.00
Parking from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. $10.00
§ 194-11 FEES § 194-12
194:385
Type Fee
Parking within 15 feet of fire
hydrant
$10.00
Parking more than 12 inches from
the curb
$10.00
Parking which blocks a public or
private driveway
$10.00
Parking where prohibited $10.00
Parking within 30 feet of any traffic
control device
$10.00
Parking which blocks a crosswalk $10.00
Parking on a sidewalk $10.00
Parked in a handicapped zone $200.00
NOTE: Violations not paid within 48 hours will be forwarded to the
District Justice for prosecution.
§ 194-13. Recreation programs
NOTES: N/I denotes no increase; nonresident surcharge of $5 on all
recreation programs. (Pitcairn residents excluded from surcharge on
programs held in Gateway School District facilities.)
SWIM PROGRAMS 2005 2006
Adult Swim Programs
POWW Program $36.00 $40.00
Adult instruction $30.00 $35.00
Water aerobics $36.00 $40.00
Swim Instruction
Parent-child aquatics (age 4 months to 1 year
w/parent)
Six weeks
$30.00 N/I
Eight weeks
$35.00 N/I
Learn to swim (Levels I - VI)
Six weeks
$30.00 $35.00
Eight weeks
$35.00 $40..00
Scuba diving ** **
**Fees set by Diving School, may vary from
provided figures
§ 194-12 § 194-13
194:386
SWIM PROGRAMS 2005 2006
Adult Swim Programs
Recreational swim (walk-in)
Youth/senior (ages 3 to 17, 65+) $2.00 N/I
Adult (ages 18 to 64) $3.00 N/I
Family $8.00 N/I
Adult lap swim (16 years and up) NEW $3.00
RECREATION PROGRAM FEES 2005 2006
Adult/Teen Programs
Aerobics (6 weeks) Varies with class $36.00 $40.00
Arts and crafts programs Various classes ** **
Ballet (12 weeks) One day per week ** N/I
Basketball (10 weeks) One day per week $30.00 N/I
Basketball (5 weeks) One day per week $17.00 N/I
Dine around town Every other week $10.00
plus meal
N/I
Drivers education (6
weeks)
One day per week $338.00** $345.00**
Exercise ball program
(with equipment)
One day per week $50.00 $55.00
Exercise tubing program
(with equipment)
One day per week NEW $55.00
Fencing (8 weeks) One day per week ** **
Golf (6 weeks) One day per week $55.00** $60.00**
Ice skating One day per week $50.00** N/I
One-session workshop One time NEW **
Skiing/snowboarding (5
weeks)
One day per week ** **
Snowshoe by moonlight Per hike $35.00** N/I
Social recreation
progarms
Various classes NEW **
Tai Chi (4 weeks) One day per week ** **
Tap dance, beginning (15
weeks)
One day per week $120.00** N/I
Teen program night Per evening $3.00 N/I
Teen recreation night (10
weeks)
One day per week $1.00/night N/I
Tennis (6 weeks) One day per week $35.00 $40.00
§ 194-13 FEES § 194-13
194:387
RECREATION PROGRAM FEES 2005 2006
Trips and tours Per trip ** **
Volleyball (10 weeks) One day per week $30.00 N/I
Volleyball (5 weeks) One day per week $17.00 N/I
Women's self defense (4
weeks)
One day per week ** **
Clinics (rollerblading,
bicycle, skateboarding)
One day per week ** **
Youth Programs
Arts/crafts (6 weeks) Varies with class $25.00 N/I
Ballet (year-long) One day per week ** **
Ceramics Various ** **
Camp Chipewee —
resident
Per day $9.50 N/I
Camp Chipewee —
nonresident
Per day $19.00 N/I
Creative Movement I One day per week $25.00 N/I
Creative Movement II One day per week $25.00 N/I
Day camps (full day) Five days per week $95.00*** $105.00***
Fencing (6 weeks) One day per week ** **
Golf (beginner) One day per week $55.00** $60.00**
Gymnastics (6 weeks) One day per week $30.00 N/I
Hockey (beginner) One day per week 60.00** **
Hoopin' It Up (6 weeks) One day per week $40.00 N/I
Little This `n' That (6
weeks)
One day per week $25.00 N/I
Musical Theater Workshop
(4 weeks)
One day per week NEW $40.00
Karate (6 weeks) One day per week $40.00 N/I
Acrobatics (beginner) One day per week $35.00 N/I
Acrobatics (advanced) One day per week $40.00 N/I
Kids Against Drugs (6
weeks)
One day per week $10
plus $3
class
$54.00
Kindermusik (15 weeks) One day per week NEW $130.00
Magic workshop One day program $50.00 N/I
Science programs One day per week ** **
Skiing (5 weeks) One day per week ** **
§ 194-13 § 194-13
194:388
RECREATION PROGRAM FEES 2005 2006
Snag golf (6 weeks) One day per week NEW $45.00
Soccer (6 weeks) One day per week $25.00 N/I
Sport camps (1 week) Five days per week $40.00 N/I
Sports camps (2 weeks) Five days per week $70.00 N/I
Start Smart Sports One day per week $45.00 N/I
Sticky Fingers (6 weeks) One day per week $30.00 N/I
T-Ball (6 weeks) One day per week $25.00 N/I
Tennis (6 weeks) One day per week $35.00 $40.00
Volleyball (5 weeks) One day per week $25.00 N/I
Cheerleading program One day per week New **
Clinics (basketball,
softball, deck hockey)
One day per week New **
Clinics (rollerblading,
bicycle, skateboarding)
One day per week New **
Red Cross/Heart Association Certification
Courses
AHA First Aid 30 hour course NEW $45.00
AHA Heart Saver CPR 30 hour course ** **
Baby-sitting 8 hour course ** **
Guard Start 6 hour course ** **
Lifeguard certification 30 hour course ** **
League Sports Leagues
Basketball - Grades 4
through 12
12 to 13 weeks Candy plus $35.00*** $40.00***
Competitive basketball -
Grades 5 though 8
12 to 13 weeks Candy plus $45.00*** $50.00***
Girls softball - 9-year-old
and up
Slowpitch league Candy plus $40.00*** N/I
Fastpitch league Candy plus $50.00*** N/I
Deck Hockey — Ages 6
through 17
10 to 12 weeks Candy plus $45.00*** N/I
Other Charges
Late registration surcharge $5.00 $10.00
§ 194-13 FEES § 194-13
194:389
RECREATION PROGRAM FEES 2005 2006
Nonresident surcharge (Pitcairn residents
excluded from surcharge on programs held in
Gateway School District facilities)
$5.00 $10.00
Processing fee (cancellation/transfer) $10.00 N/I
NOTES:
** Price determined by instructor fee and material costs, may vary from
provided figure. Certification course fees reflect current Red Cross
rates, may vary from provided figure. Trips and tour charges based on
entry fees, food and transportation costs.
*** Family discount of $5 for each additional child enrolled in these
programs, excluding first enrollee.
EQUIPMENT RENTAL FEES* 2005 2006
Volleyball standards and net $10.00 N/I
Volleyball $1.50 N/I
Set of rubber bases (throw down) $3.50 N/I
Horseshoe set (metal) $5.00 N/I
PLAYING FIELD AND COURT PERMIT
FEES* 2005 2006
Playing Fields and Volleyball Courts
Resident teams — per season (12 weeks) $75.00 N/I
Organized league play (nonspecific teams
- 12 weeks)
$150.00 N/I
Playing fields under lights (per hour, in
addition to permit fee)
$25.00 N/I
Volleyball courts under lights (per season
permit)
$85.00 N/I
Single-use permit (limit 3 per year) $20.00 N/I
Full-day use (9:00 a.m. — 9:00 p.m.) $75.00 N/I
Nonresident on teams — up-charge per
individual
$7.50 N/I
All resident youth teams No charge N/I
Tournaments (Baseball/Softball Fields)
One field - full day (includes lights) NEW $100.00
Two fields - full day (includes lights) NEW $175.00
Three fields - full day (includes lights) NEW $250.00
Four fields - full day (includes lights) NEW $300.00
Five fields - full day (includes lights) NEW $350.00
§ 194-13 § 194-13
194:390
PLAYING FIELD AND COURT PERMIT
FEES* 2005 2006
Tournaments (soccer fields)
Travel field - full day (includes lights) NEW $100.00
In-house field - full day (per field) NEW $50.00
Tennis Courts
Per season (12 weeks) $20.00 $30.00
Single use (per hour) $2.00 $3.00
*NOTE: All playing field permits are issued for two-hour time period,
unless otherwise noted.
PICNIC PERMIT FEES* 2005 2006
Standard (maximum 100 people) pavilion
(nonrefundable)
$55.00 N/I
Nonresident $100.00 N/I
2nd Pavilion (nonrefundable) $40.00 N/I
Nonresident $70.00 N/I
Large group up-charge (in excess of 100 people
in standard pavilion)
$35.00 N/I
Nonresident $70.00 N/I
Large (maximum 125 person) pavilion
(nonrefundable)
NEW $75.00
Nonresident NEW $115.00
Extra-large (maximum 250 person) pavilion
(nonrefundable)
NEW $140.0
Nonresident NEW $210.00
Wedding Gazebo - photo session
(nonrefundable)
NEW $25.00
Nonresident NEW $40.00
Concession stand $30.00 NI
Security deposit (refunded if all permit
conditions met)
Per pavilion $75.00 N/I
Large group up-charge $75.00 $25.00
Large pavilion NEW $90.00
Extra-large pavilion NEW $125.00
Concession stand $50.00 N/I
*NOTE: Department programs and functions have priority over all other
uses
§ 194-13 FEES § 194-14
194:391
§ 194-14. Sale of maps and publications fees.
Sale of maps and publications fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Zoning Ordinance $20.00
Zoning Map $10.00
Large Municipal Map $10.00
Ward Map $10.00
Other maps At cost
Street Index $2.00
Aerial Map $10.00
Topographical Map (Mine Map) $10.00
Home Rule Charter $10.00
Annual Budget $20.00
Chamber of Commerce Street
Map
At cost
Subdivision Regulations $10.00
Copies made on the copy
machine
$0.20 per page
§ 194-15. Sign permits fees.
Application for sign permits:
§ 194-16. Soliciting permit fees.
Soliciting permit fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Annual $350.00
Monthly $200.00
Weekly $50.00
Daily $10.00
Application fee $10.00
Flyers $10.00
A. Ground signs: $50 plus $2 per square foot per face.
B. Wall or roof signs: $50 plus $2 per square foot.
C. Temporary sign: $100.
D. Special promotional balloons and other inflatable signs: $100.
§ 194-14 § 194-17
194:392
§ 194-17. Stenographic/court reporting service fees.
Stenographic/court reporting service fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
In-house court stenographer $2.00 per page
Outside court stenographer At cost
§ 194-18. Videotape fees.
§ 194-19. Worker's compensation certification fees.
Worker's compensation certification: $2 per notarial act.
§ 194-20. Zoning Hearing Board fees.
Zoning hearing fees shall be as follows:
Application
Appeal from the decision of Zoning
Officer
In residential zoning districts: $100.00
All other zoning districts: $500.00
Variance, dimensional
In residential zoning districts: $100.00
All other zoning districts: $200.00
Variance, expansion of a nonconforming
structure
In residential zoning districts: $100.00
All other zoning districts: $200.00
Variance, parking $500.00
Variance, use $800.00 plus $100 per acre
Special exception:
Home occupations $100.00
Living quarters $300.00
Nontransient roomers $300.00
Outside storage areas $300.00
Directional signs $200.00
A. A fee will be charged for the reproduction of videotapes in the amount
of $5 per hour plus $10 per tape in addition to any mailing costs.
B. The fee for the use of the Accident and Fire Photographic Unit
accompanied with the Production Manager will be $50 per hour.
§ 194-17 FEES § 194-20
194:393
Application
Appeal from the decision of Zoning
Officer
Expansion of a nonconforming use $300.00
Temporary structure/trailers $300.00
Other $200.00
Challenge to the validity of the
Ordinance/Map
$1,000.00
Review and interpretation of the
Ordinance/Map
$50.00
Certificate of nonconformity $25.00
Chapter 198
FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 206.
Land disturbance — See Ch. 243.
Noise control — See Ch. 264.
Zoning — See Ch. 359.
§ 194-20 § 194-20
198:394
ARTICLE I
Firearms and Weapons
[Adopted 3-4-1961 by Ord. No. 269142]
§ 198-1. Discharge of pellets prohibited. [Amended 11-11-1997 by
Ord. No. 2057]
From and after the passage of this article, the use or discharge within
the limits of the Municipality of Monroeville of any rifle, shotgun, revolver,
pistol, flobert rifle, air gun, spring gun or other implement which impels,
with force, a pellet or projectile of any kind is prohibited.
§ 198-2. Discharge of blank cartridges prohibited.
The use or discharge of any blank cartridge in any rifle, shotgun, revolver,
pistol, flobert rifle or any similar firearm within the limits of the
Municipality of Monroeville is prohibited.
§ 198-3. Arrows and darts.
From and after the passage of this article, the use or shooting within
the limits of the Municipality of Monroeville of any bow and arrow or
other implement which impels, with force, an arrow or dart of any kind is
prohibited.
§ 198-4. Exceptions. [Amended 11-11-1997 by Ord. No. 2057]
Sections 198-1, 198-2 and 198-3 of this article shall not apply to any owner
or lessor of property in the Municipality of Monroeville discharging firearms
or shooting bows and arrows in the destruction of predatory animals nor to
any bona fide and duly organized gun, archery or sportsman's club where
the firing or discharge of all firearms, air guns, toy air guns and bows
and where the flight of its missiles are confined entirely to the property
of said club nor to persons in the exercise of necessary defense of person
or property nor to duly constituted peace officers in the discharge of their
duties nor any use or activities, regulated by and conducted, in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Game and Wildlife Code, 34 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 198-5. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, to undergo imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for a
period of not more than 30 days.
B. Each and every violation shall be considered as a distinct and separate
offense.
142. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed Ord. Nos. 139 and 142.
§ 198-1 FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES § 198-5
198:395

ARTICLE II
Explosives
[Adopted 12-14-1976 by Ord. No. 1045]
§ 198-6. Definitions and word usage.
§ 198-7. Storage and manufacture.
All storage and manufacture of explosives, blasting agents and detonators
are prohibited within the Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 198-8. Storage magazines.
All storage magazines and other facilities used for the purpose of the
storage of explosives, blasting agents and detonators are prohibited within
the Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 198-9. Seizure of explosives and magazines.
Any explosives, blasting agents, detonators and explosive facility found
within the Municipality of Monroeville in violation of this article are
declared dangerous to the safety of the citizens of the Municipality and
shall be seized, removed or caused to be removed and destroyed by the Fire
Official or his designated representative of the Municipality of Monroeville,
at the expense of the owner.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BLASTING AGENTS — Any material or mixture consisting of fuel and
oxidizer intended for blasting not otherwise defined as an explosive,
provided that the finished product, as mixed for use or shipment,
cannot be detonated by means of a number 8 test blasting cap when
unconfined.
DETONATOR — Any device containing a detonating charge that is used
for initiating detonation in an explosive; the term includes electric
blasting caps of instantaneous and delay types, blasting caps for use
with safety fuses and detonating cord delay connectors.
EXPLOSIVES — Any chemical compound mixture or device, the primary
or common purpose of which is to function by explosive; the term
includes but is not limited to dynamite, initiating explosives,
detonators, safety fuses, squibs, detonating cord, ignition cord and
igniters as listed in the Federal Register.
STORAGE MAGAZINE — All storage facilities except portable outdoor
facilities for temporary storage of high explosives while attended (day
box) and low explosive smokeless powder storage facilities.
B. Exceptions. The following are not included in the above definitions:
smokeless powder, black powder, ammunition and components.
§ 198-6 FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES § 198-10
198:397
§ 198-10. Use of explosives.
Use of explosives, blasting agents and detonators shall be controlled by the
Municipality of Monroeville as indicated by the Municipal Fire Prevention
Code143 and a permit shall be obtained before usage.
§ 198-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation found to be in violation of the
provisions of this article shall be fined not less than $500 or more than
$1,000 and/or be sentenced to one year imprisonment in Allegheny County
Jail.
143. Editor's Note: See Ch. 206, Fire Prevention; and Ch. 176, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 198-10 § 198-11
198:398
Chapter 202
FIRE LANES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 206. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 352.
§ 202-1. Purpose.
It is the intent, purpose and scope of this chapter to provide for the
designation of fire lanes, fire equipment access pads, or fire access cartways
wherever it appears that parking or vehicle traffic congestion may create
a hazard by impeding the free movement of fire-fighting equipment,
ambulances or public emergency response vehicles, anywhere within the
Municipality of Monroeville, on public or private property.
§ 202-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined as
indicated:
FIRE EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT — All vehicles designated as being
operated by the Municipality of Monroeville, fire departments or Police
Department.
FIRE LANE — A driving lane, cartway, accessway or paved pad having a
minimum width of 20 feet and minimum inside turning radius of 15 feet for
the use of emergency fire vehicles in order to locate within a minimum of
10 feet to structure.
FIRE OFFICIAL — The appointed individual responsible for enforcement of
the International Fire Code adopted by the Municipality of Monroeville.
FIRE PROTECTION DEVICES — All permanently installed fire protection
devices, equipment or apertures shall mean items such a fire hydrants, Fire
Department siamese connections, fire pump wall headers, pressurization
ventilation intakes, post indicator valves, back flow prevention valves, etc.
FIRE SAFETY ADVISORY COMMITTEE — The individual Chiefs of
Monroeville Fire Departments 1; 3; 4; 5; and 6.
MUNICIPAL MANAGER — The executive officer for the Municipality of
Monroeville
PARKING — "No Parking" shall mean all vehicles standing for a time within
a fire lane.
POLICE CHIEF — Chief of Police for the Municipality of Monroeville.
STANDING — "No Standing" shall mean all vehicles remaining stationary or
unchanged in position, with or without an operator or occupant, within the
fire lane.
§ 198-11 FIRE LANES § 202-2
202:399
STOPPING — "No Stopping" shall mean all vehicles that cease to go on or
cease moving, except momentarily stopped for the purpose of, and while
actually engaged in, loading or unloading property or passengers or
merchandise, within a fire lane.
§ 202-3. Fire lane marking and identification.
Fire lanes shall be clearly marked and identified as follows:
§ 202-4. Designation of fire lanes.
The Fire Official shall have the power to designate fire lanes anywhere
within the Municipality of Monroeville, on public or private property where
it is deemed that stopping, standing or parking or potential parking may
create a hazard by impeding the free movement of fire-fighting equipment.
The Fire Official may consult the Fire Safety Advisory Committee or any
other municipal agency or consultant in making such designation.
§ 202-5. Fire lane designation for fire protection devices and areas.
All permanently installed fire-fighting equipment, devices or apertures shall
be designated as fire lanes with or without fire lane signage:
§ 202-6. Fire lane and curb radius dimensions.
The dimensions of a designated fire lane shall be as follows:
A. Signage: a metal sign stating "No Stopping, Standing or Parking — Fire
Lane," located at each end of the designated fire lane and at reasonable
intervals between such signs as approved by the Fire Official.
A. All fire hydrants and 15 feet on either side of the hydrant on public or
private property, paralleling the street or cartway or paved vehicular
surface, is hereby deemed as fire lanes.
B. Vehicle parking near or on private commercial sidewalks adjacent to
marked designated fire lanes are hereby deemed as fire lanes.
C. All commercial entrance driveways or accessways blocking the free
movement of emergency vehicles and fire-fighting apparatus shall be
deemed as fire lanes, whether marked or unmarked.
A. Minimum width of 20 clear feet.
B. Maximum grade of 2% inclination curb to curb.
C. Paving should be approved by the Municipal Engineer and curb radius
shall be a minimum of 15 feet for each ninety-degree angle to permit
fire-fighting apparatus to safely turn into the designated fire lane.
D. Curb radius shall be a minimum inside radius of 15 feet for each ninetydegree
angle to permit fire-fighting apparatus to safely turn into the
designated fire lane.
§ 202-2 § 202-7
202:400
§ 202-7. Maintenance of fire lane markings.
§ 202-8. Enforcement.
The Police Chief shall prescribe and issue all forms necessary for the
administration of this chapter and may adopt and enforce regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration of this chapter
including but not limited to the inspection and collection of fines for
violations. The Police Chief, with approval of the Municipal Manager, may
designate the Fire Enforcement Office, Municipal Police, Municipal Fire
Departments, or other persons to enforce this chapter, either singly or in
conjunction with each other.
§ 202-9. Violations and penalties.
Any car owner who parks or permits a car to be parked within a designated
fire zone shall be prosecuted by the Police Chief. A fine of $35 shall be
imposed for each violation and shall be collected by the Police Chief by a
ticketing procedure whereby the fine may be paid at the Municipal Building.
If payment is made at the Municipal Building within 48 hours of the
issuance of a ticket, the fine shall be $20. If the fine is not paid within 10
days of the date of the issuance of the ticket, the Police Chief shall further
prosecute the violator before a District Justice. If such further prosecution
is necessary, the violator, if found guilty, shall pay a fine of $35 plus costs
imposed by the District Justice. In default of payment, the violator may be
sentenced to imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for not more than
30 days.
Chapter 206
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Division of Fire Prevention — See Ch. 54.
Alarm devices — See Ch. 151.
Building construction — See Ch. 162.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 176.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 187.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 254.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 290.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or lessee to maintain
such signage as specified in this chapter in § 202-3.
B. The Municipality shall maintain all such signage on public property as
specified in this chapter per § 202-3.
§ 202-7 FIRE PREVENTION § 206-1
206:401
§ 206-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Municipal Manager of the Municipality of Monroeville, being marked
and designated as "the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code/1996, 10th
edition," as published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc., be and is adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the
Municipality of Monroeville in the State of Pennsylvania for the control
of all conditions affecting fire and life safety in structures, buildings and
premises as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National Fire Prevention Code
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out
in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 206-3 of this chapter.
§ 206-2. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Ordinance Nos. 1583 and 1912 of the Municipality of Monroeville and all
other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 206-3. Amendments to standards; violations and penalties; board
qualifications.
A. The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
(1) Section F-107.8 shall be amended to add the following:
F-107.8 Add: Fee schedule: Fees shall be in accordance with the
current Fee Ordinance of the Municipality of Monroeville.
(2) Section F-315.2 shall be amended as follows:
F-315.2 Fire Department access: Fire Department access shall
be provided in accordance with Monroeville Ordinance 1935 listed
in Appendix A1.144
(3) Section F-503.7 is added as follows:
F-503.7 Exterior wall key safe: An exterior wall-mounted key
safe shall be installed on all buildings for emergency access of firefighting
personnel. Type, location and key requirements shall be
as approved by the Monroeville Fire Official.
Exceptions:
1. One- and two-family residential.
2. All buildings where access to doors, dorm rooms or
mechanical/electrical rooms are accessible 24 hours a day.
3. Financial institutions.
144. Editor's Note: Appendix A1 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 206-1 § 206-3
206:402
4. Jails, prisons, etc., approved by the Code Official.
(4) Section 517.4 is added as follows:
F-517.4 General: The water required for fire protection for
proposed new construction and/or changes in existing
construction, when the use group changes to a higher fire hazard
or a higher fire hazard use within the same use group than the
buildings, structures or premises had originally been constructed,
shall conform to the requirements of this section. The Fire Official
shall review all plans for proposed new or modified construction or
occupancies per Section F-517.4. He shall determine by national
standards, as listed in Appendix A1,145 the following:
1. Location of underground water distribution system to serve the
proposed structure or structures.
2. Location of all fire hydrants and/or fire protection devices
requiring water for fire-fighting and life safety for the proposed
structure and locations for such required devices on the water
distribution system.
3. The diameter of water distribution system pipes and conduit,
primary feeders, secondary feeders and distributors for fire
protection.
(5) Section F-2314.10 shall be amended as follows:
F-2314. 10 Fire lanes and water supply: shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of Sections F-315.2 and F-517.4.
(6) Section F-2320.7 shall be amended as follows:
F-2320.7 Fire lanes and water supplies: shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of Sections F-315.2 and F-517.4.
(7) Table F-3201.4, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Exempt
Amounts for Storage (Maximum Quantities per Control Area), is
amended.146
(8) Section F-3207.1 is amended as follows:
F-3207.1 General: Flammable and combustible liquid storage
tanks shall be prohibited except as specified in Ordinance No.
1979 listed in Appendix A1.147
(9) Section F-3207.5 is amended as follows:
145. Editor's Note: Appendix A1 is located at the end of this chapter.
146. Editor's Note: Table F-3201.4 is located at the end of this chapter.
147. Editor's Note: Appendix A1 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 206-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 206-3
206:403
§ 206-4. Establishment of limits.
The limits referred to in Section F-3003.2 of the BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code/1996 in which the storage of explosive materials is
prohibited, are hereby established as follows: the entire boundaries of the
Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 206-5. Severability.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court or
any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 206-2 of this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 206-6. When effective.
The office of the Manager shall certify to the adoption of this chapter and
cause the same to be published as required by law; and this chapter shall
take full force and effect immediately after this date of final passage and
approval. With the exception that buildings or structures or portions thereof
F-3207.5 Automotive service stations: Aboveground tanks
shall not be utilized for the outside storage of motor fuels at
automotive service stations unless the tanks comply with this
section. Aboveground tanks utilized for the storage of motor fuels
at automotive service stations to which the public does not have
access shall be installed in accordance with this section and the
requirements for fire-resistant tanks or tanks in vaults specified in
NFPA 30A listed in Chapter 44 and Appendix A1.
B. Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an
approved plan or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
summary offense, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
C. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after
having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be liable to a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $500.
D. The qualifications of the Board of Appeals shall conform to Monroeville
Ordinance No. 1614.148
148. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 176, Construction Codes, Uniform, § 176-4.
§ 206-3 § 206-6
206:404
of which plans have previously been submitted to the Building Department
of the Municipality of Monroeville or the Pennsylvania Department of Labor
and Industry shall be permitted to be constructed under the provisions of
the code in force at the time of approval by the involved departments.
§ 206-7. Applicability.
All plans not previously submitted for approval or already approved as of
the legal adoption of this chapter shall meet the provisions of the BOCA
National Fire Prevention Code/1996.
Chapter 210
FLEA MARKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 206.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 282.
Trade shows — See Ch. 342.
Transient retail or wholesale
businesses — See Ch. 346.
§ 210-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FLEA MARKET — Any event which meets all of the following requirements:
FLEA MARKET EXHIBITOR — Any person exhibiting, displaying, selling,
exchanging or offering for sale or exchange any personal property at a flea
market not specifically prohibited by this chapter.
FLEA MARKET OPERATOR — Any person conducting or operating the
business of a flea market on any premises in the Municipality of
Monroeville; excluding, however, exhibitors.
§ 210-2. Permit required; application.
The place or location at which the event is held has been advertised
by any means whatsoever as a place or location to which members of
the public, during a specified period of time, may bring identifiable,
tangible personal property and exhibit the same for sale or exchange.
A.
A fee is charged, payable to the operator or organizer of the event,
either in the form of a charge for general admission to the place
or location where the event is held or a charge for the privilege of
exhibiting identifiable, tangible personal property at such event. The
charge for exhibiting identifiable, tangible personal property shall be a
fixed amount.
B.
§ 206-6 FLEA MARKETS § 210-2
210:405
§ 210-3. Requirements for application approval.
A. No person or entity shall establish, organize or conduct a flea market in
the Municipality of Monroeville without first obtaining from the
Municipal Council an approval to do so.
B. Application for any such approval shall be in writing, upon such form as
may be prescribed by the Municipal Manager and giving such
information as may be requested.
C. After the filing of the application for the permit, the facts therein stated
shall be investigated and presented to the Municipal Council which,
after considering such application and any investigated reports
thereon, may, on the basis of finding of facts concerning the public
health, safety and welfare, grant or deny such application for a permit.
If the Council determines that such a permit be granted, it shall be on
the condition that all of the terms and provisions of this chapter are
complied with, all other applicable ordinances of Monroeville and laws
of the commonwealth are complied with and such other conditions as it
may deem reasonable and necessary to protect the public health, safety
and welfare.
A. Approval shall be given only to proposed flea market applicants who
show by satisfactory evidence to the Municipal Council that the
applicant qualifies as a charitable organization for federal or state taxes
of any kind or that the organization to which all proceeds are to be
given qualifies as a charitable organization. Books of account shall be
maintained, and the Municipal Council shall have the right to inspect
the same to verify the charitable status.
B. No approval shall be issued to any applicant for a flea market operation
unless and until the applicant produces satisfactory evidence to the
Municipal Council that the intended sales at the flea market operation
are not subject to any municipal, county or state tax and that in the
event that the same are so applicable that any necessary permits and
approvals have been obtained and the collection of any required tax
assured.
C. The applicant shall produce satisfactory evidence that adequate offstreet
vehicle parking to accommodate the vehicles of all persons in
attendance at the flea market has been provided as may be required by
the Planning Department.
D. The days and hours when the flea market may be conducted shall be as
fixed and determined by the Municipal Council.
E. Adequate rest room facilities shall be approved by the building and fire
officials.
F. An adequate number of police or security officers, all at the expense of
the flea market operator, shall be on duty at all times while the flea
market is in operation to keep peace and to investigate and check on
§ 210-2 § 210-3
210:406
§ 210-4. Additional requirements.
§ 210-5. Unlawful acts.
No person, firm, corporation or entity at any flea market, whether he or
it is the operator or an exhibitor or any other person or entity, shall sell,
exchange, display, offer for sale or exchange or barter at any flea market
any of the following items of personal property:
§ 210-6. Duties of exhibitors and operators.
merchandise which is being displayed and is for sale, barter or
exchange. The number of such police or security officers and the hours
of duty shall be determined by the Municipal Council, with the advice
of the Police Department.
A. The operator of a flea market shall provide for a daily cleanup of the
premises and maintain said premises in a good, clean and sanitary
condition at all times.
B. The premises must be vacated by all exhibitors, and all of their
merchandise and personal property shall be removed at the close of
each day's business.
A. Any animal, bird or fowl or other living creature.
B. Any handgun, rifle, shotgun or other type of firearm, by whatever name,
or any deadly or dangerous weapon.
C. Any flammable gas or dangerous substance, including but not limited to
the following: gasoline, kerosene, acetone, thinners and solvents;
ammunition, blasting agents, liquid petroleum gases or other
combustible gases; any type of fireworks, explosives, acids, caustics or
oxidizing agents; or any other kind of material or substance regulated
or contemplated for regulation by the BOCA Fire Prevention Code.149
D. Any item of personal property produced for a first-time sale which
would compete with other businesses in the area of Monroeville having
permanent places of business.
A. Every person who desires to exhibit identifiable, tangible personal
property at a flea market shall, before he is permitted to exhibit such
property, furnish to the operator or organizer or his duly authorized
agent written notice containing all of the following information:
(1) The name and current address and telephone number of the person
who desires to exhibit identifiable, tangible personal property at a
flea market.
149. Editor's Note: See Ch. 206, Fire Prevention; and Ch. 176, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 210-3 FLEA MARKETS § 210-6
210:407
§ 210-7. Revocation of approval.
The Municipal Council, or the Municipal Manager at the direction of the
Municipal Council, may revoke any approval granted hereunder when any
condition of this chapter or condition of approval is not complied with or
when, in the judgment of the Municipal Council, or the Municipal Manager
at the direction of the Municipal Council, the best interests of the public
health, safety and welfare will not be served by allowing the flea market
operation to continue.
§ 210-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person or persons, be they owner, operator or exhibitor, violating
any of the provisions of this chapter, including the submission of false or
fraudulent statements or the perpetrating of misstatement, deception or
fraud in connection with any application, sale or exchange or information
reports to be made in connection therewith, shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed the sum of $600 plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day
(2) An accurate description, including any identifying manufacturer's
or license number, of every item of identifiable personal property
which such person will exhibit at the flea market.
(3) The name and current address of the owner of every item of
identifiable, tangible personal property which such person will
exhibit at the flea market.
B. Every person who sells or exchanges identifiable, tangible personal
property at a flea market shall furnish to the owner or operator of the
flea market, or a person designated in advance by such owner or
operator to receive such information, a written notice containing all of
the following information with respect to each sale or exchange:
(1) Any accurate description, including any identifying manufacturer's
or license number, of the identifiable, tangible personal property.
(2) The name and current address of the person owning the
identifiable, tangible personal property.
(3) The name and current address of the person selling or exchanging
the identifiable, tangible personal property.
C. Within 24 hours after the end of each day's business at the flea market,
the owner or operator of the flea market shall transmit, in writing, the
information received pursuant to Subsections A and B above of this
section to the Chief of Police of the Municipality of Monroeville on such
form or forms as may be approved or prescribed by the Municipal
Manager.
§ 210-6 § 210-8
210:408
during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted by such person.
§ 210-9. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to any flea market as defined herein which may now
be in existence and the subject or request or application of any applicants
or any flea market hereafter requested or operated within the Municipality
of Monroeville for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and
welfare, due to the nature of the operation of this kind of business.
Chapter 214
(RESERVED)
Chapter 221
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Landfills — See Ch. 245.
Littering — See Ch. 249.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 290.
Recycling — See Ch. 297.
§ 210-8 (RESERVED) § 210-9
214:409

ARTICLE I
Storage, Collection and Removal
[Adopted 8-13-1968 by Ord. No. 611]
§ 221-1. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings as
hereinafter ascribed to them unless the context clearly appears otherwise:
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable waste, including carcasses, fat,
bone, swill, vegetables, vegetable and animal refuse or any other organic
substance subject to fermentation or decay resulting from the storage,
handling, preparation and consumption of foodstuffs.
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals, company, partnership,
firm, association, organization or corporation.
RUBBISH — All rags, glass, crockery, bottles, tin cans, plastics, foil, coat
hangers, small metal parts, utensils, toys, paper, newspapers and
magazines, that is household refuse generally, and including also cold
incinerator ashes, grass cuttings, weeds and leaves. Specifically excluded
are ashes from heating plants and coal stoves and refuse caused by repairs,
alteration and new construction of buildings, sidewalks, driveways, fences,
patios, pools, walls and the like.
§ 221-2. Outdoor storage or accumulation restricted.
No garbage, rubbish or other refuse or debris shall be stored or allowed to
accumulate outdoors on any land, public or private, within the Municipality,
nor be deposited on the streets or highways, vacant lots, streams or other
bodies of water within the Municipality, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 221-3. Garbage cans.
For purposes of temporary storage and collection, garbage and rubbish may
be deposited in potable metal or plastic and watertight garbage cans, of a
size not greater than 33 gallons' capacity, with lids and with handles in good
repair for the efficient handling and disposal thereof.
§ 221-4. Placement of garbage cans. [Amended 3-10-1981 by Ord.
No. 1267; 12-29-1981 by Ord. No. 1301]
Such garbage cans as mentioned above, whether to be collected by the
Municipality or a contractor for the Municipality, shall be placed and
located outdoors at the street curbline or within 10 feet of the edge of the
cartway where no curb exists. Any person physically incapable of complying
with this provision shall contact the Municipal Manager, who shall
determine whether special collection arrangements can be made and the
circumstances under which such arrangements should be made.
§ 221-1 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 221-5
221:411
§ 221-5. Collection permit required; issuance. [Amended
12-29-1981 by Ord. No. 1301]
No person other than agents of the Municipality or contractors for the
Municipality shall be permitted to collect garbage or rubbish, unless a
permit therefor is first obtained from the Municipal Manager. Such permit
may be issued by the Manager upon satisfactory evidence of the applicant's
ability and capacity to collect, transport and dispose of such materials in a
safe and sanitary fashion and consistent with all regulations and standards
therefor as established by the Municipality of Monroeville, by the County of
Allegheny and by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 221-6. Preparation of garbage for collection.
§ 221-7. Additional collection charges. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord.
No. 2042]
If a person desires the contents of more than three cans collected on a
regular and continuing basis, he may request such additional service by
written communication to the Municipal Manager at a charge as provided
in Chapter 194, Fees.
§ 221-8. Collection of delinquent accounts.
The Municipal Manager may from time to time direct the Solicitor to
proceed to collect all delinquent accounts either in an action in assumpsit or
in any other manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims.
§ 221-9. Collection of other discarded household refuse and trash.
The Municipal Manager shall further arrange for the collection by the
Municipality of all other discarded household refuse and trash not less often
than three times per year. Commencing January 1, 1969, the collection of
such trash shall be made weekly. Such collections shall be of materials
deposited at curbside only and shall be limited by the Municipal Manager
to such materials as can be readily and safely handled by garbage packer
trucks. Notice of such collections and the limitations and regulations
A. Prior to depositing in garbage cans, all garbage shall be thoroughly
drained and tightly wrapped in sufficient paper to protect it from
scattering and to prevent the package from opening. Garbage and
rubbish shall be placed wholly within the garbage can so that the lid
can be tightly and properly fitted thereon.
B. No garbage, rubbish, refuse or debris contemplated for collection as
herein set forth shall be placed at the curb or cartway as required
herein prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to the day regularly scheduled
for collection. [Added 12-29-1981 by Ord. No. 130]150
150. Editor's Note: Original Section 7, regarding collection charges, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 3-10-1981 by Ord. No. 1267.
§ 221-5 § 221-9
221:412
thereof shall from time to time be made and published by the Municipal
Manager. This service shall be offered without charge to the occupiers of
all one- and two-family residential dwelling units within the Municipality of
Monroeville.
§ 221-10. Certain establishments permitted to store, collect and
dispose of garbage and refuse.
The owners and occupiers of farms, apartments and business, commercial,
industrial and institutional establishments may continue to store, collect
and dispose of garbage and rubbish, as well as other refuse and debris,
as provided under existing ordinances, statutes and regulations of the
Municipality of Monroeville and of the County of Allegheny and of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 221-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before a District Justice, be subject to a fine not
exceeding $600, together with costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of said fine or costs, shall be committed to the Allegheny County
Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation shall be
committed or permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense and may
be punishable as such.
§ 221-9 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 221-11
221:413

ARTICLE II
Vehicles Transporting Garbage and Refuse
[Adopted 8-9-1983 by Ord. No. 1376]
§ 221-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUD — Wet, sticky, soft earth.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
§ 221-13. Duties of vehicle operators.
No person operating any motor vehicle or any other vehicle of any kind
shall allow and/or permit any accumulations of mud, dirt, refuse, garbage,
trash and/or other debris and/or the contents of said vehicle which have
fallen from said vehicle to lie and to remain upon any public street, public
road, public alley and/or public way within the Municipality of Monroeville
without removing the same immediately after it has fallen from said vehicle.
§ 221-14. Duties of vehicle owners.
No person owning any motor vehicle or any other vehicle of any kind shall
allow and/or permit any accumulations of mud, dirt, refuse, garbage, trash
and/or any other debris and/or the contents of said vehicle which have
fallen from said vehicle to lie and to remain upon any public street, public
road, public alley and/or public way within the Municipality of Monroeville
without removing the same immediately after it has fallen from said vehicle.
§ 221-15. Duties of property owners, lessees or occupants.
No person owning, leasing and/or occupying any real estate in the
Municipality of Monroeville from which a motor vehicle or any other vehicle
of any kind has left shall allow and/or permit any accumulations of mud,
dirt, refuse, garbage, trash and/or any other debris and/or the contents of
said vehicle which have fallen from said vehicle to lie and remain upon
any public street, public road, public alley and/or public way within the
Municipality of Monroeville without removing the same immediately after
it has fallen from said vehicle where said real estate is maintained, used
and/or operated in such a manner as to be the direct cause of said
accumulations.
§ 221-16. Duties of persons making improvements or doing
construction.
Any person either making an improvement or doing construction on any
real estate within the Municipality which causes mud, dirt, refuse, garbage,
trash and/or any other debris and/or the contents of a vehicle to lie and
§ 221-12 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 221-16
221:415
remain upon any public street, public road, public alley and/or public way
within the Municipality shall be required to either post a street maintenance
bond or submit a street-cleaning plan to the Municipal Council at the time
of the approval of the project. The amount of the bond shall be set annually
by the Municipal Manager and shall be equal to the estimated costs of the
amount of labor, time and equipment, to be provided by the Municipality,
necessary to clean the street if the person making the improvement or doing
the construction fails to do so.
§ 221-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of any of the provisions
of this article before any District Justice shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $600, and costs of prosecution, and, in default thereof, to
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days.
§ 221-16 § 221-17
221:416
ARTICLE III
Dumping
[Adopted 8-9-1983 by Ord. No. 1377]
§ 221-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS UNIT — A building or combination of buildings and the lot on
which the same is located used wholly or in part for commercial purposes,
including but not limited to offices, places of public assembly, shopping
centers, supermarkets, retail stores, warehouses, manufacturing or
fabrication plants, gasoline stations and other business uses.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INFESTATION — The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as herein defined and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited,
contributes to or cause a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
LOT — A plot, tract, premises or parcel of land with or without buildings or
structures located thereon, as surveyed and apportioned for sale or other
purposes.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including
garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, vehicles valueless
except for junk and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
YARD — An open space on the same lot which contains a building and
is located between the building line and the lot line which the particular
building line faces.
§ 221-19. Conflicts with other laws.
The provisions of this article shall supplement local laws, ordinances, codes
or regulations existing in the Municipality of Monroeville and the other
statutes and regulations of municipal authorities having jurisdiction
applicable thereto. Where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict
with any provision of local law, ordinance, code or regulation, the provision
or requirement which is most restrictive or which establishes the higher
standard shall prevail.
§ 221-18 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 221-20
221:417
§ 221-20. Residential, commercial and industrial premises.
Residential, commercial and industrial premises, whether improved or
vacant, shall be maintained free of litter; provided, however, that this
section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private
receptacles for collection.
§ 221-21. Duties of property owners and occupants.
An owner and/or an occupant of premises shall be responsible for
compliance with this article in regard to the following:
§ 221-22. Dumping on property of another unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for a person to place or dump garbage, litter or rubbish
on the property belonging to another person.
§ 221-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord.
No. 1649]
A violation of this article or any subsection or provision thereof shall be
an offense and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both fine and
imprisonment. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate
additional violation.
§ 221-24. Enforcement.
A. Maintenance of that part of the premises which he occupies or controls
in a clean, sanitary and safe condition.
B. Disposal of garbage and refuse into proper facilities or containers in a
clean and sanitary manner in accordance with the provisions of this
article or applicable municipal codes.
C. Yards and vacant lots shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards,
rodent harborage and infestations. They shall be maintained in a
manner that will prevent dust or other particles from being blown about
the neighborhood.
D. No refrigerator, freezer or other appliance may be discarded,
abandoned or stored in a place accessible to children without first
completely removing any locking devices and all doors.
A. Enforcement of this article shall be delegated by the Municipal Council
to the Municipal Building Official, Chief of Police or other appropriate
municipal official. Said municipal official shall investigate and take
whatever action is required upon receipt of a written or oral complaint
or when otherwise brought to his or her attention.
B. Upon receipt of complaint or when otherwise brought to his or her
attention, said municipal official shall serve notice to abate any
§ 221-20 § 221-24
221:418
violation of this article. The notice to abate shall state that a violation
of this article has occurred, specify the nature of work to be completed
to correct the violation and state that the violation must be remedied
within five days of receipt of notice. The notice to abate shall be
served upon such owner or occupant, or both, as the case may be, by
registered or certified mail addressed to his or her or their last known
address or by posting the premises if registered or certified mail is
refused or undelivered.
C. In addition to the provisions of Subsections A and B of this section,
whenever a violation of this article remains uncorrected for a period of
five days, the Municipal Council may adopt a resolution requiring the
owner or occupant, or both, as the case may be, of the premises with
regard to which violation has occurred to remedy such violation,
specifying the nature of the work to be completed. A notice of the
adoption of such resolution shall be served upon such owner or
occupant, or both, by registered or certified mail addressed to his or
their last known address or by posting the premises if registered or
certified mail is refused.
D. Whenever such notice has been served upon such owner or occupant,
or both, of the respective premises and such owner or occupant shall
neglect or fail to comply with the requirements of such notice within the
time provided therein, the Municipal Council shall authorize the work
to be done and pay the cost thereof out of general municipal funds to be
appropriated by the Municipal Council for such purposes.
E. The municipality shall be reimbursed for the cost of the work performed
or serviced rendered, by direction of the Municipal Council as herein
provided, by assessment and levy upon the lots or parcels of land
wherein such work was performed or such services rendered. The
expenses so assessed shall constitute a lien and charge on the real
property on which it is levied until paid or otherwise satisfied or
discharged and shall be collected in the same manner and at the same
time as other municipal charges.
§ 221-24 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 221-24
221:419

ARTICLE IV
Solid Waste
[Adopted 11-12-1991 by Ord. No. 1774]
§ 221-25. Short title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Solid Waste Ordinance."
§ 221-26. Definitions and word usage.
A. The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the
meanings ascribed herein, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ACT or ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of
1980 (P.L. 380, No. 97, July 7, 1980).151
AGRICULTURAL WASTE — Poultry and livestock manure, or residual
materials in liquid or solid form, generated in the production and
marketing of poultry, livestock, fur-bearing animals and their products,
provided that such waste is not a hazardous waste. The term includes
the residual materials generated in producing, harvesting and
marketing of all agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and agricultural
crops or commodities grown on what are usually recognized and
accepted as farms, forests or other agricultural lands.
BULKY WASTE — Large items of solid waste, including but not limited
to appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches or stumps
which may require special handling due to their size, shape or weight.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited
to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
CONSTRUCTION DEMOLITION WASTE — All municipal and residual
waste building materials, grubbing waste and rubble resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on houses,
commercial buildings and other structures and pavements.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in such a
manner that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters
the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC WASTE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE — Solid waste, comprised
of garbage and rubbish, which normally originates in the residential
private household or apartment house.
151. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 221-25 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 221-26
221:421
GARBAGE — Any solid waste derived from animal, grain, fruit or
vegetable matter that is capable of being decomposed by
micrcorganisms with sufficient rapidity to cause such nuisances as
odors, gases or vectors.
HAULER or PRIVATE COLLECTOR — Any person, firm, copartnership,
association or corporation who has been licensed by the Municipality or
its designated representative to collect, transport and dispose of refuse
for a fee as herein prescribed.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes,
as defined in the Act, which because of its quantity, concentration
or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or
significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in
morbidity in either an individual or the total population or pose a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of
or otherwise managed.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
service, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
service, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community
activities; and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or
hazardous waste under Act 97 from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant
or air pollution control facility. The term does not include sourceseparated
recyclable materials.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, state institution and agency or any
other legal entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and
duties. In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment
or penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall
include the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal
entity having officers and directors.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology used to
convert part or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing
facilities include but are not limited to transfer facilities, composting
facilities and resource recovery facilities.
§ 221-26 § 221-26
221:422
REFUSE — All solid waste materials which are discarded as useless.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material
or other waste including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations
and any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term "residual waste"
shall not include coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal
Control Act.152 "Residual waste" shall not include treatment sludges
from coal mine drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being
carried on pursuant to and in compliance with a valid permit issued
pursuant to the Clean Streams Law.153
RUBBISH — All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and
other decomposable matter. This category includes but is not limited to
ashes, bedding, cardboard, cans, crockery, glass, paper, wood and yard
cleanings.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of
material placed for collection or from a solid waste processing or
disposal facility.
SEWAGE TREATMENT RESIDUES — Any coarse screenings, grit and
dewatered or air-dried sludges from sewage treatment plants and
pumpings from septic tanks or septage which are a municipal solid
waste and require proper disposal under Act 97.154
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
STORAGE — The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in
such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall
be presumed that the containment of any waste in excess of one year
constitutes disposal. This presumption can be overcome by clear and
convincing evidence to the contrary.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any solid waste at any
time after generation.
TRANSFER STATION — Any supplemental transportation facility used
as an adjunct to solid waste route collection vehicles.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
152. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
153. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
154. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 221-26 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 221-27
221:423
§ 221-27. Prohibited activities.
§ 221-28. Standards for storage of solid waste.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit to
accumulate upon any public or private property within the Municipality
any garbage, rubbish, bulky waste or any other municipal or residual
solid waste except in accordance with the provisions of this article, any
Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and the
Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste within the
Municipality except in accordance with the provisions of this article,
any Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and
the Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any solid waste in the
Municipality except in accordance with the provisions of this article,
any Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and
the Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, transport, collect or remove
any solid waste from public or private property within the Municipality
without first securing a license to do so in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any materials from any
solid waste that is stored or deposited for collection within the
Municipality without prior approval by the Municipality.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid
wastes within the Municipality except at an approved and permitted
resource recovery facility under Act 97 and any Department rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit or cause or
permit to be thrown, placed or deposited any solid waste in or upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, body of water, public or private property within
the Municipality except as provided in this article.
A. The storage of all solid waste shall be practiced so as to prevent the
attraction, harborage or breeding of insects or rodents and to eliminate
conditions harmful to public health or which create safety hazards,
odors, unsightliness or public nuisances.
B. Any person producing municipal waste shall provide a sufficient
number of approved containers to store all waste materials generated
during periods between regularly scheduled collections and shall place
and store all waste materials therein.
C. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following preparation standards:
§ 221-27 § 221-28
221:424
(1) All municipal waste shall be drained of free liquids before being
placed in storage containers.
(2) All garbage or other putrescible waste shall be securely wrapped in
paper, plastic or similar material or placed in properly tied plastic
bags.
(3) All cans, bottles or other food containers should be rinsed free of
food particles and drained before being placed in storage
containers.
(4) Garden clippings and tree trimmings shall be placed in approved
containers or shall be cut and tied securely into bundles. Bundles
shall be not more than four feet in length, not more than two feet in
diameter and not more than 40 pounds in weight.
(5) Newspapers and magazines shall be placed in approved containers
or shall be tied securely into bundles of not more than 40 pounds in
weight.
(6) When specified by the Municipality or its designated
representative, special preparation and storage procedures may be
required to facilitate the collection and resource recovery of
certain waste materials.
D. All municipal waste shall be stored in containers approved by the
Municipality or its designated representative. Individual containers and
bulk containers utilized for storage of municipal waste shall comply
with the following standards:
(1) Reusable containers shall be constructed of durable, watertight,
rust- and corrosion-resistant material, such as plastic, metal or
fiberglass, in such a manner as to be leakproof, weatherproof,
insectproof and rodentproof.
(2) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a tightfitting
cover and suitable lifting handles to facilitate collection.
(3) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a capacity
of not less than 10 gallons nor more than 40 gallons, and a loaded
weight of not more than 40 pounds.
(4) Disposable plastic bags or sacks are acceptable containers,
provided that the bags are designated for waste disposal. Plastic
bags shall have sufficient wall strength to maintain physical
integrity when lifted by the top, shall be securely tied at the top for
collection and shall have a capacity of not more than 30 gallons and
a loaded weight of not more than 35 pounds.
(5) All containers, either reusable or disposable, shall also comply with
the minimum standards established by the National Sanitation
Foundation.
§ 221-28 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 221-28
221:425
§ 221-29. Standards and regulations for collection.
E. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following storage standards:
(1) Containers shall be kept tightly sealed or covered at all times. Solid
waste shall not protrude or extend above the top of the container.
(2) Reusable containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all
times. The interior of the containers shall be thoroughly cleaned,
rinsed, drained and disinfected, as often as necessary, to prevent
the accumulation of liquid residues or solids on the bottom or sides
of the containers.
(3) Containers shall be used and maintained so as to prevent public
nuisances.
(4) Containers that do not conform to the standard of this article or
which have sharp edges, ragged edges or any other defect that may
hamper or injure collection personnel shall be promptly replaced
by the owner upon notice from the Municipality or its designated
representative.
(5) Containers shall be placed by the owner or customer at a collection
point specified by the Municipality or its designated representative.
(6) With the exception of pickup days when the containers are placed
out for collection, the containers shall be properly stored on the
owner's or customer's premises at all times.
(7) Bulk waste items such as furniture, automobile parts, machinery,
appliances and tires shall be stored in a manner that will prevent
the accumulation of collection of water, the harborage of rodents,
safety hazards and fire hazards.
F. The storage of all municipal waste from multifamily residential units,
commercial establishments, institutions and industrial lunchroom or
office waste sources is subject to the regulations and standards set
forth in this article. The type, size and placement requirements for bulk
containers shall be determined by the waste generator and the waste
hauler and are subject to approval by the Municipality.
A. The municipality shall provide for the collection of all garbage, rubbish
and bulky wastes from individual residences and multifamily residential
sources with less than four units, or it may contract with a private
collector or collectors to provide this essential residential collection
service.
B. All households and homeowners shall utilize the residential collection
service provided by the Municipality unless they can demonstrate that
they have made alternate arrangements that are consistent with this
article by the Municipality.
§ 221-28 § 221-29
221:426
C. All multifamily residential sources [with more than four units],
commercial, institutional and industrial establishments shall negotiate
and individually contract collection service with the Municipality's
collector or any other properly licensed waste hauler of their choice.
D. All residential garbage and rubbish shall be collected at least once a
week. Bulky wastes shall be collected following prior arrangement with
the Municipality's collector and payment of any required special fees.
E. All commercial, institutional, public and industrial lunchroom and office
waste containing garbage shall be collected at least once a week.
Rubbish collection from these sources shall be made as often as
necessary to control health hazards, odors, flies and unsightly
conditions. The municipality reserves the right to require more
frequent collection when deemed necessary.
F. Residential collection schedules shall be published regularly by the
Municipality or its contracted hauler.
G. All solid waste collection activity shall be conducted from Monday
though Friday between the hours of 5:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. or on
Saturdays between the hours of 5:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m., unless prior
approval or any exception has been granted by the Municipality. No
collection, hauling or transporting of solid waste shall be permitted on
Sunday.
H. All licensed haulers and haulers under contract with the Municipality
shall comply with the following standards and regulations:
(1) All municipal waste collected within the Municipality shall
ultimately be disposed only at a landfill cited in the Allegheny
County Solid Waste Plan, 1990, or on subsequent revisions thereto.
(2) Any trucks or other vehicles used for the collection and
transportation of municipal waste must comply with the
requirements of Act 97 and any Department regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and must be licensed by the Allegheny County
Health Department.
(3) All collection vehicles conveying domestic waste and garbage shall
be watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside
littering, attraction of vectors, the creation of odors and other
nuisances.
(4) Collection vehicles for rubbish and other nonputrescible solid
waste shall be capable of being enclosed or covered to prevent
roadside litter and other nuisances.
(5) All solid waste shall be collected and transported so as to prevent
public health hazards, safety hazards and nuisances.
(6) All solid waste collection vehicles shall be operated maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition.
§ 221-29 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 221-30
221:427
§ 221-30. Collection and disposal charges.
§ 221-31. Administrative appeals.
§ 221-32. Injunctions.
The municipality may petition the court for an injunction, either mandatory
or prohibitive, to enforce any of the provisions of this article.
A. The governing body of the Municipality shall be authorized to make
funds available, in accordance with the laws and procedures of the
Municipality, for the establishment, maintenance and operation of a
municipal solid waste collection and disposal system; or for the
contracting of such service to a private collector.
B. Annual fee schedules (if appropriate) shall be published by the
Municipality on any competitively bid residential collection service
contract that may be awarded by the Municipality.
C. (Option A). The municipality shall be responsible for the collection of
any fees for solid waste collection and disposal from residential
customers. Licensed haulers shall be responsible for the collection of
any collection and disposal fees from commercial, institutional and
industrial customers.
D. (Option B). The municipality's contracted hauler and other licensed
haulers shall be responsible for the collection of any fees for solid waste
collection and disposal services provided to residential, commercial,
institutional or industrial sources within the Municipality.
A. All appeals shall be made in writing to the governing body of the
Municipality.
B. Pending a reversal or modification, all decisions of the Municipality
shall remain effective and enforceable.
C. Appeals may be made by the following persons:
(1) Any person who is aggrieved by a new standard or regulation
issued by the Municipality may appeal within 10 days after the
Municipality gives notice of its intention to issue the new standard
or regulation.
D. The notice of appeal shall be served in writing and sent by certified mail
with return receipt requested. Within 20 days after receipt of the notice
of appeal, the Municipality shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the
hearing shall be sent to both parties in time to adequately prepare for
the hearing. Notice shall be sent to the parties by certified mail with
return receipt requested at the last known address in addition to
publication in the local newspaper.
§ 221-30 § 221-33
221:428
§ 221-33. Penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be guilty of a misdemeanor which is punishable by a fine of not less than
$1,000 or, in default of payment of such fine, then by imprisonment for a
period of not more than 30 days, or both. Each day of violation shall be
considered a separate and distinct offense.
§ 221-33 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 221-33
221:429

ARTICLE V
Accumulation of Garbage
[Adopted 10-10-2000 by Ord. No. 2158]
§ 221-34. Accumulations prohibited; nuisances.
§ 221-35. Removal required.
The owner of any premises, or as to vacant premises or premises occupied
by other than the owner thereof, shall remove all garbage, rubbish, waste
material and debris of any kind, junk, scrapped or wrecked motor vehicles
and/or trailers, flammable articles or stored vehicles without a current
inspection sticker and/or current license and/or current registration, as
A. No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any property
within the Municipality of Monroeville shall permit, leave or cause to be
left or accumulated on any street, lane, alley, private or public property
any garbage, rubbish, waste material and debris of any kind, junk,
scrapped or wrecked motor vehicles and/or trailers, flammable articles
or stored vehicles without a current inspection sticker and current
license.
B. Any accumulation or storage of garbage, rubbish, waste material and
debris of any kind, junk, scrapped or wrecked motor vehicles and/or
trailers, flammable articles or stored vehicles without a current
inspection sticker and current license upon premises in the
Municipality of Monroeville, in violation of any of the provisions of this
section, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the
health, safety, cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the
Municipality of Monroeville.
C. A scrapped, wrecked or stored motor vehicle maintained as aforesaid
shall be deemed in violation of the provisions of this section if, for a
period of 15 days, said vehicle is without either a current inspection
sticker and/or current registration and/or license plate. A dealer's
license shall be deemed the equivalent of a current license only upon
compliance with the provisions of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania relating to dealer and repaired vehicles.
D. Any person, firm or corporation which is a licensed new or used motor
vehicle dealer shall not be deemed in violation of this section, provided
that:
(1) The wrecked or stored motor vehicle is maintained pursuant to the
dealer's business operation; and
(2) The dealer's business operation is maintained upon private
property which is in compliance with the district and use
classification as authorized by the Municipality of Monroeville Land
Development Ordinances then and there prevailing.
§ 221-34 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 221-35
221:431
aforesaid, remaining upon such premises in violation of § 221-34B of this
article.
§ 221-36. Notice to comply.
The Municipality of Monroeville is hereby authorized and directed to give
notice by personal service or by registered mail with return receipt, to
the owner or occupant, or both, as the case may be, of any public or
private premises where garbage, rubbish, waste material and debris of any
kind, junk, scrapped or wrecked motor vehicles and/or trailers, flammable
articles or stored vehicles without a current sticker and/or current license
and/or current registration, as aforesaid, is being accumulated or remains
in violation of the provisions of the first section of this article, directing and
requiring such owner or occupant to conform to the requirements of this
article within 10 days after issuance of such notice.
§ 221-37. Violations and penalties.
§ 221-38. Enforcement responsibilities.
Council for the Municipality of Monroeville, by this article, hereby
designates the responsibility of enforcing this article to the Ordinance
Officer.
A. In case any person, firm, corporation or entity shall neglect, fail or
refuse to comply with such notices, within the period of time stated
therein, the municipal authorities may remove the garbage, rubbish,
waste material and debris of any kind, junk, scrapped or wrecked motor
vehicles and/or trailers, flammable articles or stored vehicles without a
current inspection sticker and/or current license, as aforesaid, the
reasonable cost thereof, together with any additional payment for
administration authorized by law, may be collected by the Municipality
of Monroeville from such person, firm, corporation or entity in the
manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims or by any
other civil action.
B. Any person, firm, corporation or entity who or which shall violate or fail,
neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a
District Justice having jurisdiction of the matter, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment in the
Allegheny County Jail for not more than 30 days, provided that each
day's violation shall constitute a separate offense and neither notice to
the offender of a single day's violation nor repeated notice of a
continuing violation shall be necessary in order to constitute an offense.
C. In addition to the other powers herein set forth for violation of this
article, the Municipality may institute proceedings in Courts of Equity
in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 221-35 § 221-38
221:432
Chapter 225
(RESERVED)
Chapter 232
HEALTH CLUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Mercantile (business) licenses — See Ch. 256.
Zoning — See Ch. 359.
§ 232-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BODY MASSAGE — The application to the human body by the hands or
mechanical apparatus, any touching, stroking, friction, kneading, vibration,
percussion, oil or alcohol rubs, mechanotherapy, hot or cold packs, heat,
cold, salt glows, cabinet, tub, shower, sitz, sauna, vapor, steam or any other
special type of bath.
HEALTH CLUB — Any establishment which offers service in the form of
body massage, baths, exercises or similar services in combination to club
members or to the public for a charge, fee or donation, but shall exclude
hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics and the office or quarters of
licensed health profession practitioners.
MASSAGE TECHNICIAN — Any masseur (male) and masseuse (female) who
administers body massage to any other person for a charge, fee or donation,
but shall exclude persons licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
practice medicine, chiropractic, osteopathy, podiatry, nursing and physical
therapy and barbers, beauticians and manicurists insofar as they deal with
the head, hands and feet.
PERSONS — Includes a firm, partnership, association of persons,
corporation, organization or any other group acting as a unit.
§ 232-2. License required; fee. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
No health club or massage technician may operate or practice within the
Municipality of Monroeville without a license to operate or practice upon
proper application to the Municipal Manager and the fulfillment of the
requirements set forth herein and payment of a fee as provided in Chapter
194, Fees, for a health club and as provided in Chapter 194, Fees, for a
massage technician. Licenses granted under this chapter shall be renewed
yearly and may be revoked for any failure to comply with this chapter.
§ 221-38 (RESERVED) § 232-3
225:433
§ 232-3. Health club licensing requirements.
No health club shall be granted a license to operate until the fulfillment of
the following:
A. All zoning, building, fire, electrical, plumbing and health codes
applicable to the Municipality of Monroeville shall be complied with.
B. An application for a license shall include the names of all owners,
stockholders and managing personnel, their addresses and occupations
and satisfactory proof that they have not been convicted of any violation
of laws proscribing prostitution, obscenity, indecency or pornography.
C. Plans and specifications of the quarters proposed to be occupied shall
be submitted to the Municipal Manager, which shall include details of
entrances, partitions, windows, openings, ventilation, plumbing
fixtures, water supply and waste and vent connections. Such quarters
must be equipped with separate toilet and lavatory facilities for patrons
and personnel and a service sink for custodial services. No part of the
quarters may be used for or connected with any bedroom or sleeping
quarters.
D. All tables, tubs, shower stalls and floors, with the exception of reception
and administrative areas, shall be of nonporous materials which may be
readily disinfected.
E. Closed containers must be provided for wet towels and waste material.
F. All equipment, shower stalls, toilets, lavatories, tubs, cabinets and
other accoutrements of the establishment shall be regularly treated
with disinfectants and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition at all times.
G. As a condition of receiving a license, the owners and operators of the
health club must expressly grant access to health, plumbing, fire,
electrical and other authorized municipal inspectors to any part of the
quarters of the health club for purposes of inspection at all reasonable
times.
H. The health club must required and retain on file certificates of good
health issued by a licensed physician for all employees practicing any
services of the health club. Such certificates shall be renewed every six
months.
I. No health club shall serve any patrons infected with any fungus or skin
infection.
J. All personnel shall wash his or her hands in hot, running water, using
proper soap or disinfectants, before giving any service or treatment to
each separate patron.
§ 232-3 § 232-3
232:434
§ 232-4. Massage technician licensing requirements.
§ 232-5. Revocation of license.
The Municipal Manager may revoke the license of a health club or massage
technician upon satisfactory proof of any of the following:
K. All towels and tissues and all sheets or other coverings shall be used
singularly for each patron and discarded for laundry or disposal
immediately after use.
L. Nondisposable tools or equipment shall be disinfected after use upon
one patron.
M. The applicant must have a valid lease or title to the quarters which
meet the requirements of this chapter.
N. No body massage shall be provided to the genitals of the patron.
A. No person shall be granted a license to practice as a massage
technician without satisfactory proof of the following:
(1) That the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
(2) That the applicant has never been convicted of prostitution,
obscenity, indecency or related crimes.
(3) That the applicant has a diploma from a recognized school of
massage having a curriculum approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Education certifying that he or she has completed
400 hours of study in the basic subjects of anatomy, physiology,
hygiene, hydrotherapy, technique of massage, clinical internship,
contraindications of massage and physical and mechanical
exercise. In lieu of this requirement the applicant can furnish
equivalent credentials by way of experience and training of at least
one year's duration.
B. The license shall contain a photograph of the massage technician and
shall be carried on the person of the massage technician or
conspicuously displayed in the health club wherein the massage
technician is employed.
C. The application for a license shall contain the name, address, social
security number, photograph and fingerprints of the applicant and shall
be kept on file in the Municipal Office. Photographing and
fingerprinting shall be done by the Monroeville Police Department.
A. That the license does not meet the licensing requirements of this
chapter.
B. That the licensee has been convicted of prostitution, obscenity,
indecency, promoting prostitution, keeping or maintaining a disorderly
house or related crimes and offenses.
§ 232-3 HEALTH CLUBS § 232-5
232:435
§ 232-6. Grace period for compliance.
The owner or manager of any health club operating in the Municipality as
of the effective date of this chapter may apply for and may be granted by
the Municipal Manager a grace period not to exceed six months in order to
comply with § 232-3C and D. With these exceptions, the chapter becomes
effective upon all health clubs and proposed health clubs upon enactment.
§ 232-7. Administration; appeals.
This chapter shall be administered by the Municipal Manager or licensing
officer appointed by him. An appeal from the denial of a license or the
revocation of a license shall be filed with the Municipal Manager within
15 days of such action and shall be heard and determined by the Public
Safety Committee of the Municipal Council within 30 days of the filing of
the appeal. The applicant or licensee shall be informed in writing five days
prior to the hearing of the reasons for denial or revocation of the license.
§ 232-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days. In addition, any
health club which is found to operate without a current license shall suffer
the immediate revocation of its occupancy permit and shall not be permitted
to operate.
C. That the licensee has diagnosed or treated classified diseases,
practiced spinal adjustments or prescribed medicines.
D. That the licensee is guilty of fraud or willful negligence in the practice
of body massage.
E. That the licensee is a habitual user of narcotics or other drugs.
F. That the licensee has allowed or permitted an unlicensed person to
perform body massage.
G. That the licensee has provided body massage to the genitals of any
patron.
H. That the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or
other applicable ordinances of the Municipality of Monroeville or any
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any laws of the United
States of America. Any violation by an employee of a health club or by a
massage technician shall be considered a violation by the health club.
§ 232-5 § 232-8
232:436
Chapter 236
HOLDING TANKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 290. Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 316.
§ 236-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive and retain sewage,
whether from residential or commercial uses, and it is hereby declared that
the enactment of this chapter is necessary for the protection, benefit and
preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this
Municipality.
§ 236-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the
sewage at another site. "Holding tanks" include but are not limited to the
following:
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Municipality upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the Municipality.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
CHEMICAL TOILET — — A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a
holding tank.
A.
RETENTION TANK — — A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to
it by a water-carrying system.
B.
VAULT PIT PRIVY — — A holding tank designed to receive sewage
where water under pressure is not available.
C.
§ 232-8 HOLDING TANKS § 236-2
236:437
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
§ 236-3. Powers of Municipality.
The Municipality is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within
its borders the control and methods of holding tank sewage disposal and the
collection and transportation thereof.
§ 236-4. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Municipality is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules
and regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from time
to time to effect the purposes herein.
§ 236-5. Nature of rules and regulations.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Municipality shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the
Municipality and all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 236-6. Rates and charges.
The Municipality shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and
collect rates, assessments and other charges in the area served by its
facilities at reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable law.
§ 236-7. Collection, transportation and disposal of contents.
The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property
utilizing a holding tank shall be done under the direction and control of the
Municipality, and the disposal thereof shall be made only at such site or
sites as may be approved by the Department of Environmental Resources of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 236-8. Duties of property owner.
The owner of an approved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this or any ordinance of
this Municipality, the provisions of any applicable law and the rules and
regulations of the Municipality and any administrative agency of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the Municipality or anyone acting under the direction of the
Municipality to collect, transport and dispose of the contents therein.
§ 236-2 § 236-9
236:438
§ 236-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of § 236-8 shall, upon conviction
thereof by summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs, and, in default of said fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment in the Allegheny County Prison for a period not in excess of
30 days.
§ 236-10. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violation
of § 236-8 above shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the
Municipality by either seeking appropriate equitable or legal relief from a
court of competent jurisdiction.
Chapter 239
INSURANCE
§ 236-9 INSURANCE § 236-10
239:439

ARTICLE I
Fire Loss Claims
[Adopted 12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 1873; amended in its entirety
6-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2265]
§ 239-1. Administrative officer.
The Municipal Manager or his designee is hereby appointed as the
designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated herein.
§ 239-2. Adoption of statutory provisions by reference.
The provisions of "Act 47" of 1999, 40 P.S. § 638, are hereby incorporated
in this article by reference. A true and correct copy of "Act 47" of 1999 is
attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit "A."155
§ 239-3. Additional procedures and regulations; fees.
The Municipal Council may, by resolution adopt additional procedures and
regulations to implement this article and may, by resolution, fix reasonable
fees to be charged for municipal activities or services provided pursuant
to this article; including but not limited to issuance of certificates and
bills, performance of inspection, opening separate fund accounts and for
providing repair and restoration when necessary.
§ 239-4. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring company or
agent who violates this article shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000
per violation.
155. Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A (the text of 40 P.S. § 638) has not been reproduced in the
Code due to copyright issues. It is on file with Ord. No. 2265, in the office of the Municipal
Manager, where it may be examined during regular office hours.
§ 239-1 INSURANCE § 239-4
239:441
Chapter 243
LAND DISTURBANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 162.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 176.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 319.
Roadway occupancy — See Ch. 320, Art. VI.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 324.
Zoning — See Ch. 359.
§ 239-4 § 239-4
243:442
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 243-1. Legislative intent.
From and after the passage and approval of this chapter, the following
regulations shall be in full force and effect. The provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of the people at large and to be designed to
encourage the establishment and maintenance of reasonable community
standards of physical environment.
§ 243-2. Title.
This chapter shall be cited as the "Monroeville Land Disturbance
Ordinance."
§ 243-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
persons and property and to protect and to promote the public welfare by
preventing excess erosion, hazardous rock and soil slippage, sedimentation
and other soil and water management problems and by regulating and
controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use, location and
maintenance of grading projects, including excavation, cut and fill and any
timbering and logging operations.
§ 243-4. Compliance.
No person shall construct, enlarge, alter or repair any grading project,
including excavation, cut or fill or any timbering and logging operation,
except in full compliance with all the provisions of this chapter and after the
lawful issuance of all permits required by this chapter.
§ 243-5. Liability.
Neither the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter nor
compliance with its provisions nor conformance with conditions required by
any such permit shall relieve any person from liability for damage resulting
from a grading project or any timbering and logging operation or attach any
liability upon the Municipality for damages to persons or property.
§ 243-6. Severability and unenforceability.
In the event that any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be
found invalid or declared unenforceable by reason of any federal or state
statute or federal or state directive, rule or regulation now in effect or
hereinafter to become effective or by reason of the decision of any federal
or state court, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect or impair
any other terms or provisions hereof, unless the other terms or provisions
are directly affected by the section declared invalid or unenforceable. The
§ 243-1 LAND DISTURBANCE § 243-6
243:443
parties thereupon may, within 30 days, meet to discuss said invalidity or
unenforceability.
§ 243-6 § 243-6
243:444
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 243-7. Definitions and word usage.
A. General. Certain words used in this chapter are defined below. Words
used in the present tense shall include the future. The singular number
shall include the plural, and the plural the singular. The word "shall" is
mandatory and not permissive.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BEDROCK — The natural rock layer, hard or soft, in place at ground
surface or beneath unconsolidated surface deposits.
BUFFER ZONE — Land surrounding the immediate perimeter of a land
logging and timbering operation in which no cutting of trees or other
vegetation shall occur except for the isolated cutting of individual trees
which are dead, sick, infected or constitute a danger to neighboring
properties or the public generally.
BUILDING PERMIT — An official document or certificate issued by the
Building Official which authorizes performance of a specified building
activity.
CLEAR-CUTTING — A logging method that removes all trees from a
tract of land or portions thereof.
COUNCIL — The governing body of the Municipality of Monroeville.
CROWN — The aboveground parts of a tree, consisting of the branches,
stems, buds, fruits and leaves. This may also be referred to as the
"canopy."
DBH (DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT) — Tree trunk diameter,
measured in inches, at a height of 4.5 feet above the ground. If a tree
splits into multiple trunks below 4.5 feet, the trunk is measured at its
most narrow point beneath the split.
DEVELOPMENT — Includes any lawful land use authorized under
Chapter 359, Zoning, of the Code of the Municipality of Monroeville.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer, surveyor, architect or landscape
architect who is licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST — A person who holds a degree in geology
from an accredited college or university and who has training and
experience in the field of engineering geology.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity, including such processes as gravitational
creep.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
§ 243-7 LAND DISTURBANCE § 243-7
243:445
displaced, relocated or bulldozed, and shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom.
FELLING — The act of cutting a standing tree so that it falls to the
ground.
FILL — The end result of filling.
FILLING — An act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
material is deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or
moved to a new location, including the material being deposited and
the condition resulting from such act.
FORESTER — A person with a degree in forestry from a college or
university accredited by the Society of American Foresters.
FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan establishing best
conservation and management practices for a landowner.
GRADE, FINISHED — The average elevation of the finished ground
surface at the location of any proposed excavation, embankment or fill.
GRADING — An excavation or fill or any combination thereof, including
the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GRADE, ORIGINAL — The average elevation of the existing ground
surface at the location of any proposed excavation, embankment or fill.
HAZARD — A danger or potential danger to life, limb or health or an
adverse effect or potential adverse effect to the safety, use or stability
of property, waterways, public ways, structures, utilities and storm
sewers, including stream pollution.
INSPECTION AGENT — An engineer or an individual with at least
five years' experience in a specific type of inspection work and under
the direct supervision of an engineer to be used by the Municipality
in unusually difficult situations where the inspection is beyond the
capabilities of the Municipality.
LAND DISTURBANCE — An ongoing or completed operation and
related activities involving or primarily connected with reshaping of
land, including grading, removal of trees, vegetation or other ground
cover, transporting fill or other material for disposal purposes and
resurfacing of land.
LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT — The permit required by these
regulations.
LANDING — A place where logs, pulpwood or firewood is assembled for
transportation to a processing facility.
LOCATE — Construct, place, insert or excavate.
MAJOR TIMBERING AND LOGGING OPERATION — Any cutting and
removing of trees for commercial purposes from a site that is in excess
of 10 acres in size.
§ 243-7 § 243-7
243:446
MATERIAL — Includes soil, sand, gravel, clay, peat, mud, debris and
refuse or any other material, organic or inorganic.
MINOR TIMBERING AND LOGGING OPERATION — Any cutting and
removing of trees for commercial purposes from a site that is less than
10 acres in size.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — The person officially appointed by the
governing body to enforce this chapter.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville.
OPERATIONS — Includes the locating, moving or disposition of any
material or any construction use or activity, or a combination thereof,
which in any way modifies the conditions on lands subject to this
chapter as they exist on the effective date hereof.
OWNER — An individual, partnership, company, firm, association or
corporation that is in actual control of forest land, whether such control
is based on legal or equitable title or any other interest entitling the
holder to sell or otherwise dispose of any or all of the timber on such
land in any manner, and agents thereof acting on their behalf, such as
forestry consultants, who set up and administer timber harvesting.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including
governmental agencies conducting operations within the Municipality.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the governing body intended to inform and obtain public comment
prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the act of
July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."156
PUBLIC NOTICE — A notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing
and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.
RETAINING WALL — A structure constructed for the purpose of
supporting a cut or filled embankment which would otherwise not
comply with the standards set forth in this chapter.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of
origin by air, water, gravity or ice and has come to rest on the earth's
surface either above or below the water level.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which sediment is deposited on
stream bottoms.
156. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.
§ 243-7 LAND DISTURBANCE § 243-7
243:447
SELECTION METHOD — A method of selectively removing trees from a
wooded area either singly or in small groups according to age and size,
with provisions being made for natural or artificial vegetation.
SITE — A lot, tract, parcel of land or a series of lots, tracts or parcels
of land which are adjoining where grading work and/or a timbering and
logging operation is continuous and performed at the same time.
SKIDDER — A large machine used in moving logs from the stump site
to a landing.
SKIDDING — The act of moving logs from the stump site to a landing.
SLASH — The woody material or debris left on the ground after the
area is timbered and logged.
SOIL ENGINEER — A person registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as a professional engineer and who has training and
experience in soils engineering.
SOIL SURVEY — The unpublished and operational soil survey for
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and the accompanying text, entitled
"Soil Survey Maps and Interpretations for Developing Areas in
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania," as prepared by the United States
Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, et al.
SOLID WASTE — All parts or combinations of and including, but not
limited to, ashes, garbage, refuse, radioactive material, combustible
demolition materials and industrial wastes such as food-processing
wastes, wood, plastic and metal scrap.
STRUCTURE — Any assembly of materials above or below the surface
of the land or water, including but not limited to houses, buildings,
bulkheads, piers, docks, landings, dams, waterway obstructions, towers
and utility transmission devices.
TOPS — The upper portion of a felled tree that is unmerchantable
because of small size, taper or defect.
TREE —
WATERCOURSE — A natural drainage route or channel for the flow of
water.
Any self-supporting woody plant growing upon the earth that
usually provides one main trunk and produces a more or less
distinct and elevated head with many branches.
(1)
Any self-supporting woody plant, usually having a single woody
trunk and a potential DBH of two inches or more.
(2)
§ 243-7 § 243-7
243:448
ARTICLE III
Permit Procedures and Requirements
§ 243-8. Permit required.
§ 243-9. Permit exceptions.
A land disturbance permit will not be required for any of the following
situations:
A. A land disturbance permit must be obtained from the Municipal
Engineer for any grading projects, including excavations, cuts and fills,
and any timbering and logging operations. Changes, additions or
alterations to existing excavations or fills and timbering and logging
operations shall conform to the provisions of these regulations. A
separate land disturbance permit shall be required for each site. one
permit may cover any grading project and any timbering and logging
operations made on the same site.
B. A land disturbance permit shall be required for any grading operation
involving volumes of earth movement that are less than 10,000 cubic
yards within the Municipality of Monroeville. Volumes of earth
movement in excess of 10,000 cubic yards are major excavations and
require approval from the Council of the Municipality of Monroeville as
provided for in the Monroeville Zoning Ordinance, No. 1443, as
amended.157
C. A land disturbance permit shall be required for any timbering and
logging operation involving a land area of 10 acres or less within the
Municipality of Monroeville. Timbering and logging operations in
excess of 10 acres are major timbering and logging operations and
require approval of the Council of the Municipality of Monroeville as
provided for in Article IV of this chapter.
D. Only one permit is required for a contiguous parcel to be graded and/or
timbered and logged for an approved planned development, such as
planned residential development, planned group unit, subdivision or
land development.
E. When grading and/or timbering and logging is to be performed for and
executed concurrently with the preparation of the land for an approved
site plan that does not qualify as a conditional use approval for a major
excavation, a separate land disturbance permit will be required.
A. Minor grading operations where neither the cut nor fill exceeds a
vertical change of five feet, but not if the Municipal Engineer
determines that the possibility of erosion and sedimentation exists.
157. Editor's Note: See Ch. 359, Zoning.
§ 243-8 LAND DISTURBANCE § 243-9
243:449
§ 243-10. Form of application.
Written application shall be made on a form prescribed for that purpose by
the Municipality and shall include such plans and detailed information as
shall be required in accord with application specifications adopted by the
Municipality.
§ 243-11. Submission of plans.
B. Grading limited to reasonable, regular, normal maintenance and
landscaping improvements by individual homeowners, where standards
identified in § 243-29 of this chapter are not violated.
C. Stockpiling of rock, sand and aggregate in an area properly zoned for
such use.
D. Temporary excavation below finished grade for basements, additions to
existing structures, swimming pools or accessory structures for which a
building permit has been issued, but not if the Municipal Engineer
determines that the possibility of erosion and sedimentation exists.
E. Removal of trees limited to reasonable, regular, normal maintenance
and landscaping improvements by individual homeowners where
standards in § 243-30 of this chapter are not violated.
F. Removal of trees limited to site preparation for an approved building
permit.
G. Removal of trees limited to site preparation for an approved site plan
and/or subdivision plan.
A. The application shall consist of not less than three copies of the written
application, together with not fewer than three prints of each drawing.
B. The proposed land disturbance plan shall be prepared by an engineer in
accordance with standard engineering practices to clearly indicate the
following:
(1) A valid boundary line survey of the site on which the proposed work
is to be done, including but not limited to North arrow, scale, date,
key location map and registration stamp.
(2) A description of the features, existing and proposed, on the site
which are of importance to the proposed development, including
but not limited to, among others, location of trees, natural features,
existing structures, property lines, streets, rights-of-way,
easements, roads and utilities, distance to road intersections and
watercourses.
(3) Owners of adjacent properties, including but not limited to the
location of any existing structures and driveway locations.
§ 243-9 § 243-11
243:450
(4) Topographic features with existing contours at a vertical interval of
not more than five vertical feet.
(5) The location and description of existing and future man-made
features of importance to the proposed development, including
structures, roads, utilities, walls, excavations and fills.
(6) An erosion and sedimentation plan in conformance with applicable
regulations.
(7) Specifications which shall set forth details of the work, such as
materials, methods, procedures, insurance and estimated dates for
starting and completing the work.
(8) A subsurface investigation and evaluation by an engineer that
includes test borings, test pits and on-site visual evaluation.
(9) Calculations by an engineer showing the safety of any existing or
proposed earth-retaining structures and the design earth pressures
for these structures.
(10) Where fill is involved, the following additional information may be
necessary:
(a) A plan showing proposed preparation of natural ground
surface by benching or by removal of topsoil, vegetation and
other materials.
(b) A soils report prepared by a soil engineer that shall include
data on the nature, distribution and supporting ability of
existing soils and rock on the site and means of assuring stable
soil conditions and groundwater control.
(c) A description of surface and subsurface drainage control.
(d) Results of stability analysis.
(e) A description of the kind of material to be used in fill.
(f) A description of the method of compacting fill and thickness of
layers to be used in such compacting.
(g) A description of control tests to be made prior to and during
the process of filling and the names of persons or agencies
responsible for making the tests.
(h) Other supplemental reports as deemed necessary by the
Municipal Engineer.
(11) When deemed necessary by the Municipal Engineer, a drainage
study prepared by an engineer may be submitted that includes the
following:
§ 243-11 LAND DISTURBANCE § 243-11
243:451
(a) An accurate map of the site showing the location, elevations
and dimensions of all present and proposed watercourses,
ditches, pipes and drainage structures; proposed excavations
and fills; woodlands, structures, parking areas and driveways;
sources, storage and disposition of water channeled through or
across the site; all proposed grading and drainage; and the
gradients and maximum flow rates of watercourses.
(b) A description of the work to be performed and disposition of
cut and fill material, the materials to be used and the method of
performance, including provisions for protecting and
maintaining existing drainage facilities, whether on public or
private property. The drainage study shall be accompanied by
all supporting data developed by the engineer.
(c) Calculations based on the soil-cover complex method to
determine runoff. The coefficient of runoff used shall be
computed on the basis of existing land use set forth in the
Monroeville Comprehensive Plan and on densities permitted in
the Monroeville Zoning Ordinance.158
(d) Drainage facilities to carry surface water shall be provided and
designed to prevent erosion or overflow.
(e) The applicant shall agree to the granting and recording of
easements for the installation and maintenance of drainage
facilities.
(f) Adequate stormwater retention facilities shall be provided to
ensure that stormwater runoff after development shall not be
greater than the runoff which would occur from the site in its
natural state during a storm with a one-hundred-year
probability.
(12) For minor logging and timbering operations, a forest management
plan indicating the following may be necessary:
(a) A description of the type of tree removal project, identifying
thinning, selective cutting, clear-cutting and/or aesthetic
improvement cut.
(b) A description of the area to be timbered, specifying area to be
timbered, tree species mixture, a sampling of tree sizes and the
notation of any unusual, scarce or endangered timber.
(c) A one-hundred-percent inventory of trees to be timbered,
stating the species, size and quantity. This inventory shall
include those trees which are diseased, damaged or in
otherwise unhealthy condition.
158. Editor's Note: See Ch. 359, Zoning.
§ 243-11 § 243-11
243:452
§ 243-12. Issuance of permit.
A land disturbance permit will be issued by the Municipal Engineer upon
satisfaction of the following conditions:
(d) A statement demonstrating how trees that are not proposed for
removal are to be protected during land clearing, construction
and restoration.
(e) A statement/map showing general soil conditions throughout
the proposed timber area.
(f) A grading plan.
(g) Information as to how all trees will be marked for removal and
those trees which are to remain on the site.
(h) The diversity of the tree species shall be maintained within the
designated area at generally the same ratio both before and
after the timbering.
(i) The edge of the designated area will not be disturbed and shall
be maintained at a width of 25 feet. Ingress/egress points shall
be located as determined and approved by the Municipal
Engineer.
(j) A list of equipment to be used in the timbering.
(k) A time schedule for the start and completion of all work within
the timbering area.
(13) For minor logging and timbering operations, a forest restoration
program indicating the following may be necessary:
(a) Grading and seeding of all areas disturbed as a result of the
timbering activity, including but not limited to roads, wheel
ruts, aprons and work areas.
(b) All trees shall be cut at a minimum of 18 inches to the ground.
(c) (Reserved)159
(d) A specific proposal for replanting or reforestation.
C. The Municipal Engineer may waive the requirement for preparation of
plans by an engineer where it is evident that the proposed work is
simple, clearly shown on the drawings submitted and poses no potential
nuisance or hazard to adjacent property.
A. Payment of fees as established by separate ordinance.160
159. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(13)(c), regarding crowns of felled trees, was repealed
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2043.
160. Editor's Note: See Ch. 194, Fees.
§ 243-11 LAND DISTURBANCE § 243-12
243:453
§ 243-13. Expiration of permit.
Every land disturbance permit shall become null and void if the work
authorized has not been commenced within one year or is not completed
within two years from the date of issue. The Municipal Engineer may issue
a renewal permit for an additional one-year-period.
§ 243-14. Appeals.
Appeals shall be taken to Council within 30 days of any denial by the
Municipal Engineer. Council may grant relief from the strict provisions of
this chapter where, in its opinion, alternate methods, standards or materials
proposed by the developer will meet the objectives and intent of this
B. Bonds and certificate of insurance. A permit shall not be issued until the
bonds and certificate of insurance prescribed in § 243-15 have been
provided and approved by the Municipal Manager and Solicitor.
C. Compliance with the restrictions of this chapter and applications and
plans approved by the Municipal Engineer.
D. Possible conditions. In the interest of public health, welfare and safety,
additional items may be appended to, stated on and made a condition of
the work permitted. These conditions may include but shall not be
limited to:
(1) A reasonable time limit for completion of the work.
(2) Limitations upon the hours of the day and/or days of the week for
performance of the work covered by the permit and/or travel on
public streets.
(3) Construction of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing or
cribbing.
(4) Tests of all soil or other material used or involved in the operation,
the results of which shall be made available as soon as possible to
the Municipality.
(5) Restrictions upon the size, type and number of pieces of equipment
to be used, including trucks on public streets or thoroughfares.
(6) Planting of appropriate ground cover on slopes to provide retention
of soil and control erosion.
(7) On-site supervision of the work by an Engineer or representative.
(8) Immediate removal of debris deposited on public streets or
thoroughfares or adjacent property as a result of work.
(9) Compliance with applicable health and safety measures, including
but not limited to adequate warning signs, traffic controls, sanitary
measures, environmental measures and other applicable measures.
§ 243-12 § 243-14
243:454
chapter. Any applicant or permit holder shall have the right to appeal
decisions of Council to any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 243-15. Performance bonds and certificates of insurance.
Prior to the issuance of a permit for any grading project and/or timbering
and logging operation, the applicant shall secure the necessary
performance bonds and certificate of insurance as established by the
Municipal Engineer and approved by the Municipal Manager and Solicitor.
§ 243-16. Inspections.
The applicant shall notify the Municipal Engineer of the schedule of a land
disturbance operation. Notice shall be received by the Municipal Engineer
at least two working days before start or completion of a land disturbance
operation.
§ 243-17. Maintenance.
The owner of any property on which an excavation or fill has been made
shall maintain the excavation or fill in good condition, including all retaining
A. Land disturbance work at these stages or at any other time will be
subject to spot inspections at the discretion of the Municipal Engineer
to determine that the work is being performed in compliance with the
approved permit and these regulations.
B. Should the Municipal Engineer deem it necessary, a report by an
engineering geologist will be required with inspection and certification
that cuts and fills have been placed in accordance with approved plans
and specifications.
C. After review of the application, the Municipal Engineer may
recommend on-site inspection by an independent agency as a condition
of the permit. Inspection by an independent agency selected by the
applicant from a municipally approved list of the same will be required.
The requirement of an independent agency will be only for unusually
difficult situations where the inspection is beyond the capabilities of the
Municipality. The inspection agent shall be an engineer or shall have at
least five years' experience in this type of inspection work and shall be
under the direct supervision of an engineer. The inspection agent shall
furnish inspection on the land disturbance operation as directed by the
Municipal Engineer. The services of the inspection agent shall be solely
the applicant's expense. The inspection agent shall submit periodic
inspection reports to the Municipal Engineer as prescribed in its
approval.
D. A final inspection shall be conducted by the Municipal Engineer to
certify compliance with this chapter. Satisfactory compliance with this
chapter shall be necessary before issuance of any occupancy permit.
§ 243-14 LAND DISTURBANCE § 243-17
243:455
walls, cribbing, drainage structures, fences, ground cover or other
protective devices as may be a part of the permit requirements.
§ 243-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $300. In default of payment of the fine, such person, the
members of such partnership or the officers of such corporation shall be
liable to imprisonment for not more than 90 days. Each day that a violation
is continued shall constitute a separate offense.
A. All drainage courses, ditches, culverts, pipes and structures shall be
adequately maintained by the property owner and shall be kept open
and free flowing at all times.
B. All graded surfaces, antierosion devices, retaining walls, drainage
structures and similar protective devices, plantings and ground covers
installed pursuant to a land disturbance permit shall be continuously
maintained and kept in good repair by the owner.
C. Adequate engineering provisions shall be incorporated to prevent the
infiltration of sediment into existing streams.
D. Where the Municipal Engineer finds evidence of deterioration or
erosion of any excavation or fill which threatens to damage nearby
properties, he shall direct the property owner to effect remedies which
will restore the grading to a safe condition within a reasonable period of
time.
§ 243-17 § 243-18
243:456
ARTICLE IV
Site Plan Review and Procedures
§ 243-19. Site plan review.
No land disturbance permit shall be issued for any timbering and logging
operation involving a land area in excess of 10 acres until a site plan
has been submitted, reviewed and approved by Monroeville Council in
accordance with the provisions outlined in Article IV and in compliance with
the standards established in Article V of this chapter.
§ 243-20. Application procedure.
The application for approval of a proposed site plan for a major timbering
and logging operation shall be submitted in the office of the Municipal
Engineer and shall be accompanied by a fee established by ordinance of
Council.161 The Municipal Engineer shall annually prepare a schedule of
application submission for major timbering and logging operations.
§ 243-21. Form of application.
Written application shall be made on a form prescribed for that purpose by
the Municipality and shall include such plans and detailed information as
shall be required in accord with application specifications adopted by the
Municipality.
§ 243-22. Submission of plans.
A. The application shall consist of not fewer than 10 copies of the written
application, together with not fewer than 10 prints of each drawing.
B. The proposed land disturbance plan shall be prepared by an engineer in
accordance with standard engineering practices to clearly indicate the
following:
(1) A valid boundary line survey of the site on which the proposed work
is to be done, including but not limited to North arrow, scale, date,
key location map and registration stamp.
(2) A description of the features, existing and proposed, on the site
which are of importance to the proposed development, including
but not limited to, among others, location of trees, natural features,
existing structures, property lines, streets, rights-of-way,
easements, roads and utilities, distance to road intersections and
watercourses.
(3) Owners of adjacent properties, including but not limited to the
location of any existing structures and driveway locations.
161. Editor's Note: See Ch. 194, Fees.
§ 243-19 LAND DISTURBANCE § 243-22
243:457
(4) Topographic features with existing contours at a vertical interval of
not more than five vertical feet.
(5) The location and description of existing and future man-made
features of importance to the proposed development, including
structures, roads, utilities, walls, excavations and fills.
(6) An erosion and sedimentation plan in conformance with applicable
regulations.
(7) Specifications which shall set forth details of the work, such as
materials, methods, procedures, insurance and estimated dates for
starting and completing the work.
(8) A subsurface investigation and evaluation by an engineer that
includes test borings, test pits and on-site visual evaluation.
(9) Calculations by an engineer showing the safety of any existing or
proposed earth-retaining structures and the design earth pressures
for these structures.
(10) For major logging and timbering operations, a forest management
plan indicating the following shall be necessary:
(a) A description of the type of tree removal project identifying
thinning, selective cutting, clear-cutting and/or aesthetic
improvement cut.
(b) A description of the area to be timbered, specifying the area to
be timbered, tree species mixture, a sampling of tree sizes and
the notation of any unusual, scarce or endangered timber.
(c) A one-hundred-percent inventory of trees to be timbered,
stating the species, size and quantity. This inventory shall
include those trees which are diseased, damaged or in
otherwise unhealthy condition.
(d) A statement demonstrating how trees that are not proposed for
removal are to be protected during land clearing, construction
and restoration.
(e) A statement/map showing general soil conditions throughout
the proposed timber area.
(f) A grading plan.
(g) Information as to how all trees will be marked for removal and
those trees which are to remain on the site.
(h) The diversity of the tree species shall be maintained within the
designated area at generally the same ratio both before and
after the timbering.
§ 243-22 § 243-22
243:458
§ 243-23. Notification of neighboring property owners.
The applicant shall provide a list of names and addresses of all property
owners within 1,000 feet of the property line where the proposed major
timbering and logging operation is proposed. The office of the Municipal
Engineer shall notify those affected property owners, in writing, providing
a brief description of the proposed project and the date of the public
hearing. Additionally, the area shall be posted with signs that provide a brief
description of the proposed project and the date of the public hearing.
§ 243-24. Public hearing.
As provided in the schedule of application submission, a public hearing
pursuant to public notice shall be held by the Municipal Council.
§ 243-25. Council action.
Action shall be taken by Council, either approving or disapproving, on an
application for a major timbering and logging operation within 60 days from
the date of the first Council meeting at which the application appears as an
agenda item. Council may attach such conditions as it deems appropriate to
approval.
§ 243-26. Issuance of permit; period of validity.
Upon approval by Council and satisfaction of any conditions established by
Council, the Municipal Engineer shall issue a land disturbance permit for
(i) The edge of the designated area will not be disturbed and shall
be maintained at a width of 25 feet. Ingress/egress points shall
be located as determined and approved by the Municipal
Engineer.
(j) A list of equipment to be used in the timbering.
(k) A time schedule for the start and completion of all work within
the timbering area.
(11) For major logging and timbering operations, a forest restoration
program indicating the following shall be necessary:
(a) Grading and seeding of all areas disturbed as a result of the
timbering activity, including but not limited to roads, wheel
ruts, aprons and work areas.
(b) All trees shall be cut at a minimum of 18 inches to the ground.
(c) (Reserved)162
(d) A specific proposal for replanting or reforestation.
162. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(11)(c), regarding crowns of felled trees, was repealed
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2043.
§ 243-22 LAND DISTURBANCE § 243-26
243:459
the proposed project. Approval for a major timbering and logging operation
shall be valid for a period of one year following Council action. If the
proposed project is not started within six months, Council approval shall be
void.
§ 243-27. Performance bonds and certificates of insurance.
Prior to the issuance of a permit for any grading project and/or timbering
and logging operation, the applicant shall secure the necessary
performance bonds and certificate of insurance as established by the
Municipal Engineer and approved by the Municipal Manager and Solicitor.
§ 243-28. Inspection.
The applicant shall notify the Municipal Engineer of the schedule of a major
timbering and logging operation prior to the commencement of any work.
All inspections shall comply with § 243-16 of this chapter.
§ 243-26 § 243-28
243:460
ARTICLE V
Land Disturbance Standards
§ 243-29. Grading standards.
The following shall be minimum standards for issuance of a land
disturbance permit:
A. The maximum slope of an excavation shall not be greater than 1 1/2
horizontal to one vertical, and maximum slope for fill shall not be
greater than two horizontal to one vertical; provided, however, that the
maximum cut may be increased to one horizontal to one vertical where
a soil engineer certifies that the cut shall be into sedimentary rock or
other material which is sufficiently durable to remain stable and
maintain the cut without slippage. The only exception to this standard
shall be where a retaining wall, designed and sealed by an engineer, is
constructed to support the face of the slope.
B. No grading, excavation or fill shall be performed so close to any
property line as to endanger or damage any adjoining street or any
other public or private property without supporting such property from
settling, cracking, erosion, sedimentation, flooding or any other
physical damage or personal injury which might result.
C. Excavation adjacent to any building foundation walls, footings or
structures shall not extend beyond the angle of repose or natural slope
of the soil under the nearest point of the same unless the footings,
foundations or structures have been sufficiently underpinned or
otherwise protected against settlement.
D. Adequate provisions shall be incorporated to prevent erosion due to
storm drainage. All drainage facilities shall be properly engineered and
may be paved or planted swales and gutters and piped storm sewers.
All storm drainage facilities will be reviewed and approved by the
Municipal Engineer.
E. Existing storm drainage shall not be diverted so as to alter the location
of watercourses on any adjacent property. Any proposed grading shall
be accomplished so that exiting stormwater runoff flows are neither
increased from predevelopment rates nor concentrated at the point of
release onto abutting properties.
F. No debris or other material shall be placed or allowed to be placed in
any drainage ditch or structure in such a manner as to obstruct the free
flow of surface water.
G. All trees in an area of extreme grade change shall be protected with
suitable tree wells unless the necessity for removal is established. Trees
shall not be removed unnecessarily.
H. Provisions shall be made for dust control as are deemed necessary and
acceptable by the Municipal Engineer.
§ 243-29 LAND DISTURBANCE § 243-29
243:461
§ 243-30. Timbering and logging standards.
The following shall be minimum standards for issuance of a land
disturbance permit:
I. All fills shall be compacted to provide stability of fill materials and to
prevent settlement or slippage. Any fill material to be used shall be
tested by the owner to ensure that its dry density shall be not less than
92% of maximum density as determined by ASTM D1556.
J. Immediately upon completion of grading, all areas not designated for
building or paving shall be mulched and planted. Planting shall be
appropriate to maintain slopes from erosion and subject to approval of
the Municipality. In general, planting may be rye grass, fescue, crown
vetch or honeysuckle.
K. Plans and specifications for every grading permit shall provide for both
temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control.
L. When needed for slope stabilization, benching shall be required. In
general, slopes which exceed 50 feet shall require benches.
M. Topsoil stripped from the site in preparation for earthmoving activities
shall be stockpiled and replaced on the site over all regraded,
nondeveloped areas, at a minimum depth of four inches.
N. Fill areas shall be prepared by removing organic material, such as
vegetation and rubbish, and any other material determined by the
Municipal Engineer to prevent proper compaction and stability.
O. In addition to the above, all fill and cut operations shall follow the
Handbook for Earthmoving Activities and Erosion and Sedimentation
Control for Allegheny County. A soil and erosion and sedimentation plan
shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 25,
Environmental Resources, Chapter 102, Erosion Control, and approved
by the Allegheny County Conservation District (ACCD) prior to the
commencement of any grading or other regulated earth disturbance
activity, unless the ACCD determines that a soil and erosion control
plan is not required.
A. All timbering and logging operations shall be by the selection method.
Clear-cutting is prohibited.
B. Timbering and logging operations shall not be undertaken on any
ground with a slope exceeding 25% nor in landslide or flood-prone
areas.
C. Removal of trees which have a DBH of more than 20 inches shall be
reviewed by the Municipal Engineer before inclusion in any timbering
and logging operation.
D. The diversity of the tree species shall be maintained within the permit
area at generally the same ratio both before and after the timbering.
§ 243-29 § 243-30
243:462
E. Buffer zones of 25 feet along all abutting properties shall be maintained
on the property on which the timber and logging operation is being
conducted.
F. Buffer zones of 25 feet along all streets and streams and around any
springs shall be maintained on the property on which the timber and
logging operation is being conducted.
G. All cutting, removing, skidding and transporting of trees as part of the
timbering and logging operation shall be planned and performed in
such a manner as to minimize the disturbance of or damage to other
trees, vegetation and the land itself.
H. Roads and trails shall be constructed, maintained and abandoned in
such manner as to prevent soil erosion and permanent damage to soils
and waterways.
I. Roads and trails shall only be wide enough to accommodate the type of
equipment used, and grades of such roads and trails shall be kept as
low as possible.
J. Where possible, stream crossings shall be avoided, but where deemed
necessary crossings shall be made at a right angle across suitable
culverts or bridges.
K. Skidding across live or intermittent streams is prohibited except over
culverts or bridges.
L. All limbs and stubs shall be removed from felled trees prior to skidding.
M. All trees bent or held down by felled trees shall be promptly released.
N. No trees shall be left lodged in the process of felling.
O. Felling or skidding on or across property of others is prohibited without
the express written consent of those property owners. Felling or
skidding on or across any public street is prohibited without the written
permission of the appropriate municipal, county or state government
agency.
P. No tops or slash shall be left within 50 feet of any adjoining property or
public street, within 25 feet of any stream and/or historic or scenic trail
or within 10 feet of any drainage ditch.
Q. The stumps of all felled trees shall be permitted to remain in the soil for
stabilization purposes.
R. Upon completion of the timbering and logging operation, all roads shall
be graded to eliminate any wheel ruts, and access to such roads from
public streets by motor vehicles of any kind shall be effectively blocked.
§ 243-30 LAND DISTURBANCE § 243-30
243:463
Chapter 245
LANDFILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 221.
Littering — See Ch. 249.
Landfill operations noise — See Ch. 263, Art.
II.
Recycling — See Ch. 297.
Zoning — See Ch. 359.
§ 245-1. Definitions.
Where appearing in this chapter, the following words shall have the
following definitions:
AUTOMOBILE or STATION WAGON — Any mechanical contrivance which
was constructed or manufactured primarily for the purpose of
transportation of persons and, in the case of station wagons, which was
intended to be convertible to the use of hauling material of any kind within
the same area as the operator of such would be stationed during the
operation of such vehicle.
GARBAGE — Waste from the preparation, cooking and consumption of
food; market refuse; waste from the handling, storage and sale of produce;
contaminated or soiled foods; offal from hotels, institutions, stores and
markets; and any other animal or vegetable waste or remnants. "Garbage"
shall also include any paper or similar waste material mixed with garbage
as herein defined in the normal course of household, institutional or
commercial operation.
LANDFILL or DISPOSAL SITE — Any place where garbage and trash is
dumped, spread, mixed, stored, reduced, treated, burned or otherwise
disposed of.
PERSON — Any individual, company, partnership, firm, limited partnership,
association or corporation.
TRASH — All paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches,
yard and grounds trimmings, bedding, cans, metal, glass, crockery, mineral
refuse, building material and substance, ashes and any other similar
substances.
VEHICLE — Any mechanical contrivance other than an automobile or
station wagon as herein defined, capable of transporting garbage or trash
as herein defined, regardless of whether such mechanical contrivance was
constructed or manufactured primarily for the purpose of hauling such
material.
§ 243-30 § 245-2
245:464
§ 245-2. Existing landfills and disposal sites.
All landfills or disposal sites in existence at the effective date of this chapter,
be and the same, are hereby confined in their physical limits in the areas
now actually used and directly employed in the disposal of garbage and
trash and may not be enlarged or expanded beyond the present physical
limits of such areas, which shall be marked with permanent markers as
determined by the Municipal Engineer.
§ 245-3. Regulation and licensing of landfills and disposal sites.
All landfills or disposal sites within the Municipality shall be subject to the
regulatory and licensing provisions of this chapter as to landfills or disposal
sites.
§ 245-4. Compliance required; regulations.
A. All landfills or disposal sites must conform to the requirements and
regulations as imposed by the Department of Environmental
Resources163 and/or Allegheny County Health Department and be
properly licensed by the Department of Environmental Resources,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for operation of a landfill or disposal
site and, in addition, must maintain a valid Department of
Environmental Resources permit as a condition of continued operation.
In addition, the Municipality imposes the following regulations:
(1) All streets and surrounding public roads used in the transportation
of trash and refuse to and from landfills or disposal sites must be
maintained free and clear of mud and debris specifically
attributable to vehicles utilizing the landfill or disposal site. The
operator of the landfill or disposal site is responsible for the
maintenance of the roads in the area to ensure that debris
attributable to trucks utilizing the landfill is moved on a timely
basis and that measures are taken to remove mud and debris prior
to vehicles entering public streets.
(2) In the event that paper or other garbage or trash is spread by
unusual wind or weather conditions to areas beyond the landfill or
disposal site area, then within 24 hours such paper, garbage or
trash shall be collected and returned to the landfill or disposal site
area for proper disposition.
(3) No noxious odors shall be allowed.
(4) On a regular basis, a duly authorized agent of the Municipality of
Monroeville shall inspect separately or shall accompany the
Department of Environmental Resources and Allegheny County
Health Department Inspectors on regularly scheduled and
nonscheduled inspections for the purpose of verifying that the
163. Editor's Note: Now the Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 245-2 LANDFILLS § 245-4
245:465
§ 245-5. Vehicles hauling garbage or trash.
Any vehicle hauling garbage or trash through the Municipality to any
landfill or disposal site in the Municipality shall conform to the following:
§ 245-6. Vehicles to be licensed.
Before any vehicle is used for the transportation of garbage or trash
through any part of the Municipality of Monroeville while en route to any
landfill or disposal site within the Municipality of Monroeville, said vehicle
shall be licensed by the Municipality of Monroeville as herein provided.
§ 245-7. Licensing procedure; transferability; applicability.
standards established by the regulatory agencies are being
adhered to and ascertaining that the additional regulations
imposed by the Municipality are likewise being adhered to.
B. Inspection reports by the duly authorized agent of the Municipality of
Monroeville shall be available for public view at reasonable times and
shall be transmitted to Municipal Council and the Municipal Manager
upon completion.
A. It shall have a metal body.
B. The body shall be watertight and hold 12 inches of water, if it hauls
liquids, without overflow.
C. The body must not be of open design, and, if of nonpacker variety, it
must have metal covers so arranged that a minimum portion of the body
is open during loading and hauling.
D. The exterior of the vehicle shall be kept painted.
E. The interior and exterior of the vehicle shall be kept clean so as not to
make an unsightly appearance and/or emit odors.
F. Each vehicle shall be kept in good mechanical condition.
A. The following shall be the procedure and requirements for the licensing
of vehicles pursuant to § 245-6 hereof:
(1) Application. The owner and/or operator of said vehicle regarding
licensing pursuant to § 245-6 hereof shall make application to the
Municipality for a license, said application to be made upon forms
provided by the Municipality and which shall contain requests and
provisions for the following information as well as any further
information deemed relevant by the Municipality:
(a) The name of the owner.
(b) The name of the lessee, if any.
§ 245-4 § 245-7
245:466
(c) The make, year and model of the vehicle.
(d) The manufacturer's number of the vehicle.
(e) The load capacity of the vehicle.
(f) The body type of the vehicle.
(g) The Pennsylvania registration number and the Pennsylvania
license number.
(h) The Allegheny County registration number.
(i) The appropriate number of trips to be made into the
Municipality per day.
(j) The locality or localities from which the garbage or trash is to
be collected.
(k) The name of the person or persons with whom the applicant
has contracts for the hauling or disposal of garbage.
(2) Annual license. Any vehicle may be licensed annually at a license
fee as provided in Chapter 194, Fees. Such license shall entitled
said vehicle to be operated within the Municipality during the term
of said license and so long as the vehicle bears a license sticker
issued by the Municipality. All annual licenses shall expire on the
31st day of December following the effective date of said license.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
(3) Monthly license. Any vehicle may be licensed on a monthly basis at
a license fee as provided in Chapter 194, Fees. Such license shall
entitle said vehicle to be operated within the Municipality during
the month or months specified in the license issued by the
Municipality if carried in said vehicle and so long as the vehicle
bears a license sticker issued by the Municipality. [Amended
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
(4) Daily license. Any vehicle may be operated on a daily basis at a
license fee as provided in Chapter 194, Fees. Such license shall
entitle said vehicle to be operated within the Municipality on the
day specified in the license and so long as a copy of the license by
the Municipality is carried in said vehicle. [Amended 7-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 2042]
(5) Automobiles and station wagons. Any automobile or station wagon
may be licensed on a daily basis at a license fee as provided in
Chapter 194, Fees. Such license shall entitle said automobile or
station wagon to be operated within the Municipality during the
day or days specified in the license and so long as a copy of the
license issued by the Municipality is carried in said automobile or
station wagon. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
§ 245-7 LANDFILLS § 245-7
245:467
§ 245-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter relating to landfills
shall, upon conviction before any District Justice within Allegheny County,
be subject to the payment of a fine of not more than $600, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
confinement in the Allegheny County Jail for a period of not less than 30
days.
§ 245-9. Additional violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 2042]
The owner of any vehicle or operator of any vehicle or any person in charge
of any landfill or disposal site permitting any vehicle to dump or deposit
garbage or trash at any dump, where said vehicle has not been licensed
pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction before any District Justice
in Allegheny County, be subject to the payment of a fine of not more than
$600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days.
(6) Payment of fees. All license fees shall be payable at the time of
submission of the application to the Municipality.
(7) Inspection of vehicles. Before licensing, the Municipality of
Monroeville or its duly authorized agent may require inspection of
vehicle to be licensed in order to determine whether said vehicle
conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
(8) Issuance of license. If after application and inspection, if inspection
is required, the Municipality of Monroeville or its duly authorized
constituted agent finds that the application is in order, the license
fee paid and the vehicle conforms to requirements of this chapter,
the Municipal Manager or his duly authorized agent shall be
authorized to issue a license for said vehicle along with a license
sticker if applicable.
B. The license issued for any vehicle, whether an annual, monthly or daily
license, shall not be transferable to any other vehicle, except upon due
application to the Municipality for transfer of said license to another
vehicle and upon surrender of any license sticker which was previously
issued in connection with said license.
C. The licensing provisions herein as to vehicles do not apply to vehicles
owned by a municipal corporation or body politic hauling trash solely
within the Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 245-7 § 245-10
245:468
§ 245-10. Additional remedies.
The Municipality shall have the power, through appropriate proceedings in
any court of competent jurisdiction, to enjoin any violation of the provisions
of this chapter.
Chapter 249
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 221.
Landfills — See Ch. 245.
Park, recreation and conservation
areas — See Ch. 274.
Graffiti — See Ch. 278, Art. VII.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 282.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 290.
§ 245-10 LITTERING § 245-10
249:469

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 9-15-1962 by Ord. No. 368]
§ 249-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection
receptacle maintained by a private person, fully enclosed and complete with
a tight-fitting lid.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature which:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to the public health, safety and welfare.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville.
A. Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
B.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged
for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this subsection
shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such
meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind when
either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the
dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary
rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order,
provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall be deemed
to authorize the holding, meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition
or event of any kind without a license, where such license is or may
be required by any law of this state or under any ordinance of this
Municipality; or
C.
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
§ 249-1 LITTERING § 249-1
249:471
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law or any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the
United States, in accordance with the federal statute or regulation, or any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by
general law and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical
or current magazine regularly published with not fewer than four issues per
year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,
paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or
copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of
"commercial handbill" or "newspaper."
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the Municipality owned or used by the Municipality and
devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule
or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or
other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, grounds and buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, used wood or wood scraps, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 249-2. Littering in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the Municipality except in public receptacles, in
authorized private receptacles for collection or in official municipal dumps.
§ 249-3. Litter to be placed in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
§ 249-1 § 249-3
249:472
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.
§ 249-4. Sweeping litter into public places; sidewalks to be kept
clear.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the Municipality the accumulation of litter from any building
or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.
§ 249-5. Duties of business owners.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Municipality
the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public
or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of
business within the Municipality shall keep the sidewalks in front of their
business premises free of litter.
§ 249-6. Littering from vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the Municipality or upon
private property.
§ 249-7. Truckloads causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
Municipality unless such vehicle will prevent any load, contents or litter
from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place.
No shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the
Municipality, the wheels or tires of which carry into or deposit in any street,
alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign
matter of any kind; provided, however, that no person shall be deemed in
violation of this section of the article unless he has been given 24 hours'
written notice, signed by the Municipal Manager or Chief of Police, advising
him to remove such litter or debris within such period.
§ 249-8. Trucks transporting garbage or rubbish. [Added
12-14-1971 by Ord. No. 771]
A. Any truck or other vehicle in the act of transporting rubbish or refuse as
defined herein, excluding abandoned automobiles or major household
appliances, within or through the Municipality of Monroeville, shall be
completely enclosed, either through the design of the truck or the
vehicle or, if not designed with top cover and end cover, by utilizing
canvas or other durable weather-resistant material securely attached to
the truck or other vehicle, which completely covers the top, open sides
§ 249-3 LITTERING § 249-8
249:473
§ 249-9. Littering in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the Municipality
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as
provided herein.
§ 249-10. Throwing or distributing handbills in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other pubic place within the
Municipality. Nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any
commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall
not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
Municipality for any person to handout or distribute, without charge to
the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to
accept it.
§ 249-11. Placing handbills on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without
charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 249-12. Depositing handbills on vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which is temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
or any other opening in the truck or other vehicle through which
rubbish or refuse may be discharged.
B. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or political subdivision
acting in violation of Subsection A above shall, upon summary
conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not exceeding $600, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall
be imprisoned in Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceeding 30
days. Each load of refuse or rubbish hauled in a truck violating the
above provisions shall be considered a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
§ 249-8 § 249-13
249:474
§ 249-13. Distributing handbills at posted private premises.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone
thereon not to do so or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "No
Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents" or "No Advertisement" or any similar
notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not
desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any
such handbills left upon such premises.
§ 249-14. Distributing handbills at unposted private premises.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which is inhabited,
except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner,
occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises;
provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not
posted, as provided in this article, such person, unless requested by anyone
upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill
in or upon such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so placed or
deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blow or drifted
about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except
that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law
or regulations.
§ 249-15. Exceptions.
The provisions of § 249-14 above shall not apply to the distribution of mail
by the United States, nor to newspapers (as defined herein), except that
newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to
prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
§ 249-16. Posting notices on poles or trees.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device
calculated to attract the attention of the public to any lamppost, public
utility pole or shade tree or upon any public structure or building, except
as may be authorized or required by law, by the Municipal Council or its
authorized agents or by the Municipal Council Permit Committee.
§ 249-17. Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the Municipality, whether owned by such person or not, except
that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain
authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
§ 249-13 LITTERING § 249-18
249:475
§ 249-18. Premises to be free of litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 249-19. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Municipality, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 249-20. Removal of litter by Municipality.
§ 249-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, upon summary
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $600, plus
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall
be imprisoned in the Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceeding 30
A. Notice to remove. The Chief of Police or such other person as may be
designated by the Council is hereby empowered to notify the owner of
any open or vacant private property within the Municipality or the
agent of such owner to properly dispose of litter located on such
owner's property which is dangerous to the public health, safety or
welfare. Such notice shall be by registered or certified mail, addressed
to said owner at his last known address.
B. Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the
public health, safety or welfare within 10 days after receipt of written
notice provided for in Subsection A above, or within 10 days after the
date of such notice in the event that the same is returned to the
Municipal Post Office Department because of its inability to make
delivery thereof, provided that the same was properly addressed to the
last known address of such owner or agent, the Chief of Police is hereby
authorized and empowered to order its disposal by the Municipality.
C. Charge against owner. When the Municipality has effected the removal
of such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost
thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the date
of the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior thereto,
shall be charged to the owner of such property.
D. Recorded statement constitutes lien. The amount due the Municipality,
if not paid by the owner within 30 days of notice thereof, shall be liened
in the Office of the Prothonotary of Allegheny County in accordance
with the law pertaining thereto.
§ 249-18 § 249-21
249:476
days. Each such violation that is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 249-21 LITTERING § 249-21
249:477

ARTICLE II
Trucks and Other Vehicles
[Adopted 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1665]
§ 249-22. Litter from vehicles to be removed.
Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
street, highway or other public place in the Municipality of Monroeville,
without the consent of the owner thereof, from a truck or other vehicle
any wastepaper, sweepings, ashes, household waste, glass, metal, refuse
or rubbish or any dangerous or detrimental substance shall immediately
remove the same or cause it to be removed.
§ 249-23. Vehicle loads to be secure.
Any truck or other vehicle shall not be driven or moved on any street,
highway or other public place in the Municipality of Monroeville unless such
vehicle is so constructed, loaded or covered with a tight-fitting cover so
as to prevent any wastepaper, sweepings, ashes, household waste, glass,
metal, refuse or rubbish or any dangerous or detrimental substance from
dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom onto the streets,
highways or other public places of the Municipality, except that sand or
other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction or
water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or
maintaining such roadway.
§ 249-24. Tracking mud on public places.
No person shall operate any truck or other vehicle so as to track mud on
any street, highway or other public place in the Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 249-25. Persons responsible for violations.
For the purposes of this article, a person who permits to be dropped or
thrown from a vehicle any of the items described in this article shall include
the driver of the vehicle and the registrant of any vehicle registered in
this commonwealth from which any of the items are dropped or thrown,
either by the registrant or any person operating, in possession of or present
within the vehicle with the permission of the registrant, regardless of the
registrant's intent or lack of knowledge with respect to the disposal of such
items in violation of this section, where the registrant of the vehicle does
not, with reasonable certainty, identify the driver of the vehicle at the time
the violation occurred.
§ 249-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article is guilty of a
summary of offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of
§ 249-22 LITTERING § 249-26
249:479
not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 249-26 § 249-26
249:480
Chapter 254
MECHANICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 151.
Building construction — See Ch. 162.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 176
Electrical standards — See Ch. 187.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 206.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 290.
§ 254-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Municipal Manager of the Municipality of Monroeville, being marked and
designated as the "International Mechanical Code/1996," as published by
the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code
of the Municipality of Monroeville in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
for the installation, design, alterations, repair and maintenance of all
mechanical equipment systems and devices in all structures, buildings and
premises as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said International Mechanical Code are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter.
§ 254-2. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Ordinance No. 1582 of the Municipality of Monroeville and all other
ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 254-3. Amendments to standards; violations and penalties; Board
qualifications.
A. The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
(1) Section 106.5.2 is amended as follows:
106.5.2 Fee schedule: Fees shall be in accordance with the
current Fee Ordinance of the Municipality of Monroeville.
(2) Section 506.1.2 is added as follows:
506.1.2 Two-hour fan time delay: All exhaust fan motors shall
be equipped with a two-hour time delay electrical time controller.
The fan must continue to operate for a two-hour period after the
electrical shutoff switch has been placed in the off position.
B. Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an
approved plan or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
§ 249-26 MECHANICAL STANDARDS § 254-3
254:481
§ 254-4. Severability.
Nothing in this chapter or in the International Mechanical Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in
any court or any rights acquired, liability incurred, or any cause or causes
of action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed
as cited in § 254-2 of this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy
of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 254-5. When effective.
The office of the Manager shall certify to the adoption of this chapter
and cause the same to be published as required by law; and this chapter
shall take full force and effect immediately after this date of final passage
and approval. With the exception that buildings or structures, or portions
thereof of which plans have previously been submitted to the Building
Department of the Municipality of Monroeville or the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry, shall be permitted to be constructed
under the provisions of the code in force at the time of approval by the
involved departments.
§ 254-6. Applicability.
All plans not previously submitted for approval or already approved as
of the legal adoption of this chapter shall meet the provisions of the
International Mechanical Code/1996.
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty
of a summary offense, punishable by a fine of not more than $500
or by imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
C. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after
having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be liable to a fine on not less than $300 nor more than $500.
D. The qualifications of the Board of Appeals shall conform to Monroeville
Ordinance No. 1614.164
164. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 176, Construction Codes, Uniform, § 176-4.
§ 254-3 § 254-6
254:482
Chapter 256
MERCANTILE (BUSINESS) LICENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 155.
Carnivals and circuses — See Ch. 173.
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Flea markets — See Ch. 210.
Health clubs — See Ch. 232.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 282.
Restaurants and food preparation
facilities — See Ch. 301.
Closing-out, damaged-goods and defunctbusiness
sales — See Ch. 308.
Secondhand and antique dealers — See Ch.
312.
Taxation — See Ch. 334.
Trade shows — See Ch. 342.
Transient retail or wholesale
businesses — See Ch. 346.
§ 256-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Business License
Ordinance."
§ 256-2. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this chapter, unless the context indicates clearly a different
meaning, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth
below:
BUSINESS LICENSE YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning on the
first day of January and ending on the 31st day of December and each
calendar year thereafter.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville.
PERSON — Any natural person, individual, partnership, association or
corporation, nonprofit or otherwise. Whenever used in any provision
prescribing a fine or a penalty, the word "person," as applied to
partnerships, shall mean the partners thereof and, as applied to
corporations and unincorporated associations, shall mean the officers
thereof.
PLACEMENT OF AMUSEMENT — Any place indoors or outdoors where the
general public or a limited or selected number thereof may, upon payment
of an established price, attend or engage in any amusement, contest or
recreation, including, among other places, theaters, opera houses, motionpicture
houses, amusement parks, stadiums, arenas, baseball or football
parks or fields, skating rinks, circus or carnival tents or grounds,
fairgrounds, bowling alleys, billiard or pool rooms, nine- or ten-pin alleys,
riding academies, golf courses, bathing and swimming places, dance halls,
tennis courts, archery, rifle or shotgun ranges and other like places.
§ 254-6 MERCANTILE (BUSINESS) LICENSES § 256-2
256:483
RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL VENDOR — Any person who is a dealer or
vendor of goods, wares and merchandise who is not a wholesale dealer or
vendor.
TAX COLLECTOR — The Monroeville Municipal Manager or such other
person appointed by the Manager for the collection of the taxes imposed
under this chapter.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business that
is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive days.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who sells
to dealers in, or vendors of, goods, wares and merchandise and to no other
persons.
§ 256-3. Issuance of licenses.
For the mercantile license year 1968 and business license year 1980
annually thereafter, the Municipality shall issue a business license in the
manner and for the fees hereinafter set forth.
§ 256-4. License required; fees; posting.
For the mercantile license year 1964 and business license year 1980
annually thereafter, every person desiring to continue to engage in, or
hereafter to begin to engage in business, including the business of
wholesale or retail vendor or dealer in goods, wares and merchandise and
any person conducting a restaurant or other place where food, drink or
refreshments are sold or place of amusement, whether or not the same is
incidental to some other business or occupation, shall, on or before the
15th day of January of each license year, procure a business license upon
the payment of a fee of $25 for his place of business or if engaged in both
wholesale and retail activities a fee of $50 for his place of business or, if
more than one, for each of his places of business in the Municipality from
the Tax Collector as required by law. Such license shall be conspicuously
posted at the place of business. A licensee maintaining more than one
place of business within the Municipality shall post a single license at his
principal place of business in Monroeville for payment of all locations. Such
license shall be valid only for the person to whom issued and shall not be
transferable or assignable to any other person. Any person who is in default
of payment of any tax, interest or penalty imposed hereunder shall forfeit
such license until said tax, interest or penalty is paid in full.
§ 256-5. Payment at time of filing return; registration required.
A. The person applying for the license shall at the time of filing pay the
license amount as due thereon to the Tax Collector. Within 30 days of
commencing business in Monroeville, every person shall forthwith
register with the Tax Collector and set forth his name, address,
business address, tax identification number, and the nature of the
business activity in which he is engaged. Every person making a
business registration shall certify the correctness thereof by affidavit.
§ 256-2 § 256-5
256:484
§ 256-6. Powers and duties of Tax Collector.
Such registration shall be made by the completion of an application
furnished by the Tax Collector and the payment of a registration fee to
be established by the Municipality. If an individual or business entity
conducts business under a fictitious name, such individual or entity
shall apply for registration in both the true and fictitious names of
the individual and entity and shall list the fictitious name first on the
application. Each separate individual or business entity shall apply for
a separate registration.
B. Each person in the Municipality who leases property, products or
services used by a business, as defined in this article, shall file a form
with the Municipality on or before January 15 of each tax year that sets
forth the names and present addresses of each of the lessees in the
Municipality during both the preceding tax year and the current tax
year. Any person who owns or leases any facility or property used for
the purpose of conducting an itinerant business shall supply the
Business Tax Receiver with the name and address of every itinerant
merchant or promoter leasing or using such property or facility,
together with such other information as the Business Tax Receiver may
request to establish the nature of the goods or services to be displayed
or sold, and the duration of the show. Such information must be
provided to the Business Tax Receiver, in writing, 45 days prior to the
opening of a show.
A. It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to collect and receive the
licenses, fines, interest, and penalties imposed by this chapter. It shall
also be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him
from each person paying the license and the date of each receipt.
B. The Tax Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and is hereby empowered
to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement
of this chapter, including provisions for the reexamination and
correction of forms and payments alleged or found to be incorrect or as
to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any
person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Collector shall have the
right to appeal to a court or courts of competent jurisdiction as in other
cases provided.
C. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to compel the production of
books, papers and records and the attendance of all persons before
him, whether as parties or witnesses, whom he believes to have
knowledge of Monroeville business activity.
D. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers
and records of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to verify the
accuracy of any payment made or, if no payment was made, to ascertain
the license due. Every such taxpayer, or supposed taxpayer, is hereby
§ 256-5 MERCANTILE (BUSINESS) LICENSES § 256-6
256:485
§ 256-7. Confidential nature of returns.
Any information gained by the Tax Collector or any other officer, official,
agent or employee of the Municipality as a result of any returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this
chapter shall be confidential, except in accordance with proper judicial
order or as otherwise provided by law, and divulgence of any information
so gained is hereby declared to be a violation of this chapter, which may be
punished by dismissal from office or employment.
§ 256-8. Violations and penalties.
Whoever fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter or makes any
false or untrue statement on his registration application or who refuses to
permit inspection of the books, records or accounts of any business in his
custody when the right to make such inspection by the Tax Collector is
requested shall, upon conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution for
each offense and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, be imprisoned
in Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days for each offense.
Where the taxpayer is a firm or association, the fine or penalty may be
imposed upon any of the partners or members thereof and, in the case
of corporations, upon any of the officers thereof. Each day on which any
person violates this chapter shall be considered as a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such as hereinbefore provided.
§ 256-9. Construal of provisions; severability.
directed and required to give to the Tax Collector the means, facilities
and opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are hereby
authorized.
E. The Tax Collector is further authorized to delegate any of his authority
herein established or contained to other employees of the Municipality
of Monroeville or to accountants, auditors or collectors retained by the
Municipality of Monroeville for the purpose of assisting in the
administration of this chapter and the enforcement and collection of the
license imposed hereunder and of the auditing of the accounts of the
taxpayers and persons licensed hereunder.
F. The Tax Collector shall not receive any additional compensation for
acting as such under the provisions of this chapter, but all expenses for
the administration of this chapter, the enforcement and collection of the
license imposed hereunder and the auditing of accounts shall be borne
by the Municipality of Monroeville.
A. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to empower the
Municipality of Monroeville to levy and collect the taxes or licenses
hereby imposed on any person or any business or any portion of any
business not within the taxing power of the Municipality of Monroeville
§ 256-6 § 256-9
256:486
§ 256-10. Payment under protest; refunds.
§ 256-11. Effective date; continuation.
This chapter shall become effective January 1, 2003, and shall remain in
effect thereafter from year to year on a calendar basis.
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws and
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the license, or any portion thereof, imposed upon any person under
the provisions of this chapter shall be held by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the decision of the court shall
not affect or impair the right to impose the license or taxes or the
validity of the license or taxes so imposed upon other persons as herein
provided.
C. If a final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction holds any
provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision to any
circumstances, to be illegal or unconstitutional, the other provisions of
this chapter, or the application of such provision to other
circumstances, shall remain in full force and effect. The intention of the
Council is that the provision of this chapter shall be severable and that
this chapter would have been adopted if any such illegal or
unconstitutional provisions had not been included.
A. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest
of the amount of business license claimed by the Municipality in any
case where the taxpayer disputes the validity or amount of the
Municipality's claim for the license. If it is thereafter judicially
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that the Municipality
has been overpaid, the amount of the overpayment shall be refunded to
the taxpayer. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to cases
in which the facts are similar to those in a case litigated in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Claims for refunds of licenses erroneously withheld or paid may be filed
with the Tax Collector. A claim for refund must be filed within three
years of the due date of the return or within one year of payment,
whichever is later, which allegedly was filed or paid in error. A claim
must be prepared in a manner to be designated by the Tax Collector and
must be accompanied by a true copy of the claimant's federal income
tax return. The burden of proof of earning is on the taxpayer and must
be submitted to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector.
§ 256-9 MERCANTILE (BUSINESS) LICENSES § 256-11
256:487
Chapter 263
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 151.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 180.
Landfills — See Ch. 245.
Noise control — See Ch. 264.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 278.
Zoning — See Ch. 359.
§ 256-11 § 256-11
263:488
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)165
§ 263-1. (Reserved)
§ 263-2. (Reserved)
§ 263-3. (Reserved)
165. Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Heavy Excavation and Construction Equipment, adopted
11-12-1964 by Ord. No. 455, as amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042, was superseded
5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 2188. See now Ch. 264, Noise Control.
§ 263-1 NOISE § 263-3
263:489

ARTICLE II
Airports; Landfill Operations166
[Adopted 5-12-1970 by Ord. No. 689]
§ 263-4. Unlawful acts. [Amended 8-9-1983 by Ord. No. 1379]
The following shall be prohibited in the entire Municipality of Monroeville
as follows:
§ 263-5. Exceptions.
Section 263-4 of this article shall not be applicable in emergency situations
where there is no immediate threat of loss of life or property.
§ 263-6. Airport operation restrictions. [Amended 9-8-1970 by Ord.
No. 703]
Airports within the Municipality of Monroeville shall be required to comply
with the following safety regulations:
A. The operation of airports, runways, taxiways, landing fields or landing
zones for aircraft and the takeoff and the landing of any aircraft shall be
prohibited between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. prevailing
time.
B. The operation of sanitary landfills as recognized by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources and the Municipality of
Monroeville shall be prohibited between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. prevailing time every day and shall be prohibited absolutely
on New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day
and Christmas Day, Easter Sunday and all Sundays. This prohibition
shall prevent any and all activity within the boundaries of any sanitary
landfill during the prohibited periods.
A. All accessways to the airport, excepting the main entrance or driveway
leading into the airfield, shall be barricaded or fenced in a manner
sufficient to prevent any entry of unauthorized persons on the airfield.
B. Airports shall at all times be maintained in a proper and satisfactory
manner conforming to all statutes and regulations.
C. VFR traffic patterns and entry points will be flown in the presently
existing airport in accordance with the traffic pattern procedures
shown on the diagram attached hereto as Exhibit A and made part
hereof.167
166. Editor's Note: Any provisions regulated by this article which are inconsistent or in conflict
with Ord. No. 2188, adopted 5-8-2001 (codified as Ch. 264, Noise Control), shall be
preempted by Ord. No. 2188.
167. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file and available for inspection in the office of the Municipal
Manager.
§ 263-4 NOISE § 263-6
263:491
§ 263-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any property owner who shall permit his property to be used to violate
§ 263-4 of this article or who shall cause or direct others to violate § 263-4
of this article and any airport operator who shall cause or direct others to
violate § 263-4 of this article and any aircraft operator who shall violate
§ 263-4 of this article shall severally, upon summary conviction thereof
before any District Justice, pay a fine for each such violation of a sum not
exceeding $600, together with the costs of prosecution, and, upon failure to
pay such fine and costs, shall be confined to the Allegheny County Jail for a
period not exceeding 30 days. Failure to comply with § 263-6 of this article
shall, upon notice, result in the closing of any airport in violation.
D. Touch and go landings are prohibited unless under the supervision of a
certified flight instructor.
E. All takeoffs, except for touch and go, will be commenced at the extreme
end of the runway.
F. Any flight over the existing airport at traffic pattern altitude or below is
prohibited, except in the case of an aborted landing.
§ 263-6 § 263-7
263:492
ARTICLE III
(Reserved)168
168. Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Unlawful Acts, adopted 4-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1417, as
amended, was superseded 5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 2188. See now Ch. 264, Noise Control.
NOISE § 263-7
263:493
Chapter 264
NOISE CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Radio-controlled airplanes and flying
objects — See Ch. 147.
Alarm devices — See Ch. 151.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 180.
Landfills — See Ch. 245.
Noise — See Ch. 263.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 278.
Zoning — See Ch. 359.
§ 263-7 § 263-7
264:494
ARTICLE I
Basic Provisions
§ 264-1. Title.
This chapter shall be cited as the "Monroeville Noise Control Ordinance."
§ 264-2. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on May 18, 2001.
§ 264-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide enforceable standards to safeguard
persons and property, to protect and to promote the public welfare, by
preventing loud, excessive and unreasonable noise.
§ 264-4. Defined words.
Words used in a special sense in this chapter are defined in Article II.
§ 264-5. Compliance.
No person shall make, continue, cause to be made or permit to be made any
loud, excessive or unreasonable noise within the geographical boundaries
of the Municipality of Monroeville. The determination as to the existence
of loud, excessive or unreasonable noise may be established either by
the specific acts considered to be loud, excessive or unreasonable noise
exceeding the limitations set forth in Table 301.169
§ 264-6. Validity.
In the event any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be found
invalid or declared unenforceable by reason of any federal or state statue,
or federal or state directive, rule or regulation, now in effect or hereinafter
to become effective, or by reason of the decision of any federal or state
court, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect or impair any
other terms or provisions hereof, unless the other terms or provisions
are directly affected by the section declared invalid or unenforceable. The
parties thereupon may, within 30 days, meet to discuss said invalidity or
unenforceability.
§ 264-7. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
Monroeville and insure the enjoyment of their property.
169. Editor's Note: Table 301 is located under § 264-10.
§ 264-1 NOISE CONTROL § 264-8
264:495
§ 264-8. Repealer.
All ordinances, and any amendments thereto, or parts of ordinances
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.170
170. Editor's Note: See Ch. 263, Noise.
§ 264-8 § 264-8
264:496
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 264-9. Definitions and word usage.
NOTE: Some general definitions have been made more specific for the
purposes of this chapter. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
AMBIENT NOISE — All-encompassing sound at a given place, usually a
composite of sounds from many sources near and far.
ANSI — American National Standards Institute.
BACKGROUND NOISE — Total of all sources of interference in a system
used for the production, detection, measurement, or recording of a signal,
independent of the presence of the signal.
BAND PRESSURE LEVEL — Sound pressure level for sound contained
within a restricted frequency band. Unit, decibel (dB).
CONSTRUCTION — Work and all related activities being done to erect,
build, demolish, or modify structures and/or to grade or contour terrain for
buildings, public and private roads, housing, and other structures. The time
duration of construction will be limited to that defined by the permit.
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT — Equipment used during construction
including but not limited to heavy trucks, pay loaders, tractors, power
shovels, air compressors, cranes, graders, jackhammers, hammers, nail
guns, conveyors, concrete and cement mixers, generators, welders.
DAY HOURS — The hours between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
dBA — Unit of A-weighted sound level. The weighted sound pressure level
by the use of the A metering characteristic and weighting specified in ANSI
Specifications for Sound Level Meter.
DECIBEL — Unit of level when the base of the logarithm is the 10th root
of 10, and the quantities concerned are proportional to power. Unit symbol,
db.
DOMESTIC POWER EQUIPMENT — Equipment that are driven by either
electric or air driven motors or internal combustion engines, used for
household applications. Includes but not limited to lawn mowers, hedge
trimmers, lawn and garden tractors and related accessories, tillers, chain
saws, drills, saws, impact wrenches, portable generators, portable pumps,
trimmers, power washers, snow blowers, leaf and related blowers,
mulchers, chippers, vacuums, and related equipment.
EVENING HOURS — The hours between 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m.
FAST RESPONSE — The nominal exponential averaging time of 1/8 second
as measured with a sound level meter that complies with ANSI standards.
FREQUENCY — For a function periodic in time, the reciprocal of the period.
Unit, hertz (Hz).
§ 264-9 NOISE CONTROL § 264-9
264:497
HARMONIC — Sinusoidal quantity that has a frequency which is an integral
multiple of the frequency of the periodic quantity to which it is related.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT — (To be added).
HVAC — Heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning equipment that includes
but is not limited to air handlers, condensing units, chillers, air
conditioners, fans and related air moving devices, pressure regulating and
relief valves, and compressors.
IMPACT/IMPULSE SOUND — A sudden burst of sound or noise with an
extremely rapid rise time of nanoseconds and sharp "Q" factor along with
a rapid decay time. Normally occurring as a single event or with sufficient
time separation between events to be perceived as discrete events by the
human ear.
L90 — The L90 is the "fast response" noise level that is exceeded 90% of the
time when measured over a specific time period of 15 minutes.
LA — A-weighted sound level in dBA per ANSI standards.
Leq — The equivalent continuous A-weighted sound level measured over
a finite time, e.g., 15 minutes, with an ANSI Type I integrating-averaging
sound level meter. The steady state, fluctuating and intermittent
components of a noise signal are averaged over a well-defined time and the
result is an equivalent average sound level that contains the same energy
as the total signal.
Where:
Leq = equivalent continuous sound level (A-weighted), dBA
PA(t) = A-weighted sound pressure,
t1 = starting time of averaging,
t2 = finishing time of averaging,
T1-2 = t2 - t1 = the total integration time.
Lmax — The maximum A-weighted sound level that occurs on the crest of
a changing average noise level as measured with the "fast response" of an
ANSI Type I sound level meter for a specific time duration.
Lpeak — The amplitude of the real time waveform converted to decibels.
No averaging is used and the instantaneous high of the acoustical signal is
measured.
LEVEL — In acoustics, logarithm of the ratio of a quantity to a reference
quantity of the same kind. The base of the logarithm, the reference quantity,
and the kind of level shall be specified.
§ 264-9 § 264-9
264:498
LINE SPECTRUM — Spectrum whose components occur at a number of
discrete frequencies.
MAXIMUM SOUND LEVEL — Greatest fast (125-ms) A-weighted sound
level, within a stated time interval.
NIGHT HOURS — The hours between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
NOISE —
NOISE LEVEL — For airborne sound, unless specified to the contrary, it is
the A-weighted sound level.
NOISE LEVEL LIMIT — The maximum value permitted by Table 301171 for
the A-weighted noise level that occurs on a receiving property due to noise
being generated at a source location. The value of the noise level limit is
a function of the time of day and the zoning characteristic of the receiving
property. Measurands include: 1) 15 minute Leq, 2) "fast response" LA, 3)
"fast response" LMAX, and 4) "fast response" L90 as appropriate in this
chapter.
NORMALLY OCCURRING AMBIENT NOISE — Ambient noise with
background noise that is due to naturally occurring sounds and noises
that include but not limited to insects, rustling leaves, wind effects on the
environment, and lawfully occurring transportation noise regulated by state
and federal statues. This term will exclude other noises that may be covered
by this chapter that increase the ambient noise more than might reasonably
be expected.
OCTAVE — The interval between two sounds having a frequency ratio of
two. There are eight octaves on the keyboard of a standard piano.
OCTAVE BAND — A segment of the frequency spectrum separated by an
octave.
OCTAVE BAND LEVEL — The integrated sound pressure level of only those
sine-wave components in a specified octave band.
PEAK SOUND PRESSURE — Greatest absolute instantaneous sound
pressure within a specified time interval. Unit, pascal (Pa).
PURE TONE — Line spectrum consisting of a signal at a single frequency.
RANDOM NOISE — Oscillation for which instantaneous magnitude is not
specified for any given instant of time. The instantaneous magnitudes of
a random noise are specified only by the probability distribution functions
giving the fraction of total time that the magnitude, or some sequence of
magnitudes, lies within a specified range.
Undesired sound. By extension, noise is any unwarranted disturbance
within a useful frequency band, such as undesired electric waves in a
transmission channel or device.
A.
B. Erratic, intermittent, or statistically random oscillation.
171. Editor's Note: Table 301 is located under § 264-10.
§ 264-9 NOISE CONTROL § 264-9
264:499
RECEIVING PROPERTY — The receiver location where excessive noise is
occurring due to noise being generated at a source location. The receiver
location will include the nearest point on the property line, any point on the
property line, or any point on the property at all heights above ground level.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES — Off-road motor and engine driven vehicles
not licensed by the State of Pennsylvania. Includes but not limited to dirt
motorcycles, snowmobiles, and ATVs.
SIGNAL —
SOUND —
SOUND LEVEL — The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use
of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B, or C
as specified in ANSI specifications for sound level meters (ANSI SI.4-1971,
or the latest approved revision). If the frequency weighting employed is not
indicated, the A-weighting is implied.
SOUND LEVEL; A-WEIGHTED SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — Ten times the
logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of A-weighted squared sound pressure
to the squared reference sound pressure of 20 µPa, the squared sound
pressure being obtained with fast (F) (125-ms) exponentially weighted time
averaging. Unit, decibel (dB) for ANSI, decibel (dBA) for this chapter;
symbol LA.
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument comprised of a microphone,
amplifier, output meter, and frequency weighting networks that is used for
the measurement of noise and sound levels.
SOUND PRESSURE AMPLITUDE — Absolute instantaneous pressure in any
given cycle of sound wave at some specified time. Unit, pascal (Pa).
SOUND PRESSURE; EFFECTIVE SOUND PRESSURE — Root-mean-square
instantaneous sound pressure at a point, during a given time interval. Unit,
pascal (Pa).
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL —
A. Disturbance used to convey information.
B. Information to be conveyed over a communication system.
Oscillation in pressure, stress, particle displacement, particle velocity,
etc., in a medium with internal forces (e.g., elastic or viscous), or the
superposition of such propagated oscillations.
A.
B. Auditory sensation evoked by the oscillation described above.
Ten times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the time-meansquare
pressure of a sound, in a stated frequency band, to the square
of the reference sound pressure in gases of 20 µPa. Unit, decibel (dB);
abbreviation, SPL; symbol, Lp.
A.
For sound media other than gases, unless otherwise specified,
reference sound pressure is one micropascal (1 µPa).
B.
§ 264-9 § 264-9
264:500
SOURCE LOCATION — The location of the source producing excess noise
at a receiver location. Includes both stationary and moving noise sources.
Also includes recreational vehicles and model airplanes used on public and
private property.
SPECTRUM —
SOUND TRANSMISSION CLASS (STC) — A single-number rating of
airborne sound insulation of a building partition, derived by fitting a
reference rating curve to the sound transmission loss values measured
for the 16 contiguous 1/3 octave frequency bands with nominal midband
frequencies of 125 Hz to 4,000 Hz inclusive, by a standard method. The
reference rating curve is fitted to the 16 measured transmission loss values
such that the sum of deficiencies (transmission losses less than the
reference rating curve), does not exceed 32 dB, and no single deficiency
is greater than eight dB. Sound transmission class is the numerical value
of the ordinate (y axis) of the reference contour at 500 Hz. Unit, decibel
(dB); abbreviation, STC. For sound transmission class 50 dB, for example,
the reference rating curve consists of a straight line from 34 dB at 125 Hz
to 49 dB at 400 Hz; a straight line from 49 dB at 400 Hz to 54 dB at 1,250
Hz; and a straight line constant at 54 dB from 1,250 Hz to 4,000 Hz.
WINDSCREEN — A porous device used to cover the microphone of a sound
level meter to suppress the effect of air movement over the microphone that
causes false sound/noise. The total attenuation (insertion loss) of the device
will be limited to one dBA or less.
ZONING DISTRICT — A specifically delineated area in the Municipality
of Monroeville, described in Chapter 359, Zoning, of the Code of the
Municipality of Monroeville, as amended, and shown on the Official Zoning
Map.
Description, for a function of time, of the resolution of a signal into
components, each of different frequency and (usually) different
amplitude and phase.
A.
"Spectrum" is also used to signify a continuous range of components,
usually wide in extent, within which waves have some specified
common characteristic; e.g., "audio frequency spectrum."
B.
§ 264-9 NOISE CONTROL § 264-9
264:501

ARTICLE III
Noise Level Limits and Measurements
§ 264-10. Noise level limits.
Maximum noise level limits, NLL, are established in Table 301, and are a
function of their zoning district location and time of the day. Noise level
limits specified in Table 301 will not be exceeded at a receiving property
by noise being generated at a source location. Noise level limits are fifteenminute
A-weighted LEQ's unless otherwise specified in this chapter by
another metric based on these limit values.
TABLE 301
Noise Level Limits, NLL
Time of the Day
Zoning District
Day
7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Evening
6:00 p.m. to
10:00 p.m.
Night
10:00 p.m.
to 7:00 a.m.
S
R-1
R-2
R-2T
R-3
Conservancy
One-Family
Residential
One-Family
Residential
One-Family
Residential
One-Family
Residential
55 50 45
R-4
R-5
Multifamily
Residential
Multifamily
Residential
60 55 50
L Special use 60 55 50
C-1
C-2
C-3
Shopping
Commercial
Business Commercial
Commercial
60 60 60
M-1
M-2
Planned Industrial
Industrial
65 65 65
§ 264-10 NOISE CONTROL § 264-11
264:503
§ 264-11. Noise level limit exclusions.
Maximum noise levels limits of Table 301 are subject to the following
exclusions, including:
A. Any domestic power equipment operated upon any conservancy,
residential, commercial, industrial or special use zoned property,
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., may exceed the fifteenminute
A-weighted LEQ noise level limits of Table 301, by no more than
10 dBA, provided the equipment is in good working order and meets or
exceeds the original manufacturer's noise level specifications. This
equipment may exceed the NLL by more than 20 dBA provided the total
time above the NLL does not exceed one hour per day or three hours
per week. If a noise specification does not exist, the equipment must
have the same noise level or less noise with similar or improved noise
characteristics as the original equipment as manufactured and used as
intended.
B. Any existing HVAC equipment operated upon any conservancy,
residential, commercial, industrial or special use zoned property may
exceed the NLL of Table 301 if the equipment is in good operating
condition and does not exceed the original manufacturer noise level
specifications as when manufactured and placed in operation on the
property. If a noise specification does not exist, it must have the same
noise level and characteristics as the original equipment as
manufactured and intended to be used. New and/or replacement HVAC
equipment must comply with the noise level limits as set forth in Table
301.
C. Any transportation and/or warning device noise regulated by state and
federal laws may exceed the limits of Table 301 if these statues specify
limiting noise levels provided that this equipment is being operated in a
lawful manner.
D. The noise of the warning devices on emergency vehicles may exceed
the limits of Table 301, Noise Level Limits.
E. Noise of construction and the operation of heavy equipment used for
construction may exceed the limits of Table 301, Noise Level Limits,
during the daytime work hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. but reasonable
efforts must be made to minimize noise generation of all operations. All
equipment must be in good working order with noise levels as when
new. All equipment will be muffled to the extent that is technically
feasible. Long-term projects exceeding two months will be required to
use best available equipment that has state-of-the-art noise
suppression.
F. Emergency generators may exceed the NLL of Table 301 during
emergency use but the noise levels of routine testing must occur during
the daytime work hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. and the LEQ noise
levels must not exceed the NLL value of Table 301 by more than 20 dBA
for more than one hour per week.
§ 264-11 § 264-11
264:504
§ 264-12. Instrumentation.
Noise measurements shall be made with a sound level meter, and shall
mean an apparatus or instrument that includes an omnidirectional
G. Music, voices, paging systems, sound reinforcement systems, audio
amplification systems, televisions, radios, tape players, VCR equipment
and all similar equipment are subject to Table 301 except compliance
sound level measurements will be made with the "fast response" of an
ANSI Type 1 meter using the "LMAX" to properly capture the short
term bursts of noise energy. The LMAX sound level must not exceed the
NLL value of Table 301.
H. Impact/Impulse noise shall not exceed the NLL established in Table 301
by more than 20 dB as measured with the "LPEAK" of an ANSI Type 1
meter with peak measurement capabilities as defined in ANSI
standards.
I. The noise of organized events requiring Municipality of Monroeville
permits will be excluded from the NLL for the duration of the permit.
The Zoning Officer will review the noise producing activities of the
event to control those that might produce unnecessary or unreasonable
noise based on the intent of this chapter.
J. The normally occurring sounds and noises, i.e., voices, cheering
crowds, referee whistles, and bands, of nonprofit and community-based
sanctioned sporting, school, and college events are excluded. Sound
amplification and similar equipment are subject to the NLL of Table
301.
K. Farm equipment used on commercial for-profit farming and nurseries
are excluded from this chapter provided the equipment is in good
working order and it meets the original noise levels of the equipment
when originally manufactured for that make and model.
L. Privately owned animals and birds, excluding for-profit farm livestock,
are subject to the NLL using the LMAX.
M. Refuse trucks operating on public streets for the purpose of household
collection may exceed the NLL by no more that 20 dBA during the day
time hours with occurrences limited to one fifteen-minute interval per
week. Commercial refuse collection, handling, and disposal will meet
the NLL at all times for evening and night hours. Noise during the day
may exceed the NLL by no more than 20 dBA.
N. Snow removal equipment is excluded from this chapter during periods
of substantial snowfall and immediately there after until such time both
private and public roads, sidewalks, and parking lots are cleared so as
to prevent a hazard to citizens. Routine snow removal will be limited to
daytime hours. All equipment must be properly muffled and efforts are
to be made to avoid unneeded noise. All state, county, and township
snow removal equipment is exempt from this chapter.
§ 264-11 NOISE CONTROL § 264-12
264:505
microphone, amplifier, attenuator, output meter and frequency weighting
networks for the measurements of sound levels. The sound level meter shall
be of a design and have the characteristics of a Type 1 or better instrument
as established by the American Nationals Standards Institute. The sound
level meter must meet or exceed the performance characteristics of the
meter when new that conforms to ANSI standards for sound level meters.
Laboratory calibrations by the manufacturer or a suitable alternative will
serve as a check on these performance characteristics.
§ 264-13. Measurement methods.
Compliance measurements shall utilize current measurement techniques
and practices as specified by current ANSI standards and good practice.
The signal-to-noise ratio shall be 20 dB or more with a dynamic range,
that permits valid measurements. A properly calibrated sound meter will be
used in all compliance measurements. A field check calibration of the sound
meter shall be performed before and after the measurements if feasible.
Calibration tolerance will be 0.5 dB or less for a meter and calibrator
designed to be compatible and certified for use by the manufacturer or an
equivalent alternative. Measurement tolerances will be within one dBA.
A. If the normally occurring ambient noise along with the background
noise of the community exceeds the NLL values of Table 301,172 then
the "fast response" A-weighted Sound Level of the offending noise
source must not exceed the fifteen-minute L90 of the background noise
based using the NLL value of Table 301.
B. Windscreens will be used with an acoustic attenuation characteristic of
one dBA or less as measured with a band limited white noise spectrum
in the 100 to 20K Hertz range. Wind noise (false sound) must be five
dBA less than the noise limit of Table 301. No corrections will be made
for wind noise.
C. For screening purposes, an ANSI Type II meter can be used. Screening
measurements can be made with the "slow response" of the meter.
D. Noise sources with deep bass sounds (substantial low frequency
energy) will be evaluated with an octave band analysis. Individual
octave band sound pressure levels, OBSPL, will not exceed the
following octave band sound pressure levels for NLL 45 and NLL 55.
(The first line contains the octave band center frequencies, OBCF, in
Hertz. The following two lines contain the respective octave band sound
pressure levels for NLL 45 and 55 respectively.)
OBCF 31.5 63 125 250 500 1,000 2,000 4,000 8,000 Hz
NLL 45 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 dB
NLL 55 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 dB
172. Editor's Note: Table 301 is located under § 264-10.
§ 264-12 § 264-13
264:506
§ 264-14. Noise prohibitions.
E. At no time shall the offending noise source at the source location cause
the interior noise level of a structure on the receiving property to
exceed the NLL of Table 301 as measured with the "fast response" of an
ANSI Type One sound level meter using the LMAX. Windows and doors
may be open when compliance measurements are made. Compliance
will be based on measurements made at any interior point that is more
than one meter away from the planes that contain the walls, floor, and/
or ceiling. Only rooms with walls, floor, ceiling, door(s), and window(s)
with component construction that has a composite STC of 25 or more
are covered.
F. Noise sources that produce a pure tone(s) or a line spectrum with
dominate tones will be penalized by 10 dBA to account for the tonal
character of the noise. A factor of 10 dBA will added to the measured
fifteen-minute LEQ. This numerical value will be used to determine
compliance with the NLL of Table 301.
A. The use of motor vehicle horns is not permitted except for valid
"warning" situations specifically covered in the Motor Vehicle Code of
the state.
§ 264-13 NOISE CONTROL § 264-14
264:507

ARTICLE IV
Noise Control Administration and Enforcement
§ 264-15. Officials.
The Chief of Police, or a designated representative, and/or the Zoning
Officer shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this
chapter.
§ 264-16. Inspections.
The Chief of Police, or a designated representative, and/or the Zoning
Officer shall be authorized to make inspections of all noise sources,
performing tests or taking noise measurements, whenever necessary to
determine the quantity and character of the noise. If any person,
partnership or corporation refuse or restrict entry and free access to any
part of a premises, or refuses inspection, testing or noise level measurement
of any activity, device, facility, motor vehicle, or process where inspection
is sought, the Chief of Police, or a designated representative, and/or the
Zoning Officer may seek any appropriate action or proceeding to allow
entry and free access without interference, restriction or obstruction, at a
reasonable time, for the purpose of inspecting, testing or measuring noise
levels.
§ 264-17. Enforcement notice.
Any person, partnership, or corporation, who violates this chapter, or any
part of this chapter, shall receive a verbal order to cease or abate the noise
immediately or within a reasonable time period. A written enforcement
notice shall be served upon the person, partnership, or corporation within
12 hours of receiving a verbal order to cease or abate the noise immediately
or within a reasonable time period. Any person, partnership, or corporation
shall have the right to file an appeal with the Municipal Manager within
three working days of receiving the written enforcement notice.
§ 264-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, or corporation who or which shall violate the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500. In default
of payment of the fine, such person, the members of such partnership,
or the officers of such corporation shall be liable to imprisonment for not
more than 60 days. Each day that a violation is continued shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 264-19. Enforcement remedies.
In case any building, structure or land is, or is proposed to be, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in
violation of this chapter, Council may, in addition to other remedies,
institute in the name of the Municipality any appropriate action or
§ 264-15 NOISE CONTROL § 264-19
264:509
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate such building, structure
or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises any act, conduct, business
or use constituting a violation.
§ 264-19 § 264-19
264:510
Chapter 270
PARADES AND MOTORCADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 320. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 352.
§ 270-1. Definitions and word usage.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meaning hereby ascribed to them, except in those instances where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
EST — An abbreviation for Eastern standard time, and shall be deemed
to refer to Eastern daylight saving time during such periods as Eastern
daylight saving time shall be in effect in the Municipality of Monroeville.
MOTORCADE — An organized procession containing 25 or more vehicles,
except funeral processions, upon a public street, sidewalk or alley.
PARADE — Any march or procession consisting of people, animals or
vehicles or a combination thereof, except funeral processions, upon any
street, sidewalk or alley, which does not comply with normal and usual
traffic regulations or controls.
§ 270-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a parade or motorcade in or
upon any public street, sidewalk or alley in the Municipality or to knowingly
participate in any such parade or motorcade unless and until a permit to
conduct such parade or motorcade has been obtained from the Municipality
of Monroeville. In the administration of this chapter, the Municipality shall
not refuse to issue a permit for any reason relating solely to the identity
of the applicant or the identity of the persons or organizations who are to
participate in the parade. The Municipality shall have no discretion to limit
or restrict a permit other than under the conditions and restrictions set
forth in this chapter.
§ 270-3. Parades held for advertising or promotional purposes.
No permit shall be issued authorizing the conduct of a parade or motorcade
which the Municipality finds is proposed to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising and/or promoting any product, goods, wares, merchandising or
event.
§ 270-4. Unlawful acts.
No person shall knowingly join or participate in any parade or motorcade
conducted under permit from the Municipality in violation of any of the
§ 264-19 PARADES AND MOTORCADES § 270-4
270:511
terms of said permit, nor knowingly join or participate in any permitted
parade or motorcade without the consent and over the objection of the
permittee or in any manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct.
§ 270-5. Prohibited hours.
All parades upon any public street, sidewalk or alley in the Municipality are
prohibited between the hours of 12:00 noon EST and 8:00 a.m. EST, except
for rain dates for the Fourth of July parade where the prohibited hours are
between 4:00 p.m. EST and 8:00 a.m. EST.
§ 270-6. Permit application; fee.
§ 270-7. Issuance of denial of permit.
The Chief of Police shall issue a parade or motorcade permit conditioned
upon the applicant's written agreement to comply with the terms of such
permit, unless the Municipality finds that:
A. Any person who wants to conduct a parade or motorcade shall apply to
the Municipality for a permit at least 10 days in advance of the
proposed parade or motorcade. The application for such permit shall be
made in writing and shall contain or include the following:
(1) The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization, the parade
or motorcade chairman and the address and telephone number of
each.
(2) The purpose of the parade or motorcade, the date when it is
proposed to be conducted, the location of the assembly area, the
location of the disbanding area, the route to be traveled and the
approximate time when the parade or motorcade will assemble,
start and terminate.
(3) A general description of the individual floats, marching units,
vehicles and bands.
B. A parade fee shall be set by the Municipal Manager and shall be equal
to the actual costs incurred by the Municipality. Municipal-sponsored
community activities, i.e., Memorial Day and Independence Day, for
example, are exempt from the parade fee. (Examples of actual costs are
police personnel; public works personnel; barricade rental; and paint,
wood, rope, etc., used in the actual staging of the event.)
A. The time, route and size of the parade or motorcade will unreasonably
disrupt the movement of other traffic.
B. The parade or motorcade is of a size or nature that requires the
diversion of so great a number of police officers of the Municipality to
properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto
that allowing the parade or motorcade would deny reasonable
§ 270-4 § 270-7
270:512
§ 270-8. Denial of permit application.
The Chief of Police shall deny an application for a parade or motorcade
permit and notify the applicant of such denial where:
§ 270-9. Contents of permit.
In each permit the Municipality shall specify:
protection to the Municipality in general and residents and others in
the Municipality in particular.
C. Such parade or motorcade will interfere with another parade or
motorcade for which a permit has been issued.
A. The Municipality makes any finding contrary to the findings required to
be made for the issue of a permit.
B. The information contained in the application is found to be false or
nonexistent in any material detail.
C. The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all conditions
of the permit and any and all sections of this chapter.
A. The assembly area and time therefor.
B. The starting time.
C. The minimum and maximum speeds.
D. The route of the parade or motorcade.
E. What portions of streets to be traversed may be occupied by such
parade or motorcade.
F. The maximum number of divisions or units.
G. The maximum length of such parade or motorcade in miles or fractions
thereof.
H. The disbanding area and disbanding time.
I. The number of persons required to monitor the parade or motorcade.
J. The number and type of vehicles if any.
K. The material and maximum size of any sign, banner, placard or carrying
device therefor.
L. That the permittee shall advise all participants in the parade or
motorcade, either orally or by written notice, of the terms and
conditions of the permit prior to the commencement of such parade or
motorcade.
§ 270-7 PARADES AND MOTORCADES § 270-9
270:513
§ 270-10. Appeals.
§ 270-11. Distribution of permit copies.
Immediately upon the granting of a permit for a parade or motorcade, the
Chief of Police shall send a copy thereof to the Director of Emergency
Preparedness and the Volunteer Fire Chief.
§ 270-12. Revocation of permit.
Any permit for a parade or motorcade issued pursuant to this chapter may
be summarily revoked by the Chief of Police at any time when, by reason
or disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency or just cause, the
Municipality determines that the safety of the public or property requires
such revocation. Notice of such action revoking a permit shall be delivered
in writing to the permittee by personal service or by certified mail at the
address given as required by § 270-6A(1) of this chapter. The permit fee
shall be refundable when a permit is revoked.
§ 270-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of this chapter before any
District Justice shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $600, together
M. That the parade or motorcade shall continue to move at a fixed rate of
speed and that any willful delay or willful stopping of said parade or
motorcade, each when reasonably required for the safe and orderly
conduct of the parade or motorcade, shall constitute a violation of the
permit.
N. Such other requirements as are found by the Municipality to be
reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or property.
O. That all conditions of the permit shall be complied with.
A. Upon a denial by the Chief of Police of an application made pursuant to
§ 270-6 of this chapter, the applicant may appeal from the
determination of the Chief of Police within five days thereafter to the
Municipal Manager and then, if unresolved, by filing a written notice of
appeal for hearing by the Municipal Council at its next meeting. Upon
such appeal, the Municipal Council may reverse, affirm or modify in any
regard the determination of the Municipality of Monroeville.
B. In the event that an application is not filed within the required time as
specified in § 270-6, the applicant may request a waiver of such
requirement by the Municipal Council at its next regular meeting or a
special meeting which may be called prior thereto by said Municipal
Council to consider such matter, and the Municipal Council, if it finds
just cause and in the exercise of its sound discretion, may waive such
requirement.
§ 270-9 § 270-13
270:514
with costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
shall be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 274
PARK, RECREATION AND CONSERVATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Senior Citizens Activity Center — See Ch. 127.
Radio-controlled airplanes and flying
objects — See Ch. 147.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 180.
Littering — See Ch. 249.
Alcoholic beverages at publicly owned
facilities — See Ch. 278, Art. IV.
Smoking in Municipal buildings — See Ch.
278, Art. VI.
§ 270-13 PARK, RECREATION AND CONSERVATION § 270-13
274:515

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Amended 11-13-1990 by Ord. No. 1719; 4-14-1992 by Ord. No.
1794; 4-13-1993 by Ord. No. 1837; 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042;
3-14-2000 by Ord. No. 2139]
§ 274-1. Purpose.
It is the intent, purpose and scope of this article to ensure the preservation
of public park lands, recreation facilities and conservation areas within the
Municipality of Monroeville for the perpetual enjoyment of the residents
of the Municipality of Monroeville, to regulate activities within these areas
consistent with the enjoyment of unspoiled natural settings and park
facilities and to prevent any nuisances to the residents of the Municipality
of Monroeville in the use of such public park lands, recreation facilities and
conservation areas or in the enjoyment of private property adjacent to such
areas.
§ 274-2. Unlawful acts.
No person, except those authorized by the Municipality and conducting
municipal business, shall, in recreation, park or conservation areas:
§ 274-3. Restrictions.
A. Injure, deface, disturb, befoul or in any manner destroy or cause to be
destroyed any part of any recreation, park or conservancy site owned
by the Municipality or any building, sign structure, equipment, utility or
other property found therein.
B. Remove, injure or destroy any tree, flower, shrub, plant or growing
thing or any rock or other mineral.
C. Kill, trap, hunt, pursue or in any manner deliberately disturb or cause to
be disturbed any wild bird or animal within the recreation, park and
conservancy sites owned by the Municipality, except as permitted in
§ 274-4B.
D. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of any fountain, pond, lake or other body of water in or adjacent to any
park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such
waters any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which may result
in the pollution of said waters; or dump, deposit or leave any bottles,
broken glass, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse
or trash anywhere within the park and conservancy sites owned by the
Municipality, but rather make use of proper receptacles where these
are provided, and where receptacles are not so provided, all such
materials shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible
for their presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
§ 274-1 PARK, RECREATION AND CONSERVATION § 274-3
274:517
A. Hours of operation. Recreation, park and conservation areas shall be
open daily to the public from official sunrise to official sunset, and it
shall be unlawful for any person or persons, other than municipal
personnel conducting municipal business therein, to occupy or be
present in said park during any hours in which the park is not open to
the public. Permits must be obtained for use after official sunset for
specific activities. Any section or part of the recreation, park and
conservation areas may be declared closed to the public at any time and
for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated
intervals. During such periods of time, it shall be unlawful to enter upon
or occupy such areas or portions thereof contrary to posted regulations.
B. Group activity; possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages.173
Whenever any Monroeville or other authorized group, association or
organization desires to use recreation or park facilities for a particular
purpose, such as picnics, parties or theatrical or entertainment
performances, a representative of said group, association or
organization shall first obtain a permit for such use in specially
designated areas from the Director of Recreation, Parks and Human
Services or his/her designee. The Municipal Council may adopt an
application form to be used by the Director of Recreation, Parks and
Human Services which may require an indemnity bond or other security
to protect the Municipality from any liability of any kind or character
and to protect municipal property from damage. The Director of
Recreation, Parks and Human Services shall grant the permit if it
appears that the group, association or organization will not interfere
with the general use of the park by the individual members of the public
and if the group, association or organization meets all other conditions
contained in the application. It shall be unlawful for any person to have
in his or her possession, custody or control any alcoholic beverage,
including beer, of any kind whatsoever, except as a member of a
Monroeville or other authorized group, association or organization
granted a permit for particular activities in specially designated areas
as set forth in this section.
C. Use of facilities. Facilities and areas in municipal recreation, park or
conservancy sites shall be used only for the purposes designated or
implicit in their character. Special activities, including flying model
airplanes, games, picnics, the operation of all-terrain vehicles, motor
scooters, motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts, snowmobiles, bicycles and
similar vehicles, shall be permitted only at locations or trails specifically
designated for such use and at times established.
D. Supervision of minor children. Parents shall be responsible for
appropriate supervision for their minor children and financially
responsible for the behavior and actions of their minor children.
173. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 278, Peace and Good Order, Art. IV, Alcoholic Beverages at
Publicly Owned Facilities.
§ 274-3 § 274-3
274:518
§ 274-4. Additional restrictions.
E. Motor vehicles. Licensed motor vehicles shall be permitted only on
designated roadways. The speed limit for such vehicles on such
roadways shall be 15 miles per hour. All-terrain vehicles, motorcycles,
minibikes, go-carts and snowmobiles shall not be permitted on
roadways designated for licensed vehicular traffic unless licensed for
travel on the public roads of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All
vehicles shall be parked in areas or places so provided and designed.
Parking in places contrary to posted regulations and times is
prohibited, and such vehicles may be removed by the Municipality at
the owners' expense. All parking is prohibited after regular closing
time, except for a sponsored event or for an activity for which a permit
was issued. It shall be unlawful to clean, wash, repair or do any work
whatsoever on private vehicles within recreation, park and
conservation areas except for emergency repairs.
F. Fees. The Municipal Council shall have the authority to issue a fee
schedule for permits; the Director of Recreation, Parks and Human
Services shall set the amount of deposits and prescribe conditions
under which deposits are collected or forfeited. Such revenue shall be
used for recreation, park and conservation purposes within the general
fund.
G. Permits. Permits are required whenever alcohol is used; amplified
sound is used; for organized use of pavilions, playing fields, courts or
courses; for the training and/or exhibition of animals; for use after
official sunset for specific activities; or a single assemblage of 20
persons or more.
A. Fires and fireworks. Fires may not be built or allowed anywhere in
recreation, park or conservation areas, except in stoves, fireplaces or
designated areas provided for that purpose. Permits must be secured
for any fireworks at any time and for fires to be maintained after closing
time.
B. Animals. It shall be unlawful for owners of domesticated animals to
permit same within recreation, park or conservation areas without
being restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and
accompanied by an adult or minor capable of controlling said animal. If
such animal should defecate upon a recreation, park or conservation
area, the owner or guardian of said animal shall be responsible for the
immediate cleanup and proper disposal of feces. Any injuries, expenses
and/or damages caused by said animal which are not due to the
contributory negligence of another person shall be the sole
responsibility of the animal's owner. Permits may be obtained for the
training and/or exhibition of animals in designated areas. It shall be
unlawful to bring any dangerous animal into any recreation, park or
conservation area.
§ 274-3 PARK, RECREATION AND CONSERVATION § 274-4
274:519
C. Gambling. Gambling is prohibited in recreation, park and conservation
lands.
D. Merchandising, advertising and signs. No person shall, in recreation,
park or conservation areas:
(1) Offer for sale any article or thing, nor station or place any stand,
cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such
article or thing except under the authority of the Director of
Recreation, Parks and Human Services by application and permit.
(2) Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any
article or service for sale or hire.
(3) Post, paste, fasten, paint, write, draw, carve, tack or affix any
placard, bill, notice, sign, advertisement or any inscription
whatever upon any structure, tree, stone, fence, thing or enclosure
within any recreation, park or conservation area or on any public
land or highways or roads adjacent to any recreation, park or
conservation area, except that the Department of Recreation, Parks
and Human Services may place informational signs within such
areas.
(a) For the Community Park only features and facilities may be
named for persons, organizations, or businesses upon
application and approval by Municipal Council and approved
identifying signage/inscription may be placed on or near the
approved named feature or facility in accordance with
standards designed and approved by the Municipality. [Added
7-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2338174]
(4) Notwithstanding the restrictions set forth in Subsection D(1), (2)
and (3) of this section, Municipal Council may place an appropriate
plaque honoring any person or other entity who provides or
sponsors a service or physical improvement benefiting the park and
the citizens of Monroeville.
E. Aircraft. Except for emergency or other special circumstances
authorized by the Municipal Council, it shall be unlawful to land a
private or commercial airplane or helicopter on recreation park and
conservation lands.
F. Personal conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person in any recreation,
park or conservation area to:
(1) Disturb the peace or use profane or obscene language.
174. Editor's Note: Section 2 of this ordinance provides as follows: "The Monroeville
Foundation, Inc. is designated as the representative of the Municipality of Monroeville to
market and accept applications for naming of features and facilities in the Community
Park subject to final approval of Municipal Council." Also attached to this ordinance were
the "Community Park Features and Facilities Naming Application Fees" which are on file
in the office of the Municipal Manager.
§ 274-4 § 274-4
274:520
§ 274-5. Enforcement.
The Municipal Manager and agents designated by him/her, primarily the
Director of Recreation, Parks and Human Services, shall administer the
provisions of this article, including the establishment and collection of
fees, preparation of application forms, issuance and revocation of permits,
promulgation of rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this
article and all other decisions relative thereto. When acts or conduct of
individuals or groups is determined to be in violation of this article or
rules and regulations promulgated by the authority of this article or not
to be in the best interests of the recreation, park and conservancy area;
or when such acts or conduct endangers other people, private or public
property; or when such acts are deemed to be disruptive to the surrounding
neighborhood, the Municipal Police, Director of Recreation, Parks and
(2) Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act.
(3) Commit any assault, battery or engage in fighting.
(4) Possess any firearm, rifle, explosive device, bow, arrow, knife or any
other offensive weapon.
(5) Carry, possess or drink any alcoholic beverage, including beer,
except as otherwise permitted under § 274-3B.
(6) Carry, possess or use any drugs or controlled substances, excluding
legally prescribed medications.
(7) Violate any rule for the use of the park made or approved by the
Department of Recreation, Parks and Human Services.
(8) Prevent any person from using any park or any of its facilities or
interfere with such use in compliance with this article and rules
applicable to such use.
(9) Act in any unlawful, disorderly or disruptive manner or against the
best interests of the areas or other people.
(10) Use amplified sound, including radios or musical instruments,
without a permit.
(11) Bring any glass container to be used for the consumption of any
beverage or other product.
G. Consumption of alcoholic beverages.175 The sale, purchase, attempt to
purchase, possession and/or consumption of liquor or malt or brewed
beverages shall be prohibited at the Bel Aire Municipal Pool facility. No
pool party permit shall be issued that would include said sale, purchase,
attempt to purchase, possession and/or consumption of liquor or malt
or brewed beverages.
175. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 278, Peace and Good Order, Art. IV, Alcoholic Beverages at
Publicly Owned Facilities.
§ 274-4 PARK, RECREATION AND CONSERVATION § 274-5
274:521
Human Services or his/her agent assigned to such area or program shall
have the authority to cause such acts to be terminated, or to expel the
perpetrators of such acts from the area, or to call the Municipal Police to
arrest and detain such individual or individuals, or to file a complaint for the
violation of this article with a Justice of the Peace.
§ 274-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article and convicted of
same shall be liable to a fine of not less than $25, plus costs, nor more
than $300. Where such violator has removed, destroyed, damaged, defaced
or befouled the recreation, park and conservation area or the contents
thereof, the cost of maintenance, repair or replacement shall be charged to
such person or group in addition to any fine. Further use of recreation and
park facilities may be denied to violators of this article in addition to the
imposition of fines or costs.
§ 274-5 § 274-6
274:522
ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations
§ 274-7. Group picnics.
A. The Department of Recreation and Parks shall administer the following
policies regarding group picnics in Monroeville's recreation and park
sites.
B. All citizens may use picnic facilities at any time without a permit;
however, permit holders may request non-permit holders to vacate the
facilities noted on the permit for specific hours.
C. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NEIGHBORHOOD GROUPS — Groups of 100% Monroeville residents
of a particular Monroeville neighborhood, but does not limited to any
particular park site.
NONRESIDENT GROUPS — Groups of less than 75% Monroeville
residency not represented by a resident family or business and which
are subject to nonresident group fees.
RESIDENT GROUPS — Groups represented by a resident family or
resident business and groups with 75% or more Monroeville residents
and which are subject to resident group fees.
D. Group picnics.
(1) Ball fields. Group picnics may obtain a three-hour maximum ball
field permit in conjunction with the activities of the picnic. A
scheduling fee will be charged. Refunds will be made if picnic is
canceled.
(2) Lavatories. Picnic permits shall not be issued for parks without
lavatory facilities except to immediate neighborhood groups who
have access to their homes for lavatory purposes. A refundable fee
may be charged a group to check out the lavatory key for facility
entry at times when the parks are not staffed.
(3) Pavilions. A nonrefundable picnic pavilion reservation fee shall be
collected upon application for a group picnic permit. A picnic table
reservation fee will be collected for group picnics where lavatory
facilities are available but there is no pavilion or shelter.
E. Beer permits.176 All groups desiring beer permits must pay for the same
at time of application. The person making such application shall be
responsible for confining the beer to the picnic area and shall prohibit
beer from being present in any form or container near or on the playing
fields. Beer permits are refundable in case of cancellation of picnic or
176. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 278, Peace and Good Order, Art. IV, Alcoholic Beverages at
Publicly Owned Facilities.
§ 274-7 PARK, RECREATION AND CONSERVATION § 274-7
274:523
§ 274-8. Tennis courts.
The Department of Recreation and Parks shall administer the tennis courts
in the Monroeville recreation and park sites according to the following rules
and regulations, under the authority granted by the Monroeville Municipal
Council:
for inclement weather if pavilions or shelters are not part of the permit.
Groups issued a beer permit shall abide by the intent and letter of
the laws regulating consumption of alcoholic beverages in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Beer permit fees may be waived for
scheduled neighborhood groups.
F. Cleanup deposit. All groups seeking use of park facilities via a permit
shall deposit a cleanup fee. The fee will be partially refundable if the
picnic grounds and toilet facility are found to be free of debris, with
trash either removed from the site or placed in the trash cans provided.
If the Municipality spends personnel time cleaning an area, other than
emptying trash cans, that time shall be deducted from the fee, and the
balance, if any, returned to the group.
G. General information.
(1) Picnic permits may be obtained beginning the first working day of
the year for that particular year.
(2) Fees are payable within two weeks of permit application and/or
before issuance of a permit.
(3) Partial refunds will be made if picnic is canceled at least 10 days
before scheduled date. No refund will be made if cancellation
occurs less than 10 days before the schedule picnic date. Pavilion
and picnic table reservation fees are not refundable at any time.
(4) Monroeville resident youth groups, with adequate supervision, may
secure picnic permits at any time with the waiver of all applicable
fees.
(5) Resident and nonresident groups may apply for use of the picnic
facilities at the Bel Aire Municipal Pool and Park under the separate
rules and regulations of that facility.
A. All citizens are welcome to use any vacant court for one hour at any
time without charge, provided that they move from the court when a
permit is shown for that specific court on that specific day and time.
B. Users of the courts on a first-come-and-wait-your-turn basis shall vacate
the court after an hour's play when others are waiting to play.
C. Open court hours provide opportunity for nonresidents to use the
municipal courts between 12:00 noon and 5:00 p.m.
§ 274-7 § 274-8
274:524
D. Permits may be secured for reserved court time from dawn to 12:00
noon and from 5:00 p.m. to dusk every day of the week.
E. Two types of court time use have been established. They are:
(1) Open court time.
(a) Open court time shall be those hours designated when anyone
may use the courts for one hour of tennis play on a first-comefirst-
play-wait-your-turn basis, free of cost.
(b) The designated hours for open court time shall be 12:00 noon
to 5:00 p.m. every day of the week at all courts.
(c) Portions of the tournaments sponsored by the Department of
Recreation and Parks, scheduled and publicized in advance,
may take precedence over open court time.
(2) Permit time.
(a) Permit time shall be those hours designated when persons who
have purchased a permit for a specific court at a specific time
may bump persons occupying that specific court. Persons may
use the courts during permit time at no charge on a first-comefirst-
play-wait-your-turn basis, but are subject to being bumped
at any time by a permit holder.
(b) Designated hours of permit time shall be from dawn to 12:00
noon and from 5:00 p.m. to dusk every day of the week.
(c) Portions of the tournaments sponsored by the Department of
Recreation and Parks, scheduled and publicized in advance,
may take precedence during permit time.
(d) Group instruction, season and half-season permits and shortterm
permits may be scheduled only during designated hours
of permit time.
F. Tennis permits.
(1) Only Monroeville residents may purchase permits, i.e., season
permits [(10 hours], half-season permits [five hours] and short-term
permits [one to three nonconsecutive hours]. Proof of residency is
required.
(a) Season permits: 10 nonconsecutive hours of playing time.
(b) Half-season permits: five nonconsecutive hours of playing time.
(c) Short-term permits: one to three nonconsecutive hours of
playing time.
§ 274-8 PARK, RECREATION AND CONSERVATION § 274-8
274:525
§ 274-9. Ball fields.
The Department of Recreation and Parks shall administer the baseball and
softball playing fields under its jurisdiction according to the following rules
and regulations:
(2) Season permits and half-season permits are available at the
Department of Recreation and Parks office between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday.
(3) Short-term permits may be obtained at the Department of
Recreation and Parks office from September to June and at the
tennis court sites when authorized municipal personnel are on duty
in the summer months.
(4) Short-term permits (up to three hours) may be purchased for
houseguests by residents of Monroeville (includes individual
permits).
(5) Persons may not hold more than two permits at any one time, and
such permits shall not be consecutive hours.
(6) Permits must be held by permittees on their person and be
available for inspection (bumping may not be effected without the
showing of permit which indicates specific court on a specific day
and time). Any alteration on permit shall be the basis for
withdrawal of the permit without refund. Permits are not
transferable.
G. Refunds. Refunds shall not be made for fees paid because of inclement
weather or the permittee's inability to use his designated permit time.
H. Instruction periods.
(1) Any individual or group instruction periods must be scheduled and
authorized through the Department of Recreation and Parks and
shall be subject to prevailing fees for court use, payable to the
Municipality of Monroeville.
(2) The Municipality does not sanction instruction for private profit on
public courts.
I. Municipal courts may not be used for money-raising or money-award
events for private or charitable purposes.
A. Residency requirements.
(1) Resident teams shall be designated as those teams playing in any
league or tournament in or out of the Municipality when such team
composition in 75% or more of Monroeville-Pitcairn residents.
(2) The Department of Recreation and Parks shall have the
responsibility of confirming such residency and shall have the
§ 274-8 § 274-9
274:526
authority to withdraw any permits for the use of playing fields
in the community should the membership of the team fall below
seventy-five-percent residency.
(3) Nonresident teams shall be defined as those teams with less than
seventy-five-percent Monroeville-Pitcairn residency.
(4) Teams composed of 75% to 100% residents may apply for field use
in Monroeville and will be accommodated on a priority based from
one hundred-percent residency to seventy-five-percent residency.
Teams with less than seventy-five-percent residency will be
accommodated only where and when fields may be available at
leased sites.
B. Fees.
(1) Both resident and nonresident teams scheduling three or more
games shall pay a scheduling fee to Monroeville, except in the
instance of resident youth (under 18) teams.
(2) A single-use permit fee shall be charged, including field use with a
picnic. No more than three single-use permits may be secured by a
team; however, fees paid may be applied to season fee.
(3) All nonresidents playing on resident or nonresident teams entered
into league play shall pay a nonresident fee for each nonresident
entered on the roster, payable prior to the scheduling of the team
or issuance of the team permit.
C. Application.
(1) The third Monday of February shall be the deadline for all teams to
submit their applications for field use. Applications submitted
thereafter shall be accommodated when and where possible on a
first-come-first-served basis.
(2) The Department of Recreation and Parks shall provide a team
roster form for each team applying for field use, providing space for
full name, legal residence, street and post office address, home
phone, business phone and a column for an indication of
Monroeville-Pitcairn residency or nonresidency. Each team roster
shall have space provided for both the printed name of the player
and his signature. Such signature shall attest to the fact of his
residency and his knowledge of and agreement to league and
municipal rules and regulations regarding the use of the ball fields
in the community.
(3) Failure to list all players on the roster prior to or during the season
shall be a basis for revocation of the team permit for the balance of
the calendar year or consideration for permit use in the future.
D. Permits.
§ 274-9 PARK, RECREATION AND CONSERVATION § 274-9
274:527
(1) The Department of Recreation and Parks shall issue a permit for
field use as soon as possible after a team's schedule and roster are
submitted and approved.
(2) The permit shall be numbered, dated and signed by a designated
Department of Recreation and Parks employee and shall indicate
the team name, the assigned fields and the dates and times of such
use.
(3) The permit must be available at each game for inspection by other
teams, the Monroeville police or the Director of Recreation and
Parks or his designee. Failure to reveal the field permit on request
may be a basis for permit revocation.
(4) Permits shall be issued for no more than a three-hour period,
except to youth leagues where multiple use must be scheduled to
accommodate numerous teams.
(5) The Department of Recreation and Parks shall not issue team
permits on Saturdays beginning 1:00 p.m. through Sundays at dusk
for the period of June 1 through August 31, except that permits may
be issued on Saturday and Sunday for community-wide events, (i.e.,
all star games, pitch, hit and throw contests, etc.), provided that
requests for special uses are received prior to the annual
application deadline. Teams who have permits to play at other
times found to be playing during these designated weekend hours
shall have their permits revoked.
(6) Permits may be issued for a three-hour period during hours
between Saturday 1:00 p.m. and dusk on Sunday in conjunction
with a picnic scheduled through the Department of Recreation and
Parks office.
(7) Park fields shall not be used by organized adult groups from dawn
to 5:30 p.m. on weekdays (Monday through Friday, except
holidays), June 1 to August 31, in order that fields may remain
available for scheduled park activities for youth and occasional
picnics by permit (which allows for ball field use upon payment of a
use fee).
(8) No adult ball game controlled by an umpire or official shall be
conducted without a permit at any time.
E. Alcoholic beverages.177 Resident and nonresident teams shall agree
that there shall be no consumption of alcohol in any form, nor the
availability of the same on or in close proximity to any ball field, before,
during or after any scheduled game. Violation of this provision shall be
prosecuted under Municipal Ordinance No. 695178 or the School Code
177. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 278, Peace and Good Order, Art. IV, Alcoholic Beverages at
Publicly Owned Facilities.
178. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 695 is the ordinance which originally enacted this chapter.
§ 274-9 § 274-9
274:528
§ 274-10. Fees. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
Fees shall be as provided in Chapter 194, Fees.
as it applies to school district properties. The team permit of the
violator (or the permits of the teams playing should a spectator be the
violator) will be withdrawn for the balance of the calendar year, and all
fees paid shall be forfeited.
F. Tilbrook fields. The preceding rules and regulations shall also apply to
leased fields, except that Saturday and Sunday may be scheduled via
permit.
§ 274-9 PARK, RECREATION AND CONSERVATION § 274-10
274:529

ARTICLE III
Trailer Tenant
[Added 4-8-1986 by Ord. No. 1521]
§ 274-11. Purpose.
The purpose of the trailer tenant shall be the protection and surveillance
of recreation, park and conservation sites to preserve the sites and their
contents and to interpret rules and regulations of these sites to the public.
§ 274-12. Specific objectives.
Specific objectives of the trailer tenant shall be to:
§ 274-13. Preferred criteria.
Preferred criteria shall be as follows:
§ 274-14. Other criteria.
Other criteria desired shall be as follows:
A. Provide security that would serve as interpreters of site rules and
regulations and in effect be on-site public regulations personnel.
B. Provide personnel who would assist in eliminating vandalism on site
and thus minimize replacement, repair and maintenance costs.
C. Identify and report hazardous conditions or activities which exist on the
park sites.
A. A Monroeville resident, employed in Monroeville.
B. Married, nonrestrictive health and stability.
C. one employed (nonworking spouse).
D. A history of job responsibility.
E. Strength of character and commands respect.
F. The ability to understand and interpret municipal policies and
ordinances.
G. Ability to take control of self and minor trespass situations.
H. A lifestyle compatible with duties.
I. Recreation Advisory Board recommendation.
A. The possession or imminent possession of a new or well-conditioned
mobile home meeting the requirements of Chapter 359, Zoning, of the
Code of the Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 274-11 PARK, RECREATION AND CONSERVATION § 274-14
274:531
§ 274-15. Review of proposed tenants.
Proposed tenants shall meet as closely as possible criteria when the lease
agreement is entered. A list of eligible applicants will be kept on file.
§ 274-16. Lease agreements.
Lease agreements shall be calendared subject to review of tenant criteria
six months preceding the lease agreement termination. If current tenants
do not meet the preferred criteria following review, the Municipality may
choose to go to the next available tenant on the eligibility list.
§ 274-17. Waiting list.
A waiting list of qualified tenants will be maintained until placed on a park
site or until notification is received from the applicant of a change in status
and/or availability.
§ 274-18. Rules and regulations.
Tenants will be subject to rules and regulations defined in the lease
agreement.
B. Available time to carry out the responsibilities.
C. A lifestyle compatible with the environment and community relations
aspects of being a resident caretaker.
D. The display of judgmental abilities and familiarization with mechanical
repair techniques and tasks.
§ 274-14 § 274-18
274:532
Chapter 278
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Radio-controlled airplanes and flying
objects — See Ch. 147.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 180.
Noise control — See Ch. 264.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 282.
Pornography — See Ch. 286.
§ 274-18 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 274-18
278:533

ARTICLE I
Disorderly Conduct
[Adopted 9-10-1968 by Ord. No. 618]
§ 278-1. Acts constituting disorderly conduct.
A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the purpose to cause
danger, alarm, disorder, obstruction, annoyance or inconvenience to the
public or to cause interference with the public peace, or if with knowledge
that he is likely to create a risk thereof, he willfully:
A. Loafs or loiters upon any of the public streets or sidewalks of the
Municipality of Monroeville or upon the private streets or sidewalks
adjacent to business establishments where the general public is invited
or upon public or private parking lots or in any other place so as to
interfere with or obstruct the lawful free passage of citizens or travelers
along and through any of said thoroughfares or property;
B. Acts in such manner as to provoke, make or aid in making a breach of
the peace;
C. Engages in fighting or in threatening, violent or tumultuous behavior;
D. Makes any unreasonable noise or offensive utterance, gesture or
display or addresses abusive language to any other person present
which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and present danger of
a breach of peace or imminent threat of violence;
E. Fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a police officer or by any
other person known by him to be a peace officer, where three (3) or
more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the
immediate vicinity;
F. Otherwise creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition; or
G. Commits a trespass on private or public property.
(1) "Trespass," for the purpose of this article shall mean:
(a) Entering upon or refusing to leave any private property of
another, either where such property has been posted with "no
trespassing" signs or where, immediately prior to such entry or
subsequent thereto, notice is given by the owner or lawful
occupant, orally or in writing, that such entry or continued
presence is prohibited;
(b) Entering upon or refusing to leave any public or private
property in violation of the rules or regulations promulgated by
the superintendent, manager or other person charged with the
security, care or maintenance of the property where such rules
and regulations have been posted or where, immediately prior
to such entry or subsequent thereto, such rules and regulations
§ 278-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 278-1
278:535
§ 278-2. Disorderly conduct unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the acts of disorderly
conduct as defined hereunder within the Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 278-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person convicted of violating this article shall, upon the judgment of
any District Justice determining such violation, be subject to pay a fine
not exceeding $600, and costs for each offense, and, in default of payment
thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
are made known by the person charged with the security, care
or maintenance of the property or his agent; or
(c) Refusing to leave the private property of another or public
property, where such occupancy is without the owner's
consent, after receiving an order from a police officer to do so.
Leaving and returning the same day without the owner's
consent shall be considered a refusal to leave.
(2) "Trespass" shall further include actions of an individual in the
operation of a motor vehicle in violation of any of the provisions
hereof.
§ 278-1 § 278-3
278:536
ARTICLE II
Disorderly Houses
[Adopted 4-13-1971 by Ord. No. 730]
§ 278-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISORDERLY HOUSE —
§ 278-5. Unlawful acts.
A person shall be guilty of keeping, maintaining or visiting a disorderly
house or place in the Municipality of Monroeville, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania, if such person is found on the premises or found to be the
keeper or keepers thereof.
All houses of ill fame; all houses frequented by persons for lewd or
unchaste behavior, gaming, gambling, drinking, the use of drugs or
narcotics of any kind or misbehavior or the common nuisance and
disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens; all unlicensed
public dance houses and all houses and places where intoxicating
liquors are sold without license contrary to the laws of this
commonwealth or where persons gather or visit unlawfully for any
unlawful purpose or practices; all houses and places where slot
machines and other games of chance are unlawfully maintained and
operated; all houses and places frequented by persons for the purpose
of having their future forecast or having their fortune told, either for
pay or for gift.
A.
In addition, a "disorderly house" shall include any establishment open
to the public which shall engage in providing massages, body rubs
or other bodily stimulations by any means, if such massages, body
rubs or other bodily stimulations, whether by direct contact or by
the performance of any act, include nudity, sexual conduct or sexual
excitement by any party. As used in this section, the following
definitions shall apply: [Added 5-12-1973 by Ord. No. 836]
NUDITY — — The showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the
showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering
or the showing of covered genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
(1)
SEXUAL CONDUCT — — Acts of masturbation, homosexuality,
sexual intercourse or physical contact with a person's clothed or
unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person is a
female, breast.
(2)
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — — The condition of human male or
female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(3)
B.
§ 278-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 278-6
278:537
§ 278-6. Violations and penalties [Amended 5-12-1973 by Ord. No.
836; 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a disorderly house or place
or to visit a disorderly house or place as defined hereunder within the
Municipality of Monroeville. Any person convicted of violating this article
shall, upon conviction before any District Justice, be subject to a fine not
exceeding $600, and cost for each offense, and, in default of payment
thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for
a period not exceeding 30 days. The Mayor is authorized to direct the
padlocking of any premises which constitutes a disorderly house.
§ 278-6 § 278-6
278:538
ARTICLE III
Smoking on Public Conveyances
[Adopted 2-10-1976 by Ord. No. 1002]
§ 278-7. Unlawful acts.
No person shall smoke any cigarette, cigar, tobacco, drug or any similar
item on any school bus, other bus, other public conveyance or vehicle of
public accommodation of any kind in the Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 278-8. Signs to be posted.
Every person, firm, entity, company, corporation, partnership, association
or business of any nature owning or having management or control of any
conveyance or vehicle mentioned or contemplated by § 278-7 hereinabove
set forth shall keep posted in prominent and conspicuous places in each of
said buses, conveyances or vehicles a sufficient number of conspicuously
lettered signs warning against violations of the "no smoking" provision
required by this article and calling to attention the penalty for such
violation. A "sufficient number" shall mean that any one of the signs shall be
readable from any place in the bus, conveyance or vehicle large enough for
a person to occupy.
§ 278-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person or persons violating any provision or provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District
Justice or other proper authority, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed
$600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of said payment, be confined
to the Allegheny County Jail or other proper institution for a period of not
more than 30 days.
§ 278-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 278-9
278:539

ARTICLE IV
Alcoholic Beverages at Publicly Owned Facilities
[Adopted 1-10-1978 by Ord. No. 1097]
§ 278-10. Unlawful acts.
No person shall be permitted to use, possess or consume any type of
alcoholic beverage within or on a publicly owned facility in Monroeville,
unless such person shall have obtained a permit to authorize the use of any
such publicly owned facility for such purpose.
§ 278-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to pay
a penalty not to exceed $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for a period not to exceed
30 days.
§ 278-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 278-11
278:541

ARTICLE V
Tobacco Use in Public Library
[Adopted 7-17-1984 by Ord. No. 1430]
§ 278-12. Tobacco use restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use tobacco in any form in any place
in the Monroeville Public Library, except in a room or space set aside for its
use.
§ 278-13. Signs to be posted.
Signs prohibiting the use of tobacco shall be posted in all halls, corridors
and places open to the public in the Monroeville Public Library with letters
of such size and color as to be clearly readable.
§ 278-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be fined, for each
offense, a sum not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default
of payment of such fine and costs, imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30
days.
§ 278-12 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 278-14
278:543

ARTICLE VI
Smoking in Municipal Buildings
[Adopted 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 1630]
§ 278-15. Smoking in Council Chambers.
The Council Chambers of the Municipal Building of the Municipality of
Monroeville is hereby designated as a no-smoking area, and smoking of any
tobacco products shall be prohibited in said Council Chambers. This section
of this article shall be implemented by posting NO SMOKING - VIOLATORS
ARE SUBJECT TO A $25 FINE signs in the Council Chambers.
§ 278-16. Designation of no-smoking areas.
The Municipal Manager is hereby authorized and empowered to designate
no-smoking areas in any municipal building or office owned or occupied
by the Municipality of Monroeville. This section of this article shall be
implemented by posting NO SMOKING - VIOLATORS ARE SUBJECT TO A
$25 FINE signs in the areas designated by the Municipal Manager as no
smoking areas.
§ 278-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person smoking or in possession of lighted tobacco products in an area
designated as a no-smoking area shall be guilty of violating this article and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of $25, plus costs.
§ 278-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 278-17
278:545

ARTICLE VII
Graffiti
[Adopted 5-12-1992 by Ord. No. 1797]
§ 278-18. Prohibited conduct.
§ 278-19. Duty to remove.
§ 278-20. Sale or transfer of materials used for graffiti purposes.
No person shall knowingly sell or otherwise transfer any spray paint
container, indelible marker or other materials used for graffiti purposes to
any person for the purpose of having said spray paint container or indelible
A. No person shall destroy, damage or deface in any way, public or private
property, whether occupied, vacant and/or abandoned, including but
not limited to any of the following:
(1) Public or private buildings, fences or trees.
(2) Public streetlights, fire hydrants, pumps, fountains, inlets,
manholes or sewer ventilators.
(3) Telephone or telegraph wires or electric wires of any kind, or the
poles sustaining or attaching them.
(4) Statues, monuments or plaques.
(5) Official notices or signs posted by the Commonwealth, the Board of
Public Education, the county, the Municipality or any other public
agency.
B. In the event that the prohibited conduct is a violation of Pennsylvania
Statute, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 3304, Criminal mischief, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 3307,
Institutional vandalism, or 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5509, Desecration or sale of
venerated objects, such Pennsylvania Statutes shall supersede this
article.
A. Any owner, agent or trustee of any industrial, commercial or residential
property, which property shall have been defaced by the affixing of
obscene or improper matter or signs, symbols or language of the kind in
the category commonly known as graffiti, shall, upon notification from
the Municipality, remove such obscene or improper matter or signs,
symbols or language within a period not to exceed 90 days. Each day
such condition continues beyond the 90th day shall constitute a
separate offense.
B. In the event of multiple violations of this section by the same property
owner, through the repeated affixing of graffiti after the removal of
previously affixed graffiti by the property owner, a Magistrate, in
imposing penalty, may consider such circumstances along with financial
hardship suffered by said property owner.
§ 278-18 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 278-20
278:547
marker or other materials used in violation of any of the provisions of this
article.
§ 278-21. Violations and penalties.
§ 278-22. Rewards; Graffiti Reward Account. [Added 6-9-1992 by
Ord. No. 1800]
A. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not more than $1,000 plus costs. In default of payment
of such fines and costs, such persons shall be imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
B. In lieu of making a disposition, a Magistrate may, with the agreement of
the Municipal Officer issuing the citation, admit any person charged
with violating the provisions of this article to an adjudication alternative
program of community service up to 100 hours, with a nonprofit agency
within the Municipality.
C. In addition, the conditions of the adjudication alternative program may
include the imposition of costs and restitution, the imposition of a
reasonable charge relating to the expense of administrating the
program and other conditions agreed upon by the offender and
Municipal Officer. If said offender refuses to accept the conditions
imposed or fails to complete the program without good cause, the
Magistrate shall proceed on the charges as provided by law.
D. In any proceeding where a person under the age of 18 years is found to
violate the provisions of this article, the Magistrate shall ascertain the
amount sufficient to fully reimburse any party or parties who has or
have suffered damages because of the act of the child, and direct the
parents of said child to pay restitution to the victim or victims in an
amount not to exceed the maximum amount permissible under existing
state law.
A. The Municipal Manager is hereby authorized and directed to establish a
special account known as the Graffiti Reward Account for the receipt
and deposit of private sector contributions and the fines resulting from
violations of this article. Said funds shall be used specifically for
rewards and public awareness programs.
B. The Municipal Manager shall grant rewards up to the sum of $500 to
individuals, organizations or other entities who provide information
leading to the arrest and/or conviction of any individual for violating the
provisions of this article.
C. Said rewards shall be granted from the Graffiti Reward Account.
§ 278-20 § 278-22
278:548
ARTICLE VIII
Aggressive Panhandling or Solicitation
[Adopted 11-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2278]
§ 278-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGGRESSIVE MANNER —
PUBLIC PLACE — Any area where a governmental entity has title, an
area which is open for the use by the general public, including but not
limited to, bus stops, train or subway stations, ATM locations, telephone
booths, commercial parking lots, public right-of-ways, streets, roadways
and medians of a roadway, alleys, bridges, buildings, schools, place of
amusement, parks, playgrounds, public bathrooms, driveways, plazas,
sidewalks, and doorways and entrances to buildings and dwellings and the
grounds enclosing them.
Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching
another person without consent during or after the course of
solicitation intending to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear
bodily harm to oneself or another;
A.
Intentionally or recklessly damaging or converting the personal
property of the person being solicited;
B.
Intending to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being
solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation;
C.
Continuing to solicit from the person after the person has given a
negative response to such soliciting;
D.
Intentionally or recklessly using words or gestures intending to or likely
to cause a reasonable person fear of imminent bodily harm or the
commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession;
E.
Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that is likely to
cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or commission
of a criminal act upon the property in the person's possession;
F.
Intentionally or recklessly blocking or interfering with the safe or free
passage of pedestrian or vehicle traffic by any means, including
unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive
action to avoid physical contact or causing a pedestrian or vehicle
operator to be distracted thus inducing, among other things, traffic
accidents and delays;
G.
Following the person being solicited, with the intent of asking that
person for money or other things of value.
H.
§ 278-23 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 278-23
278:549
SOLICITATION — Includes, without limitation, any oral or written request,
offer or enticement, or other such acts or bodily gestures in furtherance
of the purpose of obtaining money or objects of value, or sale of goods or
services.
§ 278-24. Aggressive solicitation in public places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money, services or things of
value in an aggressive manner in a public place.
§ 278-25. Aggressive solicitation of persons in vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money, services or things of
value in an aggressive manner from a person in a vehicle, including the
operator of the vehicle and passengers, as it disrupts the flow of traffic and
distracts the operator from his/her primary duty of watching traffic. This is
to preserve the free flow of traffic and provide a safe environment for the
surrounding drivers and pedestrians.
§ 278-26. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this article constitutes a misdemeanor may be punished by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days and/or a fine not exceeding
$300.
§ 278-23 § 278-26
278:550
Chapter 282
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Flea markets — See Ch. 210.
Littering — See Ch. 249.
Mercantile (business) licenses — See Ch. 256.
Aggressive panhandling or solicitation — See
Ch. 278, Art. VIII.
Transient retail or wholesale
businesses — See Ch. 346.
§ 282-1. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Any organization which has been granted
an exemption by the United States Internal Revenue Service under § 501(c)
or § 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
PARKING LOT — Includes any place maintained for the outdoor parking of
cars, excepting on a street, alley or other public place where such parking
is permitted upon payment of compensation or is made available solely to
patrons or customers of any place of business.[Added 3-13-1984 by Ord.
No. 1410]
SOLICITOR — Includes any person who:[Amended 3-13-1984 by Ord.
No. 1410; 8-13-1991 by Ord. No. 1767]
Goes from private house to private house, conveying or transporting
goods, wares or merchandise or offering or exposing the same for sale
or making sales or delivering articles, goods, wares or merchandise to
purchasers.
A.
Goes from private house to private house, soliciting or attempting
to take orders from individuals for the sale of goods, wares or
merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals or personal
property of any nature whatsoever, for future delivery, or for service
to be performed at that time or in the future, whether or not such
individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of
such order or whether or not he is collecting advance payments on such
orders.
B.
Goes from private house to private house, business to business or
parking lot to parking lot, disseminating any written information for
himself or herself or for any organization for any purposes, soliciting
donations or moneys for himself or herself or for any organization for
any purpose, whether or not anything of value is given in return.
C.
§ 278-26 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 282-1
282:551
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Includes any person who, temporarily and for
a short time, hires, rents or obtains a definite place of business, whether
a storeroom, market stand, motel room or a private residence, for the sale
of goods, wares, merchandise, fresh fruit or produce to offer or expose the
same for sale or for future delivery and sale. "Temporarily" and "for a short
time" shall be construed as three months or less.
§ 282-2. Exceptions.
The terms of this chapter shall not be held to include the acts of merchants
or their employees or agents in delivering goods or services in the regular
course of business, nor shall it apply to any manufacturer or producer in
the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat products or milk and
milk products.
§ 282-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or transient merchant, as defined
in § 282-1 of this chapter, to engage in any such business within the
Municipality of Monroeville without first obtaining a license therefor in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 282-4. License application.
Goes from house to house, business or business or parking lot to
parking lot, delivering magazines, books, periodicals, or advertising
materials of whatsoever nature. [Added 5-11-1994 by Ord. No.
1889]
D.
A. Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the Police
Department of the Municipality of Monroeville an application, in
writing, on a form to be furnished by the Municipality of Monroeville,
which will give the following information:
(1) The name and physical description of the applicant.
(2) The complete permanent home and local address of the applicant
and, in the case of transient merchants, the local address from
which proposed sales will be made.
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold or the organization on behalf of which funds are solicited.
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer.
(5) The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold,
or orders taken for the sale thereof, and the proposed method of
delivery and delivery area/route. [Amended 5-11-1994 by Ord.
No. 1889]
§ 282-1 § 282-4
282:552
§ 282-5. Investigation; issuance of license.
(6) Two recent photographs of the applicant, which shall be
approximately two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the
applicant in a clear and distinguishable manner.
(7) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any felony.
(8) Applications involving solicitation for a charitable institution shall
be accompanied by a copy of the grant of exemption issued by the
Internal Revenue Service.
(9) The period and times during which solicitation is to be conducted.
B. This application completed as to all matters inquired of shall be turned
over to the Police Department of the Municipality of Monroeville,
together with the initial fee to cover the expenses of investigation,
payable to the Municipality of Monroeville.
C. In lieu of the requirements of Subsection A(1) through (9), any school,
political, patriotic, philanthropic or civic organization, benevolent
society, service club or organization, not for profit, which is not a
transient merchant and whose solicitors are permanent residents of the
Municipality and which is subject to the provisions of this chapter, shall
file with the Police Department of the Municipality of Monroeville an
application, on a form to be furnished by the Municipality of
Monroeville, which will give the following information:
(1) The name and purpose of the cause for which the permit is sought.
(2) The name and address of the local sponsor.
(3) The period and times during which solicitation is to be conducted.
(4) A list of the names and addresses of all of the members of the
organization who shall participate in the solicitation.
D. Once the application of the organization, society, club or association
referenced in Subsection C of this section has been completed and it
has been established that its nature is that referenced in Subsection C
of this section, then the Police Department shall issue a permit to the
group without charge.
A. Upon receipt of each application, it shall be immediately reviewed by
the Police Department for accuracy.
B. If, as a result of such review, the application is found to be true, the
Chief of Police or his designee shall endorse on the application his
approval and, upon payment of the prescribed initial license fee, deliver
to the applicant his or her license within five days after payment of the
fee, provided that no license shall be issued to any convicted felon.
§ 282-4 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 282-5
282:553
§ 282-6. Charitable organizations.
Solicitors for charitable organizations shall comply with the provisions of
this chapter, but no application or license fee shall be charged.
§ 282-7. Fees. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
§ 282-8. Restrictions.
§ 282-9. Exhibition of license.
Licensees shall exhibit their licenses at the request of any resident or police
officer.
§ 282-10. Revocation of license.
C. Such license shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall
show the name, address and photograph of said licensee and the date of
issue and the expiration date. Each solicitor or transient merchant must
secure an individual license. No license shall be used at any time by any
person other than the one to whom it is issued. The Police Department
of the Municipality of Monroeville shall keep a permanent record of all
licenses issued and those rejected.
A. The application fee for solicitors and transient merchants shall be as
provided in Chapter 194, Fees.
B. The license fee for solicitors and transient merchants shall be as
provided in Chapter 194, Fees.
A. No licensee shall solicit at private residences on Sunday, nor before
9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. prevailing time on weekdays.
B. No licensee shall solicit at any private residence exhibiting a sign
reading "No Solicitors" or words of the same meaning.
C. Residents may erect a "No Solicitors" or similar sign, not to exceed 120
square inches in size, which for the purpose of this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed near their entrance walk or doorway.
D. Solicitors may solicit at business properties in the Municipality with the
permission of the property owner during all business hours and may
solicit in municipal streets and other public places from 9:00 a.m.
prevailing time to sunset, provided that such solicitors obtain a license
as required by this chapter and that they shall be subject to all the other
provisions of this chapter.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Chief of Police or his designee with respect to such persons after
notice and opportunity for a hearing for any of the following causes:
§ 282-5 § 282-10
282:554
§ 282-11. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or his designee in
the denial of application approval as provided in § 282-5 of this chapter or in
the action of the revocation provided in § 282-11 of this chapter shall have
the right to appeal within five days thereafter to the Municipal Manager
and then, if unresolved, by filing written notice of appeal for hearing by
the Municipal Council at its next meeting. Upon such appeal, the Municipal
Council may reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the determination of
the Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 282-12. Expiration of permit.
All permits expire on the date specified in the permit.
§ 282-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall forfeit and pay to the Municipality for each and every
separate offense a sum of not more than $600, to be used for and recovered
as other fines and penalties are now by law enforceable, and, in default of
payment of the fine and costs of prosecution, shall be issued a citation.
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as solicitor or transient merchant.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of a felony or misdemeanor.
(5) Conducting solicitation or business in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace.
(6) Refusing to leave the premises when asked to do so by the
occupant.
(7) Continuation of service after notification. [Added 5-11-1994 by
Ord. No. 1889]
B. Notice of the revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the opportunity for a
hearing. Such notice shall be transmitted by certified mail, postage
prepaid, to the permittee at his last known address.
§ 282-10 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 282-13
282:555
Chapter 286
PORNOGRAPHY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 278. Sexually oriented businesses — See Ch. 359,
Art. VII.
§ 286-1. Findings; applicability.
The Municipal Council finds that the crass commercial exploitation of
explicit sexual conduct through the public exhibition of lewd films and the
display and/or sale of lewd publications and the use of so-called massage
parlors and model studios for purposes of lewdness, assignation or
prostitution, constitute a debasement and distortion of a sensitive key
relationship of human existence central to family life, community welfare
and the development of human personality; that it is indecent and offensive
to the senses and to public morals and interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property, in that such interferes with the interest of
the public in the quality of life and total community environment, the tone
of commerce in the Municipality, property values and the public safety;
and that the continued operation of such activities is detrimental to the
best health, safety, convenience, good morals and general welfare of the
Municipality of Monroeville and of the residents, citizens, inhabitants and
businesses thereof. The Municipal Council hereby declares such activities to
be a public nuisance and herein establishes procedures for the abatement
thereof. This chapter shall apply to existing establishments which are
presently engaged in the type of activity herein declared to be a public
nuisance.
§ 286-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
KNOWLEDGE OR KNOWLEDGE OF SUCH NUISANCE — Having
knowledge of the contents and character of the patently offensive sexual
conduct or demonstration which appears in the film or publication or
knowledge of the acts of lewdness, assignation or prostitution which occur
on the premises.
LEWD MATTER —
Any matter which:
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find, when considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient
interest; and
(1)
A.
§ 282-13 § 286-2
286:556
MASSAGE — Any method of treating the superficial soft parts of the human
body for remedial, hygienic or other purposes, consisting of rubbing,
stroking, kneading or any similar treatment accomplished by hand or by the
use of any instrument.
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any building or structure or portion thereof located
within the Municipality which is open to members of the general public,
with or without the payment of a fee, at which massage services are offered.
MATTER — A motion-picture film or a publication, or both.
MODEL STUDIO —
Depicts or describes patently offensive representations or
descriptions of:
Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated;
or
(a)
Masturbation, excretory functions or exhibition of the genitals
or genital area.
(b)
(2)
Nothing herein contained is intended to include or proscribe any matter
which, when considered as a whole, and in the context in which it is
used, possesses serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
B.
Any premises on which there is conducted the business of furnishing
figure models who pose in the nude for the purpose of being observed
or viewed by any person or of being sketched, painted, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted for persons
who pay a fee or other consideration or compensation or a gratuity for
the right or opportunity so to depict the figure model or for admission to
or for permission to remain upon or as a condition for remaining upon
the premises.
A.
Any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing
or providing or procuring, for a fee or other consideration or
compensation or gratuity, figure models who pose in the nude to be
observed or viewed by any person or to be sketched, painted, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted.
B.
Exception. The words "model studio" do not include:
Any studio which is operated by any state college or junior college,
public school or any governmental agency wherein the person,
firm, association, partnership or corporation operating it has met
the requirements established by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact
authorized thereunder to issue and confer, a diploma or honorary
diploma; or
(1)
Any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing,
providing or procuring figure models solely for any studio
described in Subsection C(1) of this definition.
(2)
C.
§ 286-2 PORNOGRAPHY § 286-2
286:557
MOTION-PICTURE FILM — Includes any:
NUDE — Includes:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
PLACE — Includes, but is not limited to, any building, structure or space
or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or not, or the
ground itself.
PUBLICATION — Includes any book, magazine, article, pamphlet, writing,
printing, illustration, picture, sound recording, or motion-picture film which
is displayed in an area open to the public, offered for sale or exhibited in a
coin-operated machine.
SALE — A passing of title or right of possession from a seller to a buyer for
valuable consideration, and shall include, but is not limited to, any lease or
rental arrangement or other transaction wherein or whereby any valuable
consideration is received for the use of, or transfer of possession of, lewd
matter.
§ 286-3. Lewd films; theaters exhibiting lewd films.
Any studio operated by a tax-exempt, nonprofit corporation devoted
to the development of art and its appreciation.
(3)
A. Film or plate negative.
B. Film or plate positive.
C. Film designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition.
Films, glass slides or transparencies, either in negative or positive
form, designed for exhibition by projection on a screen.
D.
Videotape or any other medium used to electronically reproduce images
on a screen.
E.
A. Completely without clothing; or
The human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less
than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with
less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top
of the nipple, or the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
B.
A. Any and every place in the Municipality of Monroeville where lewd films
are publicly exhibited or possessed for the purpose of such exhibition
and any and every place in the Municipality of Monroeville where a
lewd film is publicly or repeatedly exhibited or possessed for the
purpose of such exhibitions is a public nuisance.
B. Any and every lewd film which is publicly exhibited or possessed for
such purpose at a place which is a public nuisance under Subsection A
above is a public nuisance per se.
§ 286-2 § 286-3
286:558
§ 286-4. Lewd publications.
§ 286-5. Massage parlors and model studios.
§ 286-6. Liability for compliance; abatement of nuisances.
C. From and after service on the theater, or its manager or acting manager
or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct copy of this
chapter and a true and correct copy of the resolution and order of
summary abatement provided for in § 286-7 hereof, all moneys paid
thereafter as admission price to such exhibitions are also declared to be
a public nuisance as personal property used in conducting and
maintaining a declared public nuisance.
A. Any and every place in the Municipality of Monroeville in which lewd
publications constitute a part of the stock-in-trade is a public nuisance.
B. Any and every lewd publication possessed at a place which is a public
nuisance under Subsection A above is a public nuisance per se.
C. From and after service on the place, or its manager or acting manager
or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct copy of this
chapter and a true and correct copy of the resolution and order of
summary abatement provided for in § 286-7 hereof, all valuable
consideration received for the sale of such lewd publications is also
declared to be a public nuisance as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.
A. Every massage parlor or model studio which, as a regular course of
business, is used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or
prostitution and every such massage parlor or model studio in or upon
which acts of lewdness, assignations or prostitution are held or occur is
a public nuisance which shall be enjoined, abated and prevented.
B. From and after service on the place, or its manager or acting manager
or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct copy of this
chapter and a true and correct copy of the resolution and order of
summary abatement provided for in § 286-7 hereof, all moneys or other
valuable consideration paid for services rendered to customers is also
declared to be a public nuisance as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.
A. Upon and after receiving notice through service of a true and correct
copy of this chapter and of a true and correct copy of the resolution and
order of summary abatement provided for in § 286-7 hereof, any and
every person who shall own, legally or equitably, lease, maintain,
manage, conduct or operate a place in the Municipality of Monroeville
which is declared to be a public nuisance as set forth and stated in
§ 286-3, 286-4 or 286-5 of this chapter is deemed to be a person who
has knowledge of such nuisance for the purpose of this chapter and is
thereafter responsible for its maintenance and shall be liable therefor.
§ 286-3 PORNOGRAPHY § 286-6
286:559
§ 286-7. Action to be taken by Municipal Council.
Upon a specific finding that a public nuisance, as defined in § 286-3, 286-4
or 286-5 of this chapter, exists in the Municipality of Monroeville, the
Municipal Council, in applying the provisions of this chapter to such
nuisance, shall provide for the following by resolution:
B. The places and subject matter declared to be public nuisances under
§ 286-3, 286-4 or 286-5 shall be abated as provided for herein.
A. Declare the fact that such nuisance exists.
B. Set forth the description or legal description and street address of the
place which constitutes the nuisance.
C. Set forth the evidentiary facts considered by the Municipal Council in
arriving at its factual determination.
(1) In the case of a motion-picture film or films, such shall include a
recitation of the particular sexual conduct and acts which the
Municipal Council finds are patently offensive and the basis for the
finding by the Municipal Council that:
(a) Such films are publicly exhibited in the course of business; or
(b) Such films are publicly or repeatedly exhibited or held for such
exhibition at the place declared to be a nuisance.
(2) In the case of a publication or publications, such shall include a
recitation of:
(a) The particular publications or types of publications considered
by the Municipal Council and those which the Municipal
Council finds to be patently offensive;
(b) The basis for the finding by the Municipal Council that such
publications are displayed, sold or held for sale at any place
found by the Municipal Council to be a public nuisance; and
(c) The basis for the finding by the Municipal Council that such
publications constitute a part of the stock-in-trade of such
place of business or other place.
(3) In the case of a massage parlor or model studio, such shall include
a recitation of:
(a) The particular acts of lewdness, assignation or prostitution
which have occurred; and
(b) The basis for the finding by the Municipal Council that such
acts occur in the course of business.
D. Order all persons described in § 286-6A hereof to summarily abate such
public nuisance within 24 hours of service of such order on any such
§ 286-6 § 286-7
286:560
persons, by terminating the exhibition, sale or possession for sale of
such lewd subject matter or by ceasing to use the place where the
nuisance is declared to exist or by terminating the use of said premises
for the purposes of lewdness, assignation or prostitution, or causing
the same to be terminated, and notifying the Municipal Manager and
Municipal Council of compliance therewith by sworn affidavit as
ordered by the action of the Municipal Council in such resolution.
E. Order the Municipal Solicitor to proceed as directed in § 286-9 of this
chapter and do all things necessary to abate such public nuisance
through judicial proceedings and to conclude such proceedings as
expeditiously as is permissible under the law, including requesting the
court to advance such proceedings on the calendar of the court.
F. Inform and give notice to persons designated in § 286-6A that:
(1) The Municipal Council has determined that a public nuisance
presently exists at such place and address and that, under § 286-6A
of said chapter, they are deemed to have knowledge thereof and are
responsible therefor.
(2) In the event that the order of the Municipality is not complied with
within 24 hours, the Municipal Council has ordered the Municipal
Solicitor, as provided for under § 286-9 hereof, to commence
necessary legal proceedings naming such persons as defendants in
a civil action to abate the same judicially under § 286-7 of this
chapter, and that under § 286-8A and B of this chapter, the costs of
abatement of such civil abatement action filed, including
investigative costs, court costs, attorney's fees and other expenses,
are made a special assessment against the parcel of land upon
which such nuisance is being maintained and, upon their
determination in such court action, will, by separate legal
procedure, be made a lien against such property and a personal
obligation against any person, persons, firm, association,
partnership, corporation or other entity deemed to be in violation
of this chapter.
(3) All lewd motion-picture films or lewd publications being used in
conducting and maintaining such public nuisance are contraband
and the subject of forfeiture.
(4) From and after service on the place, or its manager or acting
manager or person then in charge of such place, of a true and
correct copy of this chapter and a true and correct copy of such
resolution, any and all moneys paid as admission price to or for the
exhibition or exhibitions of such lewd motion-picture films and
valuable consideration received for the sale of such lewd
publications and all moneys or other valuable consideration
received for services rendered in such massage parlors or model
studios are a public nuisance as personal property used in
§ 286-7 PORNOGRAPHY § 286-7
286:561
§ 286-8. Forfeiture of moneys to Municipality.
conducting and maintaining such nuisance and, as such, are the
subject of forfeiture.
G. Order that a true and correct copy of said resolution and a true and
correct copy of this chapter be delivered forthwith in any manner
normally used to effectuate personal service of process to all persons of
record having any legal or equitable interest in the real property and to
the regular or acting manager or persons in charge of the place therein
declared a public nuisance.
A. Upon judgment for the Municipality of Monroeville in legal proceedings
brought pursuant to this chapter, an accounting shall be made by such
defendant or defendants of all moneys or valuable consideration
received by him or them which have been declared to be a public
nuisance under § 286-3C, 286-4C or 286-5B of this chapter. Such
moneys or their equivalent and any valuable consideration received
shall be forfeited to the general fund of the Municipality of Monroeville
or to the Municipality of Monroeville as property of the Municipality of
Monroeville if any valuable consideration received is not money.
B. Cost of abatement.
(1) The cost of abatement shall include the following:
(a) Investigative costs.
(b) Court costs.
(c) Reasonable attorney's fees arising out of the preparation for
and trial of the cause, and appeals therefrom and other costs
allowed on appeal.
(d) Printing costs of trial and appellate briefs and all other papers
filed in such proceeding.
(2) Such cost of abatement is hereby made a special assessment
against the parcel of land upon which such nuisance is maintained.
Upon its determination in a civil action, such shall, by separate
legal proceeding, be made a lien against such property and a
personal obligation against any person, persons, firm, association,
partnership, corporation or other entity and shall be collected at
the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes
are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the
same procedure and sale in the case of delinquency as provided for
ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection
and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such
special assessment.
§ 286-7 § 286-9
286:562
§ 286-9. Action to be taken by Municipal Solicitor.
Upon a specific finding by resolution of the Municipal Council of the fact
that a public nuisance exists at a particular location, the Municipal Solicitor
shall, not later than three days after passage of said resolution, commence
legal proceedings by the filing of a civil action seeking the following relief:
§ 286-10. Severability; construal of provisions.
If any court shall determine that any word, clause, phrase, sentence,
paragraph or subsection of this chapter is unconstitutional as worded,
the court shall first attempt to construe or interpret such unconstitutional
A. A declaratory judgment that the matter named by the Municipal
Council is lewd, as defined herein.
B. A declaratory judgment that the matter found to be lewd is or are public
nuisances per se under this chapter and such resolution.
C. A declaratory judgment that each place named by the Municipal
Council is a public nuisance under this chapter and such resolution.
D. An accounting of all moneys paid as admission price to or for the
exhibition or exhibitions of such lewd motion-picture films and valuable
consideration received for the sale of such lewd publications and all
moneys or other valuable consideration received for services rendered
in such massage parlors or model studios from and after the time the
persons maintaining said nuisance received notice of the finding by the
Municipal Council by resolution that the public nuisance existed and a
judgment that such moneys or valuable consideration are a public
nuisance under this chapter.
E. An order that all admission price moneys or valuable consideration
received and enumerated in the court-ordered accounting be forfeited
as contraband to the general fund of the Municipality of Monroeville or
as property belonging to the Municipality of Monroeville.
F. An injunction enjoining and restraining all persons responsible for
maintaining said nuisance from possessing or publicly exhibiting said
lewd motion-picture films or from selling or possessing for sale said
lewd publications or from committing acts of lewdness, assignation or
prostitution at any time in the future in the Municipality of Monroeville,
and such other injunctive relief as the court may order.
G. An order that all positive prints of the named lewd film and all lewd
publications or copies or reproductions thereof be forfeited as
contraband under this chapter.
H. Judgment for the Municipality of Monroeville for all costs therein
expended, including investigative costs, court costs, reasonable
attorney's fees and such other expenses as are provided for herein.
I. All other relief as the court may deem proper.
§ 286-9 PORNOGRAPHY § 286-10
286:563
provision so as to enable the same to be constitutional as so narrowed or
construed. If the court cannot so limit or construe such word or provision
narrowly so as to render the same constitutional, it shall strike or modify
only the minimum number of words, phrases, clauses, sentences or
paragraphs as will be absolutely necessary to render the remainder
constitutional. In no case shall a clause or phrase or word or other portion
hereof render any other word, clause, phrase, sentence, paragraph or
section unconstitutional, but instead shall be severed therefrom entirely,
with the balance of this chapter in its entirety remaining in full force and
effect.
Chapter 290
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Division of fire prevention — See Ch. 54.
Alarm devices — See Ch. 151.
Building construction — See Ch. 162.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 176.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 187.
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 206.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 221.
Littering — See Ch. 249.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 256.
Graffiti — See Ch. 278, Art. VII.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 316.
§ 290-1. Standards adopted by reference. [Amended 5-11-2004 by
Ord. No. 2298]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the municipal offices
of the Municipality of Monroeville, being marked and designated as the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 edition, as published by
the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Municipality of Monroeville for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International
Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made
a part thereof, as if fully set forth herein, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 290-3 of this chapter.
§ 290-2. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 1582 of the Municipality of Monroeville and all other
ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.179
179. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2023, adopting this chapter, also repealed Ord. No. 1720,
adopted 11-13-1990.
§ 286-10 § 290-3
290:564
§ 290-3. Amendments to standards; violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 2298]
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. Replacing the title of Section 101.1 to read as follows:
101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property
Maintenance Code of The Municipality of Monroeville, hereinafter
referred to as "this code."
B. Replacing the title of Section 103 to read as follows:
SECTION 103
ADMINISTRATION OF THE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
C. Replace Section 103.1 with a new Section 103.1 to read as follows:
103.1 General. The Department of Community Development, its
executive official and authorized representatives shall have the sole
responsibility for, and benefit of, the execution of the provisions of the
Property Maintenance Code.
D. Replace Section 103.2 with a new Section 103.2 to read as follows:
103.2 Appointment. The executive official and authorized
representatives of the Department of Community Development shall
act as, and be treated as, the code official(s) as described in this
ordinance; and the code official(s) shall not be removed from the office
except for cause and after full opportunity to be heard of specific and
relevant charges by and before the appointing authority.
E. Replace Section 103.5 with a new Section 103.5:
103.5. Fees. The fees for activities and services preformed by the
department in carrying out its responsibility under this code shall be as
indicated in a resolution adopted from time to time by the Monroeville
Council.
F. Insert a new section 302.3.1 as follows:
302.3.1 Snow and ice removal. Snow and ice shall be removed from
all sidewalks, driveways and parking lots within 24 hours after the
accumulation of any snow or ice on these surfaces.
Snow and ice shall be removed from the full paved width of any public
sidewalk.
Snow and ice shall be cleared from the area around fire hydrants so as
to permit free and clear access to the hydrant by the Fire Department.
§ 290-3 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 290-3
290:565
Collected snow from snow removal processes shall not be placed on
areas of the lot where the collected snow will impede access to fire
hydrants, dumpsters or other garbage collection facilities, or reduce
visibility of signs or visibility at driveways or intersections.
Collected snow and ice shall not be placed on the street or in any
public right-of-way.
Exception: Snow and ice on private sidewalks and driveways
servicing detached single-family dwellings shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section.
G. Replace the first paragraph of Section 302.4 with the following first
paragraph:
302.4. Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained
free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eight inches high. All
noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all
grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs;
provided, however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and
gardens.
H. Replace the first paragraph of Section 302.8 with the following first
paragraph:
302.8. Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations,
no motor vehicle that is inoperable, without current valid registration
or current valid inspection shall be parked, kept or stored on any
premises, and no motor vehicle shall be at any time in a state of
major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or
dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside
an approved spray booth.
I. Replace the first sentence of the first paragraph of Section 303.2 with
the following first sentence:
303.2. Enclosure. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas and
any other man made body of water containing water more than 24
inches (610 mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence
or barrier at least 48 inches (1,219 mm) in height above the finished
ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool or
body of water.
J. Replace Section 304.3 with the following Section 304.3:
Section 304.3. Premises identification. Each building or structure
shall display its approved address number in compliance with the
following requirements.
(a) Address numbers shall be Arabic reflective numerals not less
than three inches in height and not less than 1/2 inch in stroke
width. These reflective numbers shall contrast with their
background.
§ 290-3 § 290-3
290:566
(b) Address numbers shall be placed on or within three feet of the
main door of the structure that faces the street and clearly
visible from the street.
(c) Where the main door of the building cannot be seen from
the street or where the building is set back more than 100
feet from the street right-of-way, in addition to the address
numbers placed in proximity to the door as required by part
(b) of this section, address numbers in compliance with part (a)
of this section shall also be placed at the driveway entrance.
These numbers shall be located within 10 feet of the driveway
entrance to the building and within 10 feet of the edge of the
street right-of-way. These numbers shall be located on a pole
and be not less than three feet above or more than seven feet
above ground level. These numbers shall be placed so to be
clearly visible by traffic traveling in either direction on the
street.
(d) In the event that a private driveway serves more building the
address numbers of all buildings served by the driveway shall
be displayed as required in part (c) of this section.
K. Replace Section 304.6 with the following Section 304.6:
304.6 Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes,
breaks, growing vegetation and loose or rotting materials; and
maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required
top prevent deterioration.
L. Remove the first five words of Section 304.14 so it reads as follows:
304.14. Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside
opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation
areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or
utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured,
packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting
screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and
every swinging door shall have a self closing device in good working
condition.
M. Add to Section 307, Rubbish and Garbage, a new Section 307.4,
Collection of rubbish and garbage.
§ 290-3 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 290-3
290:567
§ 290-4. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in
any court or any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause or causes
of action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed
as cited in § 290-2 of this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy
of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 290-5. When effective.
The office of the Manager shall certify to the adoption of this chapter and
cause the same to be published as required by law; and this chapter shall
take full force and effect immediately after this date of final passage and
approval.
Chapter 297
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 221.
Landfill — See Ch. 245.
Littering — See Ch. 249.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 290.
§ 297-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
307.4. Collection of rubbish and garbage. In addition to all of
the provisions of Chapter 221 of the Code of the Municipality of
Monroeville the following requirements shall apply to the collection of
garbage and rubbish.
(a) No container for the collection of, or garbage, refuse or debris
contemplated for collection as herein set forth shall be placed
at the curb or cartway as required by Chapter 221 of the Code
of the Municipality of Monroeville prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day
prior to the day regularly scheduled for collection.
(b) All containers used for the collection of garbage or refuse
and all garbage, refuse and debris not collected on the day of
regularly scheduled for collection shall be removed from the
curb or cartway no later than 9:00 p.m. the day of collection.
(c) Rubbish and garbage containers for commercial and industrial
properties shall be clearly marked with the name and phone
number of the business responsible for the container.
§ 290-3 § 297-1
297:568
ALUMINUM — All aluminum beverage or food cans which have been
emptied.
APARTMENTS — Any occupied multifamily structure having five or more
dwelling units per structure for which the Municipality does not provide
municipal waste removal services.
BIMETAL AND STEEL CONTAINERS — Empty food or beverage containers
consisting of steel and aluminum.
BULK RUBBISH — All items which are too large to bag, can or bundle,
including furniture, large appliances, furnaces, automobile tires and
automobile parts.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTIES — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals that include, but are not limited to, fairs, bazaars,
socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more
individuals per day.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
GARBAGE — Every refuse or accumulation of animal, fish, fowl, food, fruit
or vegetable matter that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing
in or storage of meat, fish, fowl, food, fruit or vegetable or any other
organic substance or substances subject to fermentation or decay, including
condemned food, tin cans, bottles, broken glass or crockery and cooking
utensils.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, plate glass, automotive
glass, light bulbs, blue glass and porcelain and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments and
in residences.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, day-care centers, schools and universities.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Includes but is not limited to automotive, truck
and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings
and similar material, but not including grass clippings.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Facilities owned and/or operated by a
Municipality as defined herein.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville.[Amended 7-8-1997
by Ord. No. 2042]
§ 297-1 RECYCLING § 297-1
297:569
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING PROGRAM — A source-separation and collection
program for recycling municipal waste or source-separated recyclable
materials or a program for designated dropoff points or collection centers
for recycling municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials that
is operated by or on behalf of a municipality. The term includes any sourceseparation
and collection program for composting yard waste that is
operated by or on behalf of a municipality. The term shall not include any
program for recycling construction/demolition waste or sludge from sewage
treatment plants or water supply treatment plants.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, rubbish, bulk rubbish,
industrial lunchroom or office waste or other material, including solid,
liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from the
operation of residential, municipal, commercial or institutional
establishments and from community activities and any sludge not meeting
the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste
Management Act, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq., from a municipal, commercial
or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant
or air pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated
recyclable materials or lead acid batteries or any other items excluded from
collection by the contractor under its contract with the Municipality.
MUNICIPAL WASTE LANDFILL — Any facility that is designed, operated or
maintained for the disposal of municipal waste, whether or not such facility
possesses a permit from the Department of Environmental Resources of
the Commonwealth (DER)180 under the Solid Waste Management Act, 35
P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. The term shall not include any facility that is used
exclusively for the disposal of construction/demolition waste or sludge from
sewage treatment plants or water supply treatment plants.
NEWSPAPER — Includes paper of the type commonly referred to as
"newsprint" and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news
an opinions and containing advertisements and other matters of public
interest, including color comics, glossy advertising inserts and inserts
printed in color included with newspapers.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
federal government or agency, state institution or agency, including but
not limited to the Department of General Services and the State Public
School Building Authority, or any other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provisions of
this chapter prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty, or any combination
of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors
of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers,
including but not limited to plastic pop bottles, milk jugs and plastic ketchup
bottles.
180. Editor's Note: This agency is now the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
pursuant to Act 1995-18.
§ 297-1 § 297-1
297:570
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials generated by residences and
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments which are specified
by the Municipality and can be separated from municipal waste and
returned to commerce to be reused as a resource in the development of
useful products. "Recyclable materials" may include, but are not necessarily
limited to, clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and bimetal cans,
high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper, leaf waste, plastics
and any other items selected by the Municipality or specified in future
revisions to Act 101.181 The recyclable materials selected by the
Municipality may be revised from time to time as deemed necessary by the
Municipality.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed of or processed as municipal waste or the
mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste, other than
through combustion, and the creation and recovery of reusable materials.
RECYCLING FACILITY — A facility employing a technology that is a process
that separates or classifies municipal waste and creates or recovers
reusable materials that can be sold to or reused by a manufacturer as
a substitute for or a supplement to virgin and raw materials. The term
"recycling facility" shall not mean transfer stations or landfills for solid
waste or composting facilities or resource recovery facilities.
REFUSE — All discarded articles or materials, including rubbish and
incombustible waste, except sewage and liquid waste. Paint cans are
included under "refuse" but must be empty for disposal.
RESIDENCE — Any occupied single-family or multifamily structure having
up to four dwelling units per structure for which the Municipality provides
municipal waste collection service.
RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY — A processing facility that provides
for the extraction and utilization of materials or energy from municipal
waste that is generated off-site, including but not limited to a facility that
mechanically extracts materials from municipal waste, a combustion facility
that converts the organic fraction of municipal waste to usable energy and
any chemical and biological process that converts municipal waste into
a fuel product. The term also includes any facility for the combustion of
municipal waste that is generated off-site, whether or not the facility is
operated to recover energy.
RUBBISH — All rags, paper, grass cuttings, household refuse, straw
excelsior and such other refuse as may result through ordinary household
pursuits and which may be destroyed by burning, including incinerator
ashes and refuse from burners; parts of trees, not more than four feet in
length and six inches in diameter, are included in the term "rubbish," as are
Christmas trees in December, January and February.
181. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 297-1 RECYCLING § 297-1
297:571
SOLID WASTE — As defined in the Act of July 7, 1980 (P.L. 380, No. 97),
known as the "Solid Waste Management Act," 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ACT — The Act of July 7, 1980 (P.L. 380, No.
97), 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that are
separated from municipal waste at the point of origin for the purpose of
recycling.
§ 297-2. Program established; regulations.
There is hereby established a municipal recycling program for the
mandatory separation of recyclable materials and leaf waste from municipal
waste in the Municipality of Monroeville. Specific program regulations are
provided as Attachment A to this chapter.182 The Municipality of Monroeville
is empowered to make changes to program regulations as necessary as
described in § 297-12 hereof, provided that the collection of recyclable
materials shall be made at least once per month by the Municipality, its
designated agent or any other authorized waste collectors operating in the
Municipality. The recycling program shall also contain a sustained public
information and education program.
§ 297-3. Lead acid batteries.
Disposal by persons of lead acid batteries with municipal waste and/or
recyclable materials is hereby prohibited.
§ 297-4. Materials designated for recycling.
A. Residential dwellings (residences and apartments). In addition to
separating leaf waste from municipal waste, all persons shall be
required to separate from municipal waste generated at their homes,
apartments and other residential establishments as designated by the
Municipality from the following materials:
(1) Clear glass.
(2) Colored glass.
(3) Aluminum.
(4) Steel and bimetallic cans.
(5) Newsprint.
(6) Corrugated paper.
(7) High-grade office paper.
(8) Plastic.
182. Editor's Note: Attachment A is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Municipal Manager.
§ 297-1 § 297-4
297:572
§ 297-5. Preparation and storage of designated recyclable
materials.
Refer to Attachment A.183
§ 297-6. Ownership of recyclables.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to impair the ownership of
separated materials by the person who generated them unless and until
such materials are placed at curbside or a similar designated location for
collection by the Municipality or its agents and/or contractor.
§ 297-7. Ownership of containers for recyclable materials.
Any container provided to residents for the collection of recyclable
materials shall be the property of the Municipality and shall be used only
for the collection of recyclable materials. Any resident who moves within
or from the Municipality shall be responsible for returning the allocated
containers to the Municipality or shall pay the replacement cost of said
containers. Use of recycling containers for any purpose other than the
designated recycling program or use of the recycling containers by any
person other than the person allocated such containers shall be a violation
of this chapter.
§ 297-8. Collection by Municipality.
The Municipality shall pick up or provide for the pickup of all recyclable
materials from the curbside or similar location of all dwellings of one to
four units and other participating establishments one time per week on the
designated day that the municipal waste is picked up by the Municipality
or its agents and/or contractor. Said recyclable material shall be placed in
the designated containers to be provided by the Municipality and shall be
picked up by trucks and other related equipment at the curbside or similar
B. Commercial, municipal and institutional establishments and community
activities. All commercial, municipal and institutional establishments
and community activities shall be required to separate for recycling
materials including high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated
paper and leaf waste. Based upon the volume generated, the
Municipality may require additional materials to be separated for
recycling from the following materials:
(1) Clear glass.
(2) Colored glass.
(3) Steel and bimetal cans.
(4) Newsprint.
183. Editor's Note: Attachment A is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Municipal Manager.
§ 297-4 RECYCLING § 297-8
297:573
location. The recyclable material shall be transported to the recovery
facility where the recyclable materials will be separated for sale to a
secondary market or reused by a manufacturer as a substitute for or a
supplement to virgin or raw materials. The Municipality or its agents and/or
contractors shall provide written documentation of the total number of tons
of recyclable material collected and disposed of each year pursuant to the
provisions of the aforementioned Act 101 of July 1988.184
§ 297-9. Multifamily residential dwellings.
Any person, owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily
rental housing properties with five or more units must comply with the
requirements of this chapter by establishing an independent collection
system for recyclable materials at each multifamily rental housing property.
The collection system must include suitable containers for collecting and
sorting materials, easily accessible locations for the containers and written
instructions to the occupants concerning the use and availability of the
individual collection system. Persons, owners, landlords and agents of
owners or landlords who comply with the provisions of this section shall
not be liable for the noncompliance of occupants of the multifamily rental
housing properties. Any owners, landlords and/or their agents of
multifamily dwellings of five or more units must provide annually to the
Municipality of Monroeville written documentation of the total number of
tons of material that have been recycled. This written documentation shall
be in the form of receipt slips which shall show the volume of material
recycled per receipt. This written documentation must also show the total
number of tons of recyclable material collected and disposed of per year.
§ 297-10. Commercial, institutional and municipal establishments.
Any person occupying a commercial, institutional or municipal
establishment within the municipal boundaries of the Municipality of
Monroeville must provide for his or its own separation and collection of
recyclable materials and must provide annually to the Municipality of
Monroeville written documentation of the total number of tons of material
that have been recycled. This written documentation shall be in the form of
receipt slips which shall show the volume of material recycled per receipt.
This written documentation must also show the total number of tons of
recyclable material collected and disposed of per year.
§ 297-11. Unauthorized collection of recyclable materials.
A. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to collect or pick up or
cause to be collected or picked up any recyclable material once it has
been placed at the curb or other similar designated location.
184. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 297-8 § 297-11
297:574
§ 297-12. Rules and regulations.
The Municipality of Monroeville Municipal Council is hereby authorized and
directed to make reasonable rules and regulations for the operation and
enforcement of this chapter as are deemed necessary, including but not
limited to:
§ 297-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-12-1991 by Ord. No.
1748]
Chapter 301
RESTAURANTS AND FOOD PREPARATION FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 316. Zoning — See Ch. 359.
B. It shall also be unlawful for any person to collect, remove or dispose of
solid and/or municipal waste which contains recyclable materials when
it is combined with other forms of solid and/or municipal waste.
A. Establishing recyclable materials to be separated for collection and
recycling by residences and additional recyclable materials to be
separated by commercial, municipal and institutional establishments
and apartments.
B. Establishing procedures for the distribution, monitoring and collection
of containers for the recyclables.
C. Establishing procedures and rules for the collection of leaf waste.
D. Establishing collection procedures for the recyclable materials.
E. Establishing reporting procedures for amounts of materials recycled.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300
nor more than $1,000, and cost of prosecution, or, in default of such fine
and cost, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
B. Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense punishable as provided for in this section.
C. Violations are for:
(1) Not participating in the recycling program.
(2) Unauthorized collection or pickup of municipal property.
§ 297-11 RESTAURANTS AND FOOD PREPARATION § 301-1
301:575
§ 301-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD PREPARATION FACILITY — Includes any food establishment, in any
building, room or place or any portion thereof or appurtenance thereto,
where human food or drink is mixed, cooked or otherwise prepared, offered
for sale, sold, served or given with or without charge to patrons, customers
or guests for consumption on the premises; provided, however, that this
does not include the mixing, cooking or other preparation and serving of
food in single-family dwellings to the resident family or its guests, or to
buildings designated in Use Group A-4 by the Building Code.185
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — An interceptor whose rated flow exceeds 35
gallons per minute and which is located underground, outside the building.
GREASE TRAP — An interceptor whose flow rate is 35 gallons per minute or
less and which is located inside the building. "Grease traps" shall be rated
for a minimum 22.50 gallons per minute.
RESTAURANT — Includes any public eating place where regular meals
are prepared, offered for sale, sold and served to patrons, customers or
guests for compensation based on the price charged for and generally paid
at the conclusion of each meal. The words "regular meals" as used herein
mean meals generally consisting of courses embracing some kind of meat
or its equivalent, vegetables, bread, pastry, beverage and accompaniments,
served at more or less regular intervals.
§ 301-2. Plumbing to be in good repair.
Every building or room occupied or used as a public eating place or
restaurant shall be well drained. All soil pipes, waste pipes, drains or other
plumbing fixtures shall be of adequate size to enable a passage of any waste
intended to pass through it to the main public sewer. All drains, sewers,
waste and soil pipes, traps and water in gas pipes shall, at all times, be kept
in good repair and order so that no gases or odor shall escape therefrom
and so that the same shall not leak, and all vent pipes shall be kept in good
order and repair and free from obstruction.
§ 301-3. Installation of grease interceptors and traps.
A. Every building, room or space or part thereof used as a restaurant or
food preparation facility, whether new or existing, shall install or cause
to be installed a grease interceptor or grease trap. The type of
installation shall be determined by the total fixture flow-through rate of
potential grease-laden fixtures discharging through the building
sewage lines as determined by the Allegheny County Health
Department Plumbing Division. For flow-through rates 35 gallons per
minute or less, an internal grease trap may be installed in certain
185. Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Building Construction; and Ch. 176, Construction Codes,
Uniform.
§ 301-1 § 301-3
301:576
§ 301-4. Maintenance of grease interceptors and traps.
existing structures used as restaurants and food preparation facilities.
For flow-through rates exceeding 35 gallons per minute, an external,
underground grease interceptor must be installed in all new structures
or changes of use involving restaurants or food preparation facilities.
B. Said grease trap or interceptor shall be installed at an appropriate
location along the sewer line between the restaurant and/or food
preparation facility and the line's entry into the main public sewer line.
An inspection site tee shall be installed between the interceptor
discharge and shall connect to the public sewer system. All installations
shall be in accordance with Article 15 of the Allegheny County Health
Department Plumbing Code and Regulations.
C. No solid waste devices, such as waste grinders, disposals, potato
peelers, etc., shall discharge through the grease trap or grease
interceptor. Only potentially grease-laden fixtures may discharge
through the trap or interceptor.
D. All new restaurants or food preparation facilities shall be required to
install an exterior, underground grease interceptor of a minimum
capacity of 1,000 gallons, regardless of flow-through rate.
E. In all existing restaurants or food preparation facilities, there shall be
installed a grease interceptor or grease trap as determined by flowthrough
rate, as detailed above. In existing facilities where it is
determined by the Municipality that a grease trap is not sufficient, the
Municipality may require that a grease interceptor (as detailed above)
be installed. Such insufficiency shall be evidenced by excessive
amounts of grease being discharged into the public sewer system by a
facility. All existing restaurants or food preparation facilities shall, at a
change of ownership or alteration, install an exterior, underground
grease interceptor of a minimum capacity of 1,000 gallons. In all
existing structures, buildings or parts thereof in which there is a
change of use or occupancy to that of a restaurant or food preparation
facility, there shall be installed a grease interceptor, minimum onethousand-
gallon capacity, regardless of flow-through rate.
A. All grease interceptors and grease traps shall be maintained and kept in
good working order at all times. The interceptor or trap shall limit the
amount of grease discharged into the public sewer system to levels not
exceeding those permitted by the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority
(ALCOSAN). Oil/grease discharges shall not exceed 200 parts per
million downstream of the interceptor or trap.
B. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any owner, lessee or agent of
any restaurant or food preparation facility to, at a minimum, annually
inspect the grease interceptor or trap. A written record shall be kept of
all inspections. The inspection record shall, at a minimum, list the name
(inspector and company), address and phone number of the inspection/
§ 301-3 RESTAURANTS AND FOOD PREPARATION § 301-4
301:577
§ 301-5. Violations and penalties.
Whosoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of up to $1,000. Each day that
a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 301-6. Right of entry.
In the discharge of duties, the Municipal Code Enforcement Officer or
authorized representative shall have the authority to enter, at any
reasonable hour, any restaurant or food preparation facility in the
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 304
RIGHTS-OF-WAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 320.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 324.
Zoning — See Ch. 359.
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A363.
Telephone franchise — See Ch. A365.
disposal company, the method and frequency of cleaning schedule and
the date of the cleaning/inspection. Such records shall be presented
to the Municipality upon request. A more frequent cleaning/inspection
schedule may be ordered to be performed by the facility when it is
determined by the Municipality that the facility is discharging excessive
amounts of grease to the public sewer system.
§ 301-4 § 301-6
304:578
ARTICLE I
Title; Definitions
§ 304-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Municipality of Monroeville Rights-of-
Way Ordinance."
§ 304-2. Definition of terms.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and
words in the singular number include the plural number:
AFFILIATE — A person: 1) with a direct or indirect ownership interest in
the subject entity of 5% or more or which controls such interest, including
forms of ownership such as general, limited, or other partnership interests,
direct ownership interests, limited liability companies and other forms of
business organizations and entities but, not including corporations; 2) with
a stock interest in the subject entity where the subject entity is a
corporation and such stockholder or its nominee is an officer or director of
the grantee or who directly or indirectly owns or controls 5% or more of
the outstanding stock, whether voting or nonvoting; or 3) which controls
grantee and/or, is controlled by, or is under common control with such
person or entity.
CABLE SERVICE — The same meaning as used in the Communications Act.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT — The Communications Act of 1934, as amended
as of the time of enactment of this chapter.
EQUIPMENT — Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain a
facility in the public way.
EXEMPT — A service which is provided to residences or businesses within
the Service Area, but which is exempt from the provisions of this chapter
under § 304-5 of this chapter.
FACILITY — Any tangible asset in the public way used or required to
provide a nonexempt service to residences or businesses within the service
area.
GRANTEE — A person who enjoys a nonexclusive privilege to occupy or use
a public way to provide nonexempt service under this chapter and who is in
continuous compliance with this chapter.
GROSS REVENUE — All gross revenue of grantee or any affiliate of grantee
derived from the use or occupancy of public ways for the provision of
non exempt services to persons having a residence or place of business in
the service area. Gross revenue shall include amounts earned, regardless
of: whether the amounts are paid in cash, in trade, or by means of some
other benefit to grantee or its affiliates; whether the services with which
§ 304-1 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 304-2
304:579
the revenue is associated are provided at cost or the revenue amount can
be matched against an equivalent expenditure; and/or how the amounts
are initially recorded by grantee or its affiliates. "Gross revenue" shall
not be a net of: 1) expense, including but not limited to any operating
expense; capital expense; sales expense; or commission; 2) any accrual,
including, without limitation, any accrual for commissions; or 3) any other
expenditure, regardless of whether such expense, deduction, accrual, or
expenditure reflects a cash payment. Gross revenue shall not be double
counted, viz. gross revenue which has been included as gross revenue of
both grantee and an affiliate but which sum is included in gross revenue
due solely to a transfer of funds between grantee and the affiliate shall not
be counted for purposes of determining gross revenue.
INFORMATION SERVICE — The offering of a capability for generating,
acquiring, storing, transforming, processing, retrieving, utilizing, or making
available information via telecommunications, and includes electronic
publishing, but does not include any use of any such capability for the
management, control, or operation of a telecommunications system or the
management of a telecommunications service. Cable modem service and
wireline broadband Internet access service are examples of an information
service.
INFRASTRUCTURE — All wires, cables, ducts, conduits, vaults, poles and
other necessary facilities owned and/or used by the grantee for the purpose
of providing telecommunications service and/or for providing information
service located in, under and above a public way.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.
NONEXEMPT — A service which is provided to residences or businesses
within the service area, but which is not exempt from the provisions of this
chapter under § 304-5 of this chapter.
PERSON — Any natural person, sole proprietorship, partnership,
association, limited liability company, corporation or other form of
organization or juridical person authorized to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and provides or seeks to provide one or
more nonexempt services to residences or businesses in the service area. A
governmental entity or a municipal authority is not a "person."
PUBLIC WAY — The surface of, and the space above and below, any public
street, unopened right-of-way, highway, turnpike, bridge, land path, alley,
court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle, or
other public right-of-way held by the Municipality in the service area. Public
way shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held by the Municipality
within the service area for the purpose of public travel and/or for utility and/
or public service use dedicated for compatible uses.
SERVICE AREA — The present municipal boundaries of the Municipality,
and shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
§ 304-2 § 304-2
304:580
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission, between or among points
specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change
in the form or content of the information as sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The offering of telecommunications
for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
§ 304-2 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 304-2
304:581

ARTICLE II
Registration; Grant of Privilege; Exemptions
§ 304-3. Registration required.
Each person who occupies or uses or seeks to occupy or use a public
way other than on a transitory basis to provide a nonexempt service to
residences or businesses within the service area, or places any equipment
or facility in a public way other than on a transitory basis, including persons
with installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease or
assignment, must register with the Municipality. Registration is
accomplished by filing with the Municipality a completed provider
certification in the form shown at Appendix A to this chapter.186
§ 304-4. Grant.
Continuous compliance with this Rights-of-Way Ordinance grants to grantee
a nonexclusive privilege to occupy or use the public ways for the purpose of
providing nonexempt service to residences or businesses within the service
area. Occupation or use of the public ways for the purpose of providing
nonexempt service to residences or businesses within the service area not
in compliance with this Rights-of-Way Ordinance shall be unlawful.
§ 304-5. Exemptions.
This Rights-of-Way Ordinance shall not apply to occupation or use of the
public ways to provide:
A. The transportation of passengers or property or both as a common
carrier by means of elevated street railway, inclined plane railway,
railroad, street railway or underground street railway, trackless-trolley
omnibus or by any combination of such means.
B. The transportation of artificial or natural gas, electricity, petroleum or
petroleum products or water or any combination of such substances for
the public.
C. The production, generation, manufacture, transmission, storage,
distribution or furnishing of natural or artificial gas, electricity, steam,
air conditioning or refrigerating service or any combination thereof to
or for the public.
D. The diverting, developing, pumping, impounding, distributing or
furnishing of water from either surface or subsurface sources to or for
the public.
E. The collection, treatment or disposal of sewage for the public.
F. The conveyance or transmission of messages or communications by
telephone or telegraph for the public.
186. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 304-3 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 304-5
304:583
§ 304-6. Cable service.
This Rights-of-Way Ordinance shall not apply to occupation or use of the
public ways to provide cable service. This chapter does not authorize a
person to provide cable service.
G. The diverting, pumping or impounding of water for the development or
furnishing of hydroelectric power to or for the public.
H. The transportation of oxygen or nitrogen, or both, by pipeline or
conduit for the public.
I. Any ancillary service reasonably necessary or appropriate for the
accomplishment of services specified in (1) — (8), including the
placement, maintenance and removal of aerial, surface and subsurface
public utility facilities thereon or therein. Information service is not an
ancillary service.
§ 304-5 § 304-6
304:584
ARTICLE III
Standards of Service; rental
§ 304-7. Safety requirements.
All work performed by grantee, those working under him, and his agents
in the public ways shall be performed in accordance with applicable safety
codes and technical requirements.
§ 304-8. Maps.
Prior to beginning any construction of facilities, grantee shall provide the
Municipality with a construction schedule for work in the public ways,
which schedule shall be updated as changed. Upon completion of initial
construction and upon completion of construction of any modification to
its facilities, grantee shall provide the Municipality with a map showing
the location of its installed facilities in the public ways. Such maps shall
be provided in both paper form as well as in an electronic format in PDF,
arc-info, CAD or such other format or formats as are required for asbuilt
drawings by the Municipality for placement on the Municipality's GIS
system. Annually thereafter, grantee shall provide a map to the Municipality
showing the location of grantee's facilities in the public ways on a scale of
150 feet per inch or whatever standard scale the Municipality adopts for
general use.
§ 304-9. Reservation of Municipality public ways.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the Municipality
or other agency of government or municipal authority from constructing
sewers, grading, paving, repairing and/or altering any street and/or laying
down, repairing and/or removing water mains and/or constructing and/or
establishing any other public work or improvement. If any of the grantee's
facilities or equipment interferes with the construction or repair of any
street or public improvement, including construction, repair or removal of a
sewer or water main, the grantee's facilities or equipment shall be removed
or replaced in the manner the respective Municipality or other agency of
government or municipal authority shall direct. Any and all such removal
or replacement shall be at the expense of the grantee. Should grantee
fail to remove, adjust or relocate its facilities by the date established by
the Municipality or other agency of government or municipal authority,
the Municipality or other agency of government or municipal authority
may cause and/or effect such removal, adjustment or relocation, and the
expense thereof shall be paid by grantee, including all reasonable costs and
expenses incurred by the Municipality or other agency of government or
municipal authority due to grantee's delay.
§ 304-10. Rental.
A. In consideration of occupying or using the public ways under this
chapter, grantee shall elect to pay to Municipality an annual rental
§ 304-7 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 304-10
304:585
equal to either: 1) 5% of gross revenue; or 2) $1 for each linear foot
of its infrastructure located in the public ways. Such election shall be
made by grantee in writing at the time of registration as required by
§ 304-3 of this chapter. In the absence of grantee making such election,
rental shall be computed on the basis of one dollar for each linear
foot of its infrastructure located in the public ways. Thereafter, grantee
may change its election from year to year by sending written notice to
Municipality of such election no later than October 1 of each such year
for an election to be effective beginning January 1 of the next year.
B. The rent shall be calculated on a calendar quarterly basis and shall be
payable to the Municipality no later than 45 days after the expiration of
the calendar quarter for which payment is due. Grantee shall file a
complete and accurate verified statement at the end of each calendar
year quarter, certified as true and correct by a representative of
grantee authorized to make such certification, explaining how the
payment was calculated. Said statement shall accompany each
payment. Upon request by the Municipality, grantee shall provide such
additional information as may be reasonably required
C. In the event grantee shall have elected to compute rental on the basis of
5% of gross revenue, grantee shall keep accurate books of account, in
an electronic format, which shall clearly support the calculation of rents
and describe in sufficient detail the amounts attributable to each
specific component of gross revenue. Such books of account shall be
made available to the Municipality and its authorized representatives
for examination at a location in Allegheny County at any time during
regular business hours on 10 days' prior written notice for the purpose
of verifying or identifying rents owed to the Municipality. Such requests
by the Municipality shall not be made more than once in any calendar
year. Where in the opinion of the Municipality they are reasonably
necessary to verify or supplement grantee's records, the grantee shall
exercise its best efforts to obtain financial records of affiliates for the
Municipality. Municipality shall have the right to examine and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this or any
other section; provided, however, that such examination shall take
place within 48 months following the close of each of grantee's fiscal
years. Any additional amount due to Municipality as a result of the
examination shall be paid within 60 days following written notice to
grantee by the Municipality, which notice shall include a copy of the
examination report. In the event that said examination determines that
funds are owed to the Municipality in an amount in excess of $2,500,
the cost of said examination, at the election of the Municipality, shall be
borne by the grantee.
D. In the event that any rent or other payment is not made or the requisite
documentation and certification is not provided on or before the
applicable dates heretofore specified, Municipality shall so notify
grantee in writing; and, if all sums due from grantee are not received by
Municipality within five days of the date of such written notification,
§ 304-10 § 304-10
304:586
interest shall be compounded daily and set at the one-year United
States Treasury Bill rate existent on the date payment was due, plus
three percentage points. Any amount recomputed to reflect correct
payment due shall bear interest as described from the date such
payment was originally due.
§ 304-10 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 304-10
304:587

ARTICLE IV
Insurance, Indemnification and Bonds or Other Surety
§ 304-11. Insurance, indemnification and bonds or other surety.
A. Grantee shall save the Municipality, its agents, employees and elected
and appointed officials, harmless from and against all claims, damages,
losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, sustained on
account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever,
including for the negligence of the Municipality, its employees, officials,
agents and elected officials arising out of the construction, leasing,
operation or maintenance of the grantee's equipment, facilities, and
services specified by this chapter, whether or not any act or omission
complained of is authorized, allowed and/or prohibited by the chapter
the rights granted thereunder.
B. Insurance:
(1) Grantee shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect
throughout the term of this chapter insurance with an insurance
company licensed to do business and doing business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and acceptable to the Municipality.
All companies will be required to be rated A-VII or better by A.M.
Best or A better by Standard and Poors. Grantee shall provide
Municipality with proof of such insurance so required.
(2) Grantee shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect, at
grantee's sole expense, insurance coverage in the following types
and minimum amounts:
Type Amount
Workers' Compensation and statutory
employers liability
$100,000/$500,000/$100,000
Commercial general (public) liability,
to include coverage for the following
where the exposure exists:
Premises operations Combined single limit for
Independent contractors bodily injury and property
Products/completed operations damages of $2,000,000
per
Personal injury occurrence or its
equivalent
Contractual liability
Explosion, collapse and
underground
Property damage
§ 304-11 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 304-11
304:589
Type Amount
Comprehensive vehicle insurance coverage for loading and
unloading hazards, for:
Owned/leased vehicles Combined single limit of
bodily
Nonowned vehicles injury and property
damage
Hired vehicles of $1,000,000
per occurrence or its
equivalent
(3) The Municipality shall receive, without expense, copies of
certificates of insurance evidencing coverage stated above.
(4) Grantee agrees that, with respect to the above-required insurance,
all insurance certificates will contain the following required
provisions:
(a) Name the Municipality as an additional insured party as to all
applicable coverage (except worker's compensation);
(b) Provide for 60 days' written notice to the Municipality for
cancellation, nonrenewal, or material change;
(c) Provide that all provisions of this chapter concerning liability,
duty, and standard of care, including the indemnity provisions,
shall be underwritten by contractual coverage sufficient to
include such obligations within applicable policies, subject to
policy terms and conditions.
(d) The insurance certificate issued on behalf of the Municipality
shall include the following statement:
"It is a condition of the above-described policies that they will
be deemed to be automatically extended without amendment
for an additional period of one year from the present or any
future expiration date thereof, unless at least 60 days prior to
the then-current expiration date we notify the Municipality in
writing at Manager's Office, Municipality of Monroeville, 2700
Monroeville Boulevard, Monroeville, PA 15146, or such other
address as the Municipality may specify, via registered mail or
other form of delivery for which a receipt is acknowledged, of
our intention to cancel any of the above-described policies."
(5) Companies issuing the insurance policies shall have no recourse
against the Municipality for payment of any premiums or
assessments which all are set at the sole risk of the grantee.
Insurance policies obtained by grantee shall provide that the
issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation
§ 304-11 § 304-11
304:590
against the Municipality in connection with any damage covered by
these policies.
C. Bond:
(1) Grantee shall arrange for and shall maintain a construction,
performance, and payment bond for the protection of Municipality
with a corporate surety and trust company reasonably acceptable
to Municipality. Grantee shall deliver to Municipality within 30 days
of registration as required by § 304-3 of this chapter such
construction, performance, and payment bond or other suitable
security in form reasonably acceptable to Municipality in an
aggregate amount no less than $100,000 conditioned for the
performance of the obligations of the grantee as set forth in this
chapter. The aforesaid bond or other security shall not be released
until the proper performance of all of the obligations of the grantee
contained herein, and only after approval and verification by
Municipality to that effect, and compliance with all laws, rules, and
regulations of Municipality or any commission, agency, or board
having lawful jurisdiction thereof. The faithful performance by and
the liability of the grantee shall not be limited by the acceptance of
the bond required by this section.
(2) No action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such
bond shall affect the Municipality's rights to demand full and
faithful performance under this chapter or limit grantee's liability
for damages.
(3) The bond shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby
understood and agreed that this bond may not be cancelled by the
surety nor any intention not to renew be exercised by the surety
until 60 days after receipt by the Municipality of Monroeville, by
registered mail, of written notice of such intent."
D. All expenses of the above-noted insurance and bond shall be paid by the
grantee.
E. Neither the provisions of this chapter nor any insurance accepted by
the Municipality pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the
Municipality thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful
performance by the grantee and/or limit the liability of the grantee
under the ordinance issued hereunder and/or for damages, either to the
full amount of the bond or otherwise.
§ 304-11 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 304-11
304:591

ARTICLE V
Enforcement and Termination
§ 304-12. General.
In addition to all other rights, remedies and powers reserved and/or
retained by the Municipality under this Rights-of-Way Ordinance or
otherwise, the Municipality reserves the right to bring a civil action to
collect any sums due to Municipality by grantee and/or forfeit or revoke
all privileges of grantee under this chapter in the event of violation of this
chapter.
§ 304-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person which commits or suffers the violation of this chapter, shall,
upon being found liable in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Municipality, pay a fine of $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the Municipality. A separate offense shall arise
for each day or portion thereof in which a violation is found to exist or
for each section of this chapter which is found to have been violated.
In addition, the Municipality also may enforce this chapter by an action
brought in equity.
§ 304-12 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 304-13
304:593

ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 304-14. Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
The grantee shall at all times be subject to the exercise of the police power
of the Municipality. The grantee shall comply with all lawful ordinances,
codes, laws, rules and regulations of the Municipality, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and the United States of America which are now in effect or
hereafter enacted.
§ 304-15. Conflict.
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are in conflict with other
requirements of the ordinances of the Municipality, the most restrictive
or those imposing the highest standards shall govern. Privileges granted
by this chapter do not constitute a waiver or impairment of the rights of
the Municipality at law or equity now or henceforth existing to proceed
versus grantee for enforcement of the chapter or violation of this chapter or
ordinances of the Municipality.
§ 304-14 RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 304-15
304:595
Chapter 308
SALES, CLOSING-OUT, DAMAGED-GOODS AND DEFUNCTBUSINESS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Flea markets — See Ch. 210.
Mercantile licenses — See Ch. 256.
Transient retail or wholesale
businesses — See Ch. 346.
§ 308-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein.
CLOSING-OUT SALE — Includes, but is not limited to, all sales
advertised, represented or held forth under the designation of "quitting
business," "selling out," "liquidation," "lost our lease," "must vacate,"
"forced out," "removal," "branch store discontinuance," "building
coming down," "end," "final days," "last days," "lease expires," "we
give up," "we quit," "warehouse closing," "warehouse removal,"
"reorganization" and any other advertising or designation by any other
expression or characterization similar to any of the foregoing, and
giving notice to the public that the sale will precede the abandonment
of a business location.
DEFUNCT-BUSINESS SALE — Includes, but is not limited to, all sales
advertised, represented or held forth under the designation of
"adjuster's sale," "administrator's sale," "assignee's sale," "bankrupt
sale," "bankrupt stock sale," "benefit of administrator's sale," "benefit
of creditor's sale," "benefit of trustees's sale," "creditor's committee
sale," "creditor's sale," "executor's sale," "insolvent sale," "mortgage
sale," "receiver's sale," "trustee's sale" and any other advertising or
designation by any other expression or characterization similar to any
of the foregoing, and conveying the same meaning or giving notice
to the public of a sale resulting from death, business failure or other
adversity.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
SALE OF GOODS DAMAGED BY FIRE, SMOKE OR WATER — Includes,
but is not limited to, all sales advertised, represented or held forth
under the designation of "fire sale," "smoke-damage sale," "water-
§ 304-15 § 308-1
308:596
§ 308-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the Municipality of Monroeville to
advertise or hold out by any means that the sale of any goods, wares or
merchandise is a closing-out sale, a sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke or
water or a defunct-business sale unless a license is first obtained to conduct
such a sale from the Manager of the Municipality.
§ 308-3. License application.
damage sale," "flood-damage sale," "insurance sale" and any other
advertising or designation by any other expression or characterization
similar to any of the forgoing, and giving notice to the public that the
goods, wares or merchandise offered for sale have been damaged.
UNUSUAL PURCHASE OR ADDITION — Any purchase of goods, wares
or merchandise during the 90 days preceding the application for a
license, the total value of which is at least 25% greater than purchases
made by the applicant for a like ninety-day period during any one
of three years next immediately preceding the year in which the
application is made or his peak purchases for any ninety-day period if
he has been in business for less than three years.
A. Any person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this chapter shall
make a written application under oath to the Manager of the
Municipality.
B. If the application is for a closing-out sale or a defunct-business sale, it
shall be filed at least 15 days prior to the date on which such sale is to
commence.
C. If the application is for a sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke or water,
it may be made at any time prior to the date on which such sale is to
commence.
D. All applications for a licensed sale regulated by this chapter shall set
forth and contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant, who must be the true
owner of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold, and if the
applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners,
or if the applicant is a corporation or association, the date and
place of incorporation or organization, the address of the principal
office within the commonwealth and the names and addresses of all
the officers of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the person or persons who will be in
charge and responsible for the conduct of such sale.
(3) The exact address of the place at which the proposed sale is to be
conducted and the length of time the applicant has been engaged in
business at such location.
§ 308-1 SALES, CLOSING-OUT, DAMAGED-GOODS § 308-3
308:597
(4) The date on which it is proposed to begin the sale.
(5) The nature of the occupancy where such sale is to be held, whether
by lease or otherwise, and the effective date of termination of such
occupancy.
(6) The reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of the goods,
wares or merchandise to be offered at such sale.
(7) A statement of the descriptive name of the sale and the reasons
why the name is truthfully descriptive of the sale.
(8) A statement that the business is to be terminated permanently or
reopened at another location; the location of the premises to which
the business is to be moved if the applicant intends to resume the
operation of the business upon the termination of the sale; and the
name or designation under which such business is to be resumed.
(9) A full, complete, detailed and itemized inventory of the goods,
wares and merchandise to be offered at such sale as disclosed by
the applicant's records, which inventory shall:
(a) Itemize the goods to be offered for sale and contain sufficient
information concerning each item, including quantity, make,
brand name, model and manufacturer's number, if any, to
clearly identify it.
(b) List separately any goods to be offered for sale which were
purchased and received during a ninety-day period
immediately prior to the date of making application for the
license.
(c) Provide the total retail value of the inventory of goods, wares
and merchandise to be offered at such sale based on the
inventory used for applicant's most recent federal income tax
return adjusted for sales and purchases.
(10) If the application is for a license to conduct a sale of goods
damaged by fire, smoke or water and the applicant was not the
owner at the time when the goods, wares and merchandise to be
offered at the contemplated sale were damaged, he shall attach to
said application certified copies of the bill of sale and all other
documents connected with such transfer obtained by him from the
previous owner of such goods, wares and merchandise.
(11) If the application is for a license to conduct a defunct-business sale
and the applicant was not the owner of the goods, wares and
merchandise to be offered at the contemplated sale at the time of
occurrence of the circumstances warranting the termination of
such business, he shall attach to the application certified copies of
the bill of sale and the official appraisal made by the trustee,
§ 308-3 § 308-3
308:598
§ 308-4. Exceptions.
§ 308-5. Bond required.
No license shall be issued unless there is filed with the Manager of the
Municipality a bond payable to the Municipality of Monroeville conditioned
upon the faithful observance of all the provisions of this chapter and the
indemnifying of any purchaser at such sale who suffers any loss by reason of
misrepresentation made in connection with such sale and for the payment
to the Municipality or the commonwealth of all taxes due and owing or
which may become due and authorizing actions thereunder by the
Municipality and by any purchaser at such sale for damage or loss suffered
by reason of any misrepresentation made in connection with such sale;
receiver, assignee for the benefit of creditor, referee in bankruptcy
or the personal representative of a decedent.
(12) A statement that no goods will be added to the inventory after the
application is made.
(13) A statement that all goods included in such inventory have been
purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without
cancellation privileges and that said inventory comprises no goods
purchased on consignment.
(14) A statement that no merchandise listed in the inventory has been
the subject of a licensed sale conducted within one year prior to the
date of the application, unless such merchandise was damaged by
fire, smoke or water while in the possession of the applicant.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to nor affect the following
persons:
(1) Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(2) Persons who are required to file an accounting with a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(3) Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as
public officers, such as sheriffs, constables and marshals.
(4) Any publisher or employee of a newspaper or magazine or any
operator or employee of a radio or television broadcasting station
who publishes or broadcasts any such advertisement in good faith
without knowledge of its false, deceptive and misleading character
or without knowledge that the provisions of this chapter are not
being complied with.
B. Nor shall the provisions of this chapter apply to any sale advertised as
an "alteration sale," "remodeling sale," "clearance sale," "surplus stock
liquidation sale" or "special purchase sale."
§ 308-3 SALES, CLOSING-OUT, DAMAGED-GOODS § 308-5
308:599
provided, however, that the aggregate liability of the surety for all breaches
of the conditions of the bond shall in no event exceed the amount of said
bond. The amount of said bond shall be determined as follows: 5% of the
first $100,000 of the retail value of all the goods, wares and merchandise
to be offered at such sale; 2% of the next $400,000; and 1% of the balance.
Said bond shall be approved as to form and sufficiency by the Municipal
Solicitor and by the Municipal Manager.
§ 308-6. Branch stores and warehouses.
If the applicant for a license hereunder owns, conducts or operates more
than one store or a warehouse in connection with such store or stores,
the license issued will apply only to the one store or warehouse for which
it was issued, and no other store, branch or warehouse may advertise or
represent in any way that it is cooperating with or participating in any way
in the licensed sale, nor shall the licensed store or any person advertise
or represent that any other store or warehouse is cooperating with or
participating in the licensed sale. The licensed sale conducted by any store
of a chain or group of stores shall be conducted solely at the location
of the store for which the license was obtained, and no goods, wares or
merchandise shall be brought from any other store and placed on sale at
the store licensed to conduct a sale hereunder.
§ 308-7. Unlawful acts.
§ 308-8. Investigation of application; denial; revocation.
A. Any substitution for or addition to goods described in an inventory filed
pursuant to this chapter or any change in the time or place for a sale
conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be unlawful and shall void any
license issued to conduct a sale pursuant to this chapter, and such
license shall be revoked.
B. In the case of a sale licensed under this chapter conducted by the
applicant in addition to conducting a business of selling other goods,
wares or merchandise not included in the inventory accompanying the
application, the goods to be sold at such sale shall be clearly and
distinctly segregated, marked or identified and advertised, if at all, so
that both on display and in advertising such goods may be readily
distinguished from other stocks and their identity readily ascertained.
Any commingling of such goods with other stocks of the licensee in such
a manner as to cause the goods to lose their separate identity, either on
display or in advertising, shall be unlawful and shall void any license
issued to conduct such a sale pursuant to this chapter, and such license
shall be revoked.
A. Upon receipt of the application, the Manager of the Municipality may, in
his/her discretion, make or cause to be made an examination or order
an investigation of the applicant and all the facts contained in the
application and inventory in relation to the proposed sale. A license
§ 308-5 § 308-8
308:600
shall be denied or refused if any one or more of the following facts or
circumstances are found to exist:
(1) That the applicant has not been the owner of the business
advertised or described in the application for a license hereunder
for a period of at least three months prior to the date of the
application or, if the applicant is a partnership, corporation or
association, controlling interest in the corporation or association
was transferred within six months prior to the date of the
application for a license hereunder, except:
(a) Where the application is for a license for a sale of goods
damaged by fire, smoke or water or a defunct-business sale
and the inventory listed in the application contains only those
goods, wares or merchandise which were on the premises at
the time of the occurrence of the circumstances warranting the
granting of a license hereunder.
(b) That upon the death of a person doing business in this
commonwealth, his or her heirs, distributees, devisees,
legatees or their successors and assignees shall have the right
to apply at any time for a license hereunder.
(c) Where a business is required or compelled to be discontinued
because the premises whereupon it is being conducted has
been condemned or taken for purposes of urban renewal or
development or because the premises must be vacated
because of legal or judicial proceedings.
(2) That in the case of a closing-out sale, the applicant, either as owner,
partner, member of an association or principal stockholder of a
corporation, was granted a prior license hereunder within one year
preceding the date of the filing of the application.
(3) That the inventory contains goods, wares or merchandise not
purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without
cancellation privileges.
(4) That the inventory contains goods, wares or merchandise
purchased by the applicant on consignment, except if the
consigned goods, wares or merchandise have been damaged while
in the consignee's possession.
(5) That the applicant, except in the case of an application for a license
to conduct a sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke or water or a
defunct-business sale, either as owner, partner, officer of an
association or principal stockholder of a corporation, was granted a
prior license hereunder within one year preceding the date of the
filing of the application at the particular location for which the
license is sought or within one year prior to the date of filing of the
application has conducted a sale in connection with which he
advertised or represented that the entire business conducted at the
§ 308-8 SALES, CLOSING-OUT, DAMAGED-GOODS § 308-8
308:601
particular location for which the license is sought was to be closed
out or terminated.
(6) That the applicant has within one year prior to the filing of the
application been convicted of a violation of this chapter.
(7) That the goods, wares or merchandise as described in the inventory
were transferred or assigned to the applicant prior to the date of
the filing of the application and that said transfer or assignment
was not made for a valuable and adequate consideration.
(8) That the inventory contains goods, wares or merchandise
purchased by the applicant or added to his stock in contemplation
of such sale and for the purpose of selling the same at such sale.
For this purpose any unusual purchase or addition to the stock of
such goods, wares and merchandise made within 90 days prior to
the date of the filing of such application shall be presumptive
evidence that such purchase or additions were made in
contemplation of such sale and for the purpose of selling the same
at such sale.
(9) That any representation made in the application is false.
B. Revocation. Upon written and signed complaint being filed with the
Manager of the Municipality by a resident of the Municipality or a
resident of any adjoining municipality or township or upon the initiative
of such individual or Manager after making an investigation, the
Manager shall revoke any license granted under the provisions of this
chapter if he/she shall determine that:
(1) Any sale by the applicant is conducted in violation of any provision
of this chapter.
(2) The applicant has made any material misstatement in his
application for said license.
(3) The applicant has failed to include in the inventory required by the
provisions of this chapter the goods, wares or merchandise
required to be contained in such inventory.
(4) The applicant has added or permitted to be added to said sale or
offered or permitted to be offered at said sale any goods, wares or
merchandise not described in the original application and
inventory.
(5) The applicant made or permitted to be made any false, misleading
or deceptive statements in advertising said sale, whether written or
oral, or in displaying, ticketing or pricing goods, wares or
merchandise offered for sale.
§ 308-8 § 308-9
308:602
§ 308-9. Appeals.
Any applicant for a license who is aggrieved by the denial, refusal or
revocation of a license may appeal within five days from the date of denial,
refusal or revocation to the Court of Common Pleas of the county in which
the license is sought. The appeal shall be upon petition of the applicant for
an injunction prohibiting the denial, refusal or revocation of a license. A
copy of such appeal shall be served upon the Manager of the Municipality
who has refused, denied or revoked the license. The Court shall hear the
application for an injunction expeditiously at a time as it shall fix, of which
notice shall be given to the Manager of the Municipality from whose refusal,
denial or revocation of a license the appeal has been taken. The Court shall
either sustain the denial, revocation or refusal of the license or order the
issuance of the license to the applicant.
§ 308-10. Materials to be posted; advertisements.
A copy of the application for license to conduct a sale under this chapter,
including the inventory filed therewith, shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in the salesroom or place where the inventoried goods are to be
sold, so that the public may be informed of the facts relating to the goods
before purchasing same. Any advertisement or announcement published in
connection with the sale shall conspicuously show on its face the number of
the license, the date of its expiration and, if applicable, the location where
the business is to be resumed.
§ 308-11. Duration of sale; license fees. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord.
No. 2042]
A license to conduct a sale issued pursuant to this chapter shall be good
for no more than a period of 30 consecutive calendar dates and may be
renewed for one consecutive period not exceeding 30 consecutive calendar
days upon the affidavit of the applicant that the goods listed in the inventory
have not been disposed of and that no new goods have been or will be
added to the inventory previously filed pursuant to this chapter by purchase
or acquisition, on consignment or otherwise. The application for renewal
shall be made not more than 10 days prior to the time of the expiration of
the license and shall contain a new inventory of the goods remaining on
hand at the time the application for renewal is made, which new inventory
shall be prepared and furnished in the same manner and form as the
original inventory. The Manager of the Municipality where such sale is to
be conducted shall receive from the applicant for such license upon the
granting thereof a fee as provided in Chapter 194, Fees, and upon the
renewal thereof a fee as provided in Chapter 194, Fees. The applicant shall
not be entitled to a refund of the fee paid if said application is refused,
denied or revoked.
§ 308-9 SALES, CLOSING-OUT, DAMAGED-GOODS § 308-12
308:603
§ 308-12. Opening a similar business.
The opening of a business similar to the one for which the sale licensed
pursuant to this chapter was conducted, except the licensed sale of goods
damaged by fire, smoke or water, by the person, partnership, association,
corporation, partner of a partnership, officer of an association or principal
stockholder of a corporation who or which conducted the sale upon the
same premises within one year of the termination of the sale shall constitute
a violation of this chapter. Every day in which business is conducted within
the prohibited period of one year shall constitute a separate violation of this
chapter.
§ 308-13. Records to be kept.
§ 308-14. Jurisdiction.
Upon complaint of any person, the Common Pleas Court of the county
wherein a violation of this chapter occurred shall have jurisdiction in equity
to restrain and enjoin any act forbidden or declared illegal by any provision
of this chapter.
§ 308-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for a term of not exceeding 30 days. Each
day any sale is conducted in violation of this section shall be a separate
violation of this chapter. The right to appeal from such conviction shall exist
as in other cases of summary proceedings.
A. Suitable books and records concerning said sale shall be kept by the
licensee for the duration of the licensed sale and one year thereafter
and shall be open for inspection by the Manager of Monroeville's duly
authorized representative.
B. Upon the termination of a sale licensed hereunder, the applicant shall,
within 30 days of such termination, file a statement with the Manager of
the Municipality in which the sale was held stating:
(1) The total retail value of the goods, wares or merchandise not
disposed of during the sale; and
(2) The ultimate disposition thereof and, if transferred to another, the
name and address of the transferee.
§ 308-12 § 308-15
308:604
Chapter 312
SECONDHAND AND ANTIQUE DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Flea markets — See Ch. 210.
Mercantile licenses — See Ch. 256.
Transient retail or wholesale
businesses — See Ch. 346.
§ 312-1. License required.
No person or business entity shall engage in the business of being a
secondhand dealer or antique dealer in the Municipality of Monroeville
before registering with and obtaining a license from the Monroeville Police
Department on a form issued by the Department.
§ 312-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SECONDHAND ARTICLES OR GOODS — Any articles or goods that are
purchased, salvaged or received from any person.
SECONDHAND DEALER or ANTIQUE DEALER —
§ 312-3. Records to be kept by licensee.
Every secondhand and antique dealer located in or doing business in the
Municipality of Monroeville shall keep a legible record in the English
language at the time of acquiring or selling articles in the course of
business, which shall contain the following information:
Any person who wholly or partly engages in or operates the trade or
business of buying and selling used goods as antiques, precious stones,
metals, jewelry and tools.
A.
The foregoing enumeration of articles, goods and property shall not be
deemed to be exclusive or all-inclusive.
B.
A. The name and address of the person selling the article.
B. The name and address of the person buying any article.
C. The purchase price of the article.
D. A description of the article purchased or sold, including any and all
identifying marks such as inscriptions, color, engraving, serial numbers,
manufacturer, etc.
§ 308-15 SECONDHAND AND ANTIQUE DEALERS § 312-4
312:605
§ 312-4. Licensee to provide records.
Every dealer, person or business entity subject to the provisions of this
chapter shall provide the records prepared in accordance with § 312-3
hereof to the Monroeville Police Department on Monday of each week or at
such other times as may be requested by the Police Department.
§ 312-5. Sale of precious metals.
Every dealer, person or entity subject to provisions of this chapter shall not
sell or dispose of any article or goods made of gold, silver or other precious
metals, excluding coins, within 15 days after purchase of the same.
§ 312-6. License fee. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
The license fee for the license herein required shall be as provided in
Chapter 194, Fees.
§ 312-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
In the event that any person shall violate any provision of this chapter,
said person, upon being found in violation of said provisions before the
District Justice, shall be sentenced to a fine not exceeding $600, plus
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 316
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Monroeville Municipal Authority — See Ch.
16, Art. II.
Building construction — See Ch. 162.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 176.
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Holding tanks — See Ch. 236.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 290.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 319.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 320.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 324.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 328.
Zoning — See Ch. 359.
§ 312-4 § 312-7
316:606
ARTICLE I
Sanitary Sewer Construction
[Adopted 5-24-1962 by Ord. No. 349]
§ 316-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Sanitary Sewer
Construction Code."
§ 316-2. Applicability.
This article shall apply only to sanitary sewers which are not owned,
operated or maintained by the Municipality of Monroeville but which are
connected, either directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewer system of the
Municipality of Monroeville. It shall further apply to all building or house
sewers as further defined in this article.
§ 316-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING OR HOUSE SEWER — That part of the horizontal pipe which
begins at the outside wall of a building and extends and connects to a public
sewer, septic tank or other disposal terminal, conveying sanitary sewer
effluent therefrom.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
SEWER INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Municipality of
Monroeville and shall further include any person employed by the
Municipality as an assistant under his supervision.
§ 316-4. Rain- and surface water connections.
Roof leaders, surface drains or groundwater drains shall not be connected
to the sanitary sewer either within or without a building.
§ 316-5. Building sewers to be independent.
Each building or house sewer shall be independent of that of any other
building; provided, however, that where one building stands in the rear
of another building located on the same lot and considered by the sewer
inspector as a single unit of occupancy, such as a house and garage, the
sewers from the two buildings may be connected together and treated and
considered as one building or house sewer.
§ 316-1 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-6
316:607
§ 316-6. Permit for connection required.
No connection shall be made or permitted to any public sewer owned,
operated or maintained by the Municipality of Monroeville without prior
approval and issuance of written permit by the sewer inspector. Each
connection shall be made only at the point designated by the sewer
inspector.
§ 316-7. Cleanout connections.
Connections for cleaning and rodding sewer lines shall be placed in
buildings or houses in such manner as to be readily available for use.
§ 316-8. Connection materials and procedures.
A. Pipe. All building or house sewers shall be constructed of either vitrified
glazed clay sewer pipe conforming to the American Society of Testing
Materials standard specifications for clay sewer pipe (Designation
C-13) or extra-heavy cast-iron soil pipe conforming to the American
Society of Testing Materials standard specifications for cast-iron soil
pipe and fittings (Designation A-74). No other type of pipe may be used
or substituted, except upon certification of the Municipal Engineer that
the substitute requested is equal or superior in quality in all respects to
the vitrified glazed clay sewer pipe described above and that it will,
further, provide no hindrance to the efficient cleaning and maintenance
of the sewer.
B. Joints and connections.
(1) All joints of sections of vitrified glazed clay sewer pipe as specified
above shall be sealed according to American Society of Testing
Materials standard specifications, C425-5AT plastic joint,
according to said Society's latest revisions and modifications.
(2) Joints for extra-heavy cast-iron soil pipe shall be made by inserting
rolled hemp or jute in the joint and thoroughly caulking it into
place. The joint must be then scaled with pure molten load, wellcaulked,
not less than one inch deep. No paint, varnish or putty
shall be used on the joints until after the same have been tested.
C. Size of sewer.
(1) No house sewer shall be smaller than four inches in interior
diameter. No sewer for a commercial or industrial building or a
multiple-family dwelling shall be less than six inches in interior
diameter.
(2) Sewers of six-inch diameter or greater shall maintain a grade fall of
not less than 1/8 inch per foot. Sewers of less than six inches in
diameter shall maintain a grade fall of not less than 1/4 inch per
foot.
§ 316-6 § 316-8
316:608
§ 316-9. Inspections.
The sewer inspector may require existing sewers to be excavated for the
purpose of facilitating inspection where he has reasonable cause to believe
that the same may be operating inadequately or below the standards of this
article or if he has reasonable cause to believe that unlawful matter is being
permitted to drain into the building or house sewer.
§ 316-10. Cesspools and septic tanks.
No cesspool or septic tank shall be connected to any portion of a building or
house sewer that is further connected to the public sewer system.
§ 316-11. Permit required; fee.
§ 316-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon summary
conviction thereof before any District Justice with proper jurisdiction, be
fined a sum not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, be imprisoned for a period not exceeding
30 days. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense and may be punishable as such.
D. Trenching and backfilling. All excavations shall be open trench work
unless otherwise authorized by the sewer inspector for crossings of
streams, highways or unusual terrain or where it would be otherwise
impractical. The foundation in the trench shall be formed so as to
prevent any subsequent settlement of the pipes. If the foundation is
firm earth, it shall be pared or molded to give full support to the lower
quadrant in each section of pipe. Bell holes shall be dug to provide
ample space for the bells. Care must be exercised in backfilling below
the center of the pipe in order to give it proper support. Backfilling shall
be placed in layers and solidly tampered or packed up to two feet above
the pipe. Backfilling shall not be commenced until final inspection and
approval by the sewer inspector.
A. No building or house sewer shall be built, repaired or reconstructed
within the Municipality without first obtaining a permit therefor from
the sewer inspector for a fee as provided in Chapter 194, Fees;
provided, however, that no separate permit shall be required where the
building or reconstruction of the said sewer is part of a larger building
project for which a permit is obtained. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord.
No. 2042]
B. Nothing herein contained, however, shall in any way affect the existing
ordinances of the Municipality requiring permits and inspection fees for
tapping or connecting into the municipal sewer system.
§ 316-8 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-12
316:609

ARTICLE II
Sanitary Sewer Construction by Developers
[Adopted 6-14-1962 by Ord. No. 354]
§ 316-13. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Developers' Sanitary
Sewer Construction Code."
§ 316-14. Applicability.
This article shall apply only to sanitary sewers which are constructed by
or on behalf of developers of land where the sewer is located within the
Municipality of Monroeville, upon completion of which it is intended that
such sewer would be dedicated to and accepted by the Municipality of
Monroeville as part of the municipal sewer system. This article does not
apply to sewers connecting buildings to the municipal or proposed
municipal sewer system, which sewer construction is provided for under
Article I of this chapter.
§ 316-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEVELOPER — Any person building or proposing to build a sanitary sewer
to improve or service land or buildings erected thereon or to connect the
same to the then-existing sanitary sewer system of the Municipality of
Monroeville.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — The Municipal Engineer for the Municipality of
Monroeville or any consulting engineer or engineering firm appointed by
the Municipality.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
SEWER INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Municipality of
Monroeville, and further includes any person employed by the Municipality
as an assistant under his supervision.
§ 316-16. Sewer plans and design.
The design of all sanitary sewers proposed to be constructed hereunder
shall be drawn by qualified personnel. All designs shall conform to the
pertinent sections of Standard Conditions Relating to Sewage, as attached
to all sewer permits of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Sanitary Water
Board. All such plans and designs must be approved by said Sanitary Water
Board and a permit issued therefrom prior to construction. The design and
location plans of the sewer must further be approved by the Municipal
§ 316-13 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-16
316:611
Engineer not more than three months prior to the start of construction for
the purpose of reviewing their compliance with these standards, adequacy
of size and location.
§ 316-17. Issuance of permit.
§ 316-18. Excavations.
All excavation shall be to the depth as shown on approved plans unless
written permission of variance is received from the Municipal Engineer.
Excavations for manholes and other accessories shall have a minimum of
one foot and a maximum of two feet of clearance on all sides. Excess
excavation below the required level shall be backfilled with sand, gravel
or slag, all thoroughly tampered, or with concrete. Unstable soil shall
be removed and replaced with gravel, crushed stone or crushed slag, all
thoroughly tampered. Any water accumulating in the excavation shall be
removed by pumping or other means approved by the Municipal Engineer.
Grade stakes shall be set and used by the developer. Grade sheets shall be
furnished to the Municipal Engineer for approval.
§ 316-19. Trench excavations.
The sides of all trench excavations shall be vertical for a height of two feet
above the top of the pipe. This vertical portion of the trench shall have a
minimum clearance of six inches and a maximum clearance of 10 inches
on each side of the pipe bell, and the excavation shall be not less than six
inches below the flow line of the pipe. Crushed stone, slag or gravel cradle
shall be used for the installation of the pipe from the bottom of the trench
to the center of the pipe.
§ 316-20. Bracing, sheathing and shoring.
The developer shall construct all necessary bracing, sheathing and shoring
necessary to protect any excavations and all personnel on the premises.
§ 316-21. Backfilling.
A. Upon approval of the State Sanitary Water Board and the Municipal
Engineer and upon payment of a fee as provided in Chapter 194, Fees,
the sewer inspector shall issue a permit for the construction of such
sanitary sewer line. The sewer inspector shall be given notice at least
48 hours prior to the commencement of construction and shall further
be given 48 hours' notice at any time construction is continued or
carried on on Saturdays, Sundays or Municipality legal holidays.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
B. No sanitary sewer covered by this article shall be concealed or
backfilled prior to inspection and approval by the sewer inspector.
A. After sewer pipe has been laid in the trench and cradle and inspected
and approved by the sewer inspector, backfilling shall be completed
§ 316-16 § 316-21
316:612
§ 316-22. Replacing pavement.
§ 316-23. Sewer pipe.
with the original materials free of any large clods or stones in excess of
six inches in diameter. Backfilling material shall be placed evenly and
carefully around and over the pipe in layers of not more than six inches.
Each layer shall be thoroughly and carefully tamped until one foot of
cover exists over the pipe. The remainder of backfilling material shall
be placed, moistened and thoroughly compacted.
B. For trenches under roadways and areas to be paved, after the first foot
of backfilling is completed and tamped as set forth above, the remaining
material shall be placed in layers of eight inches or less and compacted
to the density of the adjacent original material so that pavement can be
placed immediately.
C. Where trenches are under existing paved streets they shall be
backfilled only with granulated slag, sand or gravel, thoroughly
compacted.
D. In backfilling around manholes and other structures, all forms of trash
and debris must be removed. Backfill material may be from excavation,
free of rock, lumber or other debris, and shall be placed symmetrically
on all sides in layers not more than eight inches in height, thoroughly
tamped and compacted for a height of four feet. Where manholes or
other structures are in roadways or areas paved or to be paved, only
granulated slag or gravel shall be used. Each layer shall be compacted
to a density according to that of adjacent original material so that
pavement can be placed immediately.
E. The developer shall check backfilling and refill for settlement after the
completion of construction.
A. All state roads will be backfilled and repaved under standard state
specifications for such repaving.
B. All Allegheny County roads shall be backfilled and repaved under
standard Allegheny County specifications.
C. All subgrades shall be compacted with a mechanical tamper.
D. The minimum width of replaced concrete pavements shall be four feet
at interiors and six feet at joints. Concrete shall be 1.3 times the
original thickness. The existing pavement edge shall be cut vertically.
E. The minimum width of replaced bituminous pavements shall be three
feet, with base of the same depth as the original pavement and surface
course of cold-patch mixture. The existing pavement shall be cut
vertically and horizontally on a straight line. The edge of existing
pavement shall be coated with suitable bonding materials.
§ 316-21 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-23
316:613
§ 316-24. Laying pipe.
§ 316-25. Joining pipe.
§ 316-26. Connections.
A. All sewer pipe shall conform to size and materials as shown on the
original design. The minimum size permissible is an interior diameter of
eight inches. All materials must be of first quality and free of chips,
damages or other defects.
B. Permissible types of pipe are as follows:
(1) Vitrified clay pipe and fittings that conform to the American Society
of Testing Materials standard specifications, C 200-57T, and the
latest revision thereof.
(2) Asbestos cement pipe and fittings conforming to the American
Society of Testing Materials standard specifications for Class 2400
and SS P-331A.
(3) Cast-iron pipe.
(4) Other types of pipe only with the approval of the Municipal
Engineer.
A. All sewer pipe shall be laid true to line and grade, with bells upgrade.
The sections of pipe shall be so laid and fitted together that when
complete the sewer will have a smooth and uniform invert. Pipe shall be
kept thoroughly clean so that joining compounds will adhere. Each
section of pipe shall be inspected by the sewer inspector for defects
before being lowered into the trench.
B. No water shall be allowed in the trench while the pipe is being laid, nor
shall water be allowed to rise around the joint before it is set.
C. Not more than 100 feet of trench shall be open in advance of pipelaying
unless permitted by the sewer inspector. The interior of the sewer pipe
shall be carefully kept clean and free of all dirt, cement or superfluous
material or debris of any kind as the work progresses.
A. For asbestos cement pipe, couplings with rubber sealing rings shall be
used as recommended by the pipe manufacturer.
B. For vitrified clay pipe, joints used shall conform to the American Society
of Testing Materials standard specifications, C 425-58T, and shall be
installed according to the manufacturer's specifications.
C. For concrete pipe, the joining compound shall be DeWitt No. 10 or its
approved equal.
D. For any other type of approved pipe, the joining compound used shall be
the type recommended by the manufacturer of the pipe.
§ 316-23 § 316-26
316:614
§ 316-27. Inspections and tests.
§ 316-28. Manholes.
§ 316-29. Precast manholes.
Precast manholes may be used, provided that they are manufactured in
accordance with American Society of Testing Materials specifications,
C-76-57T.
A. All connections for future use shall be capped and watertight.
B. No pipe shall be cut for connection except upon written approval of the
Municipal Engineer.
C. There shall be at least one service connection for every commercial or
residential lot abutting on the sewer. The ends of the pipe which enter
into masonry shall be neatly cut to fit the inner face of the masonry.
A. After joints have been inspected and approved and backfilled to the
extent of one foot, light tests shall be conducted between manholes
before further backfilling to determine if alignment is true.
B. Infiltration tests and tests for watertightness shall be made by the
developer only in the presence of the Municipal Engineer. The sewer
and sewer connections shall not leak under the exterior normal
groundwater pressure in excess of 150 gallons per inch diameter per
mile of sewer in 24 hours. The tests and measurements of infiltration
shall be conducted in a manner approved by the Municipal Engineer.
A. Manholes may be constructed of eight-inch brick or concrete with castiron
frames and covers as shown on Municipality of Monroeville
Standard Detail Drawing 2000. Precast manholes may be used as an
alternate subject to the approval of the Municipal Engineer.
B. No manhole shall be constructed when the outside temperature is
below the freezing point, and all work shall be protected against
freezing.
C. Invert channels shall be smooth and constructed in accordance with
said Drawing 2000. Galvanized wrought iron steps shall be installed as
shown on said Drawing 2000. The wrought iron shall conform to the
American Society of Testing Materials specifications, A — 41. The rung
shall have a minimum length of 10 inches and be at least 3/4 inch in
diameter. The manholes shall be built up so that the cover, when placed,
will be at the required grade. Only new brick shall be used, and it shall
conform to the American Society of Testing Materials specification,
C-32 Grade MA. The outside and inside of brick manholes shall be
plastered and troweled smooth with 1/2 inch of mortar composed of one
part cement to two parts sand. The manhole must be left clean and free
of all debris.
§ 316-26 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-30
316:615
§ 316-30. Frames, covers and gratings.
Frames, covers and gratings shall be of the type and duty shown on said
Drawing 2000. Iron castings shall conform to the standard specifications for
American Society of Testing Materials, A — 48 Class 20. All castings shall be
true to pattern in form and dimension, free from faults, sponginess, cracks,
blowholes and any other defect affecting their strength.
§ 316-31. Manhole base.
The base of the manhole shall be constructed according to said Drawing
2000 and conform to Pennsylvania Department of Highways specifications,
Form 408-1960, Sections 2.25 and 2.26.
§ 316-32. Presentation of as-built drawings.
Upon completion of construction of a sanitary sewer line under the terms
hereof, the developer shall present to the Municipal Engineer for municipal
records an as-built plan of the sewer line, showing the precise location
thereof and courses and distances between manholes.
§ 316-33. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon summary
conviction thereof before any District Justice with proper jurisdiction, be
fined a sum not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default
of payment thereof, be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each
day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense
and may be punishable as such.
§ 316-30 § 316-33
316:616
ARTICLE III
Connections; Rates and Charges
[Adopted 10-8-1964 by Ord. No. 450]
§ 316-34. Title.
This article shall hereafter be known and referred to as the "Monroeville
Municipal Sanitary Sewer Code."
§ 316-35. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide certain rules and regulations
for the discharge of sewage from any building within the Municipality
of Monroeville; to provide certain rules and regulations for the use and
operation of the Municipality of Monroeville sanitary sewer system and the
further discharge of sewage into the sanitary sewer system and treatment
plant of the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority; to establish and define the
sanitary sewer system of the Municipality of Monroeville; and to establish
various charges for the connection to and use of the Municipality of
Monroeville sanitary sewer system and the sanitary sewer system of the
Allegheny County Sanitary Authority.
§ 316-36. Definitions.
The following terms, when used in this article, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:
ACCOMMODATED BUILDING OR PROPERTY — A building or property that
has a municipal sanitary sewer line available for direct connection without
traversing the private property of others except through municipal sewer
easements.
BUILDING — Any structure erected and intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals or from which
structure sanitary sewage, wastes or wastewater is or may be discharged.
Where buildings are joined together side by side, such as double or row
houses or shopping centers, each with a separate entrance and each with
a separate water meter, each such unit shall be considered a separate
"building" for purposes of this article.
MUNICIPAL MANAGER — The Municipal Manager of the Municipality of
Monroeville or, in his absence, the person designated by him to assume his
responsibilities. In the event of vacancy in the office of Municipal Manager,
it shall mean the person then acting as Monroeville Municipal Secretary.
MUNICIPAL or MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville, a
political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
OWNER — The person, firm or corporation, whether one or more, having
legal or equitable title, wholly or partially, in any premises which is or is
about to be furnished sewer service by the Municipality.
§ 316-34 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-36
316:617
pH — The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration, expressed in moles per liter. It shall be determined by one of
the acceptable methods described in the latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Sewage, published by the American Public
Health Association.
SEWER or SEWER LINE — A pipe or system of pipes for the carrying of
sanitary sewage or other wastes as permitted in this article. Sewer lines of
the Municipality of Monroeville sanitary sewer system shall be considered
either trunk lines or lateral lines, and, as it may be deemed necessary,
determination thereof shall be made by resolution of the Council of the
Municipality of Monroeville.
SEWER SYSTEM — The sanitary sewer system of the Municipality of
Monroeville.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE — A structure built primarily for the use and
occupancy of one family. Two or more such structures adjoining side by
side, as in double houses or row houses, where each structure has separate
exterior entrances and separate water meters, shall each be considered
"single-family residences" for purposes of this article.
TENANT — Any person, firm or corporation occupying premises under a
lease, whether oral or written, from an owner, which premises is furnished
sewer service by the Municipality.
§ 316-37. Administration and enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Manager and any other municipal
employee under his supervision designated by the Municipal Manager to
administer and enforce all of the provisions of this article. The Chief of
Police and those police officers designated by him shall, upon request of the
Municipal Manager, cooperate and render such assistance to him as may be
necessary for the proper enforcement of this article.
§ 316-38. Applicability.
TRUNK LINE — — A sewer line designed and built primarily for the
purpose of collecting sewage from lateral sewer lines and conducting
such sewage across distances to discharge the same into the sanitary
sewer system of the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority. This
definition, however, shall not be construed to prohibit the direct sewer
connection of buildings into a "trunk line," with the approval of the
Municipal Manager.
A.
LATERAL or LATERAL SEWER LINES — — Sanitary sewer lines
designed and built primarily to provide direct service connections to
buildings and users of the sanitary sewer system and to discharge such
sewage into a trunk line.
B.
A. This article shall apply to all users and to the owners of all properties
served or accommodated by any part of the sanitary sewer system of
the Municipality of Monroeville, whether or not such users or
§ 316-36 § 316-38
316:618
§ 316-39. Rain- and surface water drainage.
The drainage of rain- or surface water into the sanitary sewer system or
into any private sewer which ultimately discharges into the Municipality of
Monroeville sanitary sewer system is prohibited.
§ 316-40. Drainage into coal mines or ditches.
The discharge or drainage of sanitary sewage into coal mines, abandoned
or otherwise, or into open ditches across public or private property is
prohibited.
§ 316-41. Septic tanks and cesspools.
The use of septic tanks, cesspools or any other private means of treatment
or disposition of sanitary sewage is prohibited, unless in those instances
where a municipal sanitary sewer system is not available and such private
system, septic tank, cesspool or otherwise is specifically authorized, in
writing, by the Allegheny County Department of Health. It is the intention
of this article that all sanitary sewage be discharged into the Municipality
of Monroeville sanitary sewer system (unless herein otherwise specifically
prohibited), except in those instances where sanitary sewers are not
directly available.
properties are within or without the Municipality, subject, however, to
the following limitations:
(1) Where preexisting agreements have been made by the Municipality
of Monroeville with specific users, municipalities, authorities or
school districts at any time prior to the enactment of said
Monroeville Municipal Sanitary Sewer Code, such agreements
shall be honored to whatever extent they covered. [Amended
3-14-1967 by Ord. No. 568]
(2) Where certain sections of the Municipality of Monroeville sanitary
sewer system, as defined in this article, are not wholly owned or
wholly leased by the Municipality of Monroeville, this article shall
in those cases apply only to the users of property served that lies
within the Municipality of Monroeville.
(3) The owners of buildings or property outside the Municipality of
Monroeville that are part of the Monroeville Sanitary Sewer
District or that may hereafter request or elect to become part of the
Monroeville Sanitary Sewer District shall, upon such request, be
deemed to have accepted and be bound by all of the provisions of
this article, including all collection and enforcement provisions
hereof.
B. There shall be no exemptions from this article for other governmental
agencies or authorities or eleemosynary institutions.
§ 316-38 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-42
316:619
§ 316-42. Occupancy of buildings restricted.
The occupancy of any building which is not connected through sanitary
sewers to the Municipality of Monroeville sanitary sewer system or, in the
absence of the availability of such system, provided with a septic tank or
disposal system approved by the Allegheny County Department of Health is
prohibited.
§ 316-43. Inspection.
The Municipal Manager or any of his authorized subordinates or any police
officer acting pursuant to this article shall have authority to enter upon
private property, at reasonable hours, for the purpose of inspection of sewer
facilities and to determine compliance with any of the provisions of this
article.
§ 316-44. Prohibited discharges.
No matter or materials shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer system
of the Municipality of Monroeville which would in any way be prohibited for
discharge into the sanitary sewer system of the Allegheny County Sanitary
Authority. No matter or materials of any nature whatsoever, whether solids,
liquids or gases, shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer system of the
Municipality of Monroeville that would cause or tend to cause unusual wear
or damage to sewer pipe or appliances or that would tend to cause clogging
in the system. Upon written notification from the Municipal Manager or
any of his authorized subordinates, any person so directed shall forthwith
terminate or prevent the discharge of such unlawful materials as the
Municipality may determine. The following matters are specifically
prohibited from discharge into said sanitary sewer system:
A. Mineral acids, waste acid, pickling or plating liquors from the pickling
or plating of iron, steel, brass, copper or chromium or any other
dissolved or solid substances which will endanger health or safety,
interfere with the flow in sewers or sewerage structures or equipment
or otherwise interfere with the operation of the sewers or other
facilities of the Municipality or the Sanitary Authority.
B. Cyanides or cyanogen compounds capable of liberating hydrocyanic gas
on acidification.
C. Fats, entrails and the like from meat processing plants, rendering
plants and similar industries and establishments.
D. Gas, tar, phenols, residues from petroleum storage, refining or
processing, fuel or lubricating oil, gasoline, naphtha, benzene or
explosive or flammable liquids, solids or gases.
E. Ashes, cinders, sand, mud, lime or acetylene sludges, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, sawdust, paunch
manure, hair, hides, dead animals, spent mash and grain, pulp from
food processing, water or wastes containing grease in excess of 100
§ 316-42 § 316-44
316:620
§ 316-45. Metering of sewage.
parts per million or any other solids or viscous substances capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with
the proper operation of the Municipality's or the Sanitary Authority's
facilities.
F. Sludges or other materials from septic tanks or similar facilities or from
sewage or industrial waste treatment plants or from water treatment
plants.
G. Garbage, whether ground or not, except properly shredded garbage in
a private dwelling, apartment, building, hotel, commercial restaurant
or retail food store resulting from the proper use of a garbage grinder
or disposer of a type approved by the Municipality, the Allegheny
County Health Department and the Sanitary Authority and maintained
in good operating condition; provided, however, that a retail food store
shall not operate more than one grinder or disposer, which shall be not
greater than three horsepower in size, and, when so required by the
Allegheny County Health Department, shall be equipped with an
approved water meter and limited in use to the consumption of an
average of not more than 1,500 gallons of water per day; and provided,
further, that the foregoing restrictions shall not apply to any existing
installation in a retail food store or a garbage grinder or disposer larger
than three horsepower in size until such time as the equipment now in
use can no longer be kept in good operating condition by ordinary
maintenance and repair, at which time such grinder or disposer larger
than three horsepower shall be abandoned and shall not be renewed or
replaced.
H. Water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the Municipality or of
the Sanitary Authority.
I. Water or wastes containing any toxic radioactive isotopes.
A. Where no water meters are used. In cases where any sewer user within
the Municipality of Monroeville Sanitary Sewer District has private
water sources and for that reason does not have a water meter on the
premises, the Municipality may, at its own option, install a sewage
meter or a water meter to measure sewer usage. Such sewage meter or
water meter shall be of such type and shall be located on the premises
in such a manner as shall be determined by the Municipal Manager.
Said meters shall be and at all times remain the property of the
Municipality of Monroeville. Any adjustment or tampering in any
manner with such meters, except by authorized personnel of the
Municipality of Monroeville, is prohibited.
B. Where water meters are in use. In all cases where a property or
building is served by metered water, the owners of such property may,
§ 316-44 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-45
316:621
§ 316-46. Connection required.
The owners of any building within the Municipality of Monroeville that
is served or accommodated by any part of the sewer system are hereby
required and directed, within 90 days of the effective date of this article,
or, where such sewers are not presently available, within 90 days of their
availability as determined by the Municipal Manager, to take all steps
necessary, pay established fees and cause to be constructed a private
connecting sewer on their property to connect such building with the
municipal sewer system. Such connecting sewer shall be constructed
pursuant to standards as established by Article I of this chapter and as
such Article may be hereafter amended. If any such building does not have
interior plumbing facilities, the owners thereof are hereby required and
directed, within 90 days of the effective date of this article, to construct
such interior plumbing facilities pursuant to standards established by the
Allegheny County Department of Health. No outhouses or other type of
outdoor sanitation facilities are permitted.
nevertheless, cause to be installed, at their own private expense, a
separate meter to measure the flow of sanitary sewage from their
property. The make, type, design and location of such sewage meter
shall be subject to the approval of the Municipal Manager. Upon such
approved sewage meter being installed, the Municipal Manager shall
certify the same, and such meter readings shall be used in lieu of water
meter readings for purposes of this article. The Municipal Manager may
decertify such sewage meter at any time that he determines the same
to be in a faulty state of repair or that, for any reason, it fails to measure
accurately the volume of flow of sanitary sewage from the property
involved. Upon such decertification, readings of the water meter on the
premises shall determine sewage volume, commencing from the day of
the last water meter reading prior to such decertification.
C. The owner of any such building or property served by metered water
may also, at his own expense, cause such water to be metered in such a
fashion as will clearly indicate the portion thereof that shall ultimately
be discharged into the sanitary sewer system and that which may be
disposed of otherwise, such as for lawn-watering systems. Such
separate meter systems, however, shall be installed only with the
approval of the Municipal Manager and the water utility or authority
servicing such property. Upon the approval of such separate metering
installation and subject to its continued approval, only that water so
metered and connected so as to indicate discharge into the sanitary
sewer system shall be charged for under any of the provisions of this
article.
D. For purposes of this article where no sewage meter is installed either
pursuant to Subsection A or B above, it shall be conclusively presumed
that the volume of sewage flow shall be equal to the flow of water used
on the premises as measured by the water meter installed thereon,
subject, however, to the limitations of Subsection C above.
§ 316-45 § 316-47
316:622
§ 316-47. Determination of sewer availability.
For purposes of this article, any property or building within the Municipality
of Monroeville is deemed to be served and accommodated by municipal
sanitary sewers when such property or building abuts upon a street,
easement or right-of-way wherein a sanitary sewer line owned, leased or
operated, in whole or in part, by the Municipality of Monroeville is located.
As additional sanitary sewer lines are constructed by or for the Municipality
of Monroeville and placed into operation, all properties abutting upon the
street, easement or right-of-way wherein such additional sanitary sewer
lines are located shall be deemed served thereby. If such private property
adjoins such right-of-way, easement or street at any point, it shall be
construed as an abutting sewer line to such property.
§ 316-48. Buildings not required to connect.
Where a building erected on property with municipal sanitary sewers
available to it, as defined above, is, nevertheless, erected on such property
at a point more than 200 feet from the municipal sewer line as measured
by the shortest direct distance from the closest point on the sewer line to
the closest point on the building, the owners of such property shall not be
required to connect such building to the municipal sewer line; provided,
however, that this exception shall no longer apply in cases where the
Municipality of Monroeville has offered to extend the municipal sewer line
into the property to a point less than 200 feet from such building. Such
offer to extend the municipal sewer line shall, furthermore, be subject to
the owners of such property granting the necessary rights-of-way for such
sewer extension in a form acceptable to the Municipality of Monroeville.
Should the owners of such property refuse to grant such right-of-way upon
the request of the Municipality of Monroeville, the exception to connecting
requirements set forth in this section shall no longer be applicable.
§ 316-49. Notice to connect.
The Municipal Manager shall give written notice to all property owners who
have failed to make connection to the municipal sewer system pursuant to
§ 316-46 hereof. Such notice shall direct the owners of such property to
make connection to the municipal sewer system within 45 days from the
date of the notice. Any person, firm or corporation that shall have received
such notice and that shall have failed to make such sewer connection within
said forty-five-day period shall then be in violation of this article and subject
to its penalty provisions, as hereinafter set forth. Upon failure to make such
connection upon notice as specified above, the Municipality of Monroeville,
in addition to all other penalty and enforcement provisions herein set forth,
may, at its option, cause such connection to be made and collect the cost
thereof from the property owners by municipal claim or in an action of
assumpsit.
§ 316-47 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-50
316:623
§ 316-50. Sewer district established.
The entire Municipality of Monroeville and, in addition, any adjacent areas
of territories that are served by any part of the Municipality of Monroeville
sanitary sewer system shall constitute one sewer district, and all charges
for the connection to the sewer system and the use thereof and any other
charge appertaining thereto shall be uniform throughout the Municipality
of Monroeville and throughout said sewer district; provided, however, that
where the Municipality of Monroeville has by agreement provided for the
use of part of the Monroeville sanitary sewer system by another
Municipality for the private property owners thereof, such properties
located outside the Municipality of Monroeville shall not be part of the
Municipality of Monroeville Sanitary Sewer District.
§ 316-51. Use charges for operation and treatment. [Amended
1-22-1971 by Ord. No. 722; 2-1-1975 by Ord. No. 901; 10-14-1980 by
Ord. No. 1246; 12-29-1981 by Ord. No. 1297; 6-8-1982 by Ord. No.
1334; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 1648; 11-23-1990 by Ord. No. 1728;
12-11-1990 by Ord. No. 1729; 1-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1734; 7-8-1997
by Ord. No. 2042]
A. The owners of all properties and buildings which are presently or which
may be hereafter served or accommodated by any part of the sanitary
sewer system of the Municipality of Monroeville, wheresoever located
within the Monroeville Sanitary Sewer District, shall pay rentals for the
operation of the Monroeville sanitary sewer system and for the ultimate
disposition and treatment of sewage by the Allegheny County Sanitary
Authority according to the schedule of rates as provided in Chapter
194, Fees, as measured by water meters installed on the premises by
the Water Authority187 or utility servicing the same or, where
applicable, by sewage meters installed as hereinbefore set forth.
B. Surcharges.
(1) In any case where the wastes of any nonresidential user have an
unusually high concentration of suspended solids or biochemical
oxygen demand or an unusually high chlorine demand, the sewer
charges as set forth in Subsection A above shall be increased
according to the following formulas:
(a) Suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand:
187. Editor's Note: This Authority's name was revised 5-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2223 to be the
"Monroeville Municipal Authority."
§ 316-50 § 316-51
316:624
Where
F = Factor to be applied to basic rate.
SS = 275 or the suspended solids of the particular
waste expressed in milligrams per liter,
whichever is greater.
BOD = 300 or the biochemical oxygen demand of the
particular waste expressed in milligrams per
liter, whichever is greater.
(b) Chlorine demand:
Rc = 000835 Pc (C-5)
Where
Rc = Surcharge rate for chlorine demand in cents per
1,000 gallons of wastes.
Pc = Contract price of chlorine in cents per pound.
C = 5 or the chlorine demand of particular waste in
parts per million, whichever is greater.
(2) The above surcharges shall be ordered and imposed by the
Municipal Manager only in cases where similar surcharges are
imposed upon the Municipality of Monroeville by the Allegheny
County Sanitary Authority.
C. Additional charges for garbage grinders.
(1) Household garbage grinders. For each household garbage grinder
in a private dwelling unit, the charge shall be as provided in
Chapter 194, Fees.
(2) Other garbage grinders. For garbage grinders other than those
referred to in Subsection C(1) above, the charge shall be as
provided in Chapter 194, Fees, per grinder of one-horsepower
capacity and a proportionately lower or higher charge per grinder
of lesser or greater horsepower capacity.
D. Single-family residential users shall pay their sewer charges quarterly
and all other users shall pay their sewer charges monthly, in
accordance with statements rendered or caused to be rendered for
sewer service by the Municipality of Monroeville or its duly authorized
collection agency. Charges for sewer service shall be subject to a
penalty of 5% if payment for the same is not received by the
Municipality of Monroeville or its collection agency within 30 days from
the date of billing.
§ 316-51 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-51
316:625
§ 316-52. Trunk line use and tapping charge.
E. Unless sewage or water meters are installed as herein specifically
authorized, it shall be conclusively presumed for purposes of this article
that sewer usage is equal to water usage as measured by water meters
installed by the Monroeville Water Authority,188 the Wilkinsburg-Penn
Water Authority or any other duly constituted utility or authority
supplying water service to the premises involved.
F. Use of revenues.
(1) The revenues received by the Municipality of Monroeville pursuant
to this section shall be used for the following purposes:
(a) To pay all reasonable and necessary costs of administration
and collection thereof.
(b) To defray the expenses of the Municipality of Monroeville in
the operation, maintenance and repair of the Municipality of
Monroeville sanitary sewer system and related appliances and
facilities.
(c) To pay to the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority such
charges as it may impose upon the Municipality of Monroeville
for the use of its sanitary sewer system and the ultimate
treatment and disposition of the sewage from the users of the
sewer system of the Municipality of Monroeville.
(2) All funds received pursuant to the charges made under this section
shall be segregated and kept separate and apart from all other
funds of the Municipality of Monroeville.
A. In addition to any other charges set forth in this article, the owners of
all buildings which are presently or which may be hereafter connected
to, either directly or indirectly, or accommodated, either directly or
indirectly, by any part of the trunk line sanitary sewers of the
Municipality of Monroeville, wheresoever located within the
Monroeville Sanitary Sewer District, shall pay to the Municipality of
Monroeville the sum as provided in Chapter 194, Fees, for tapping and
connecting into the municipal sanitary sewer system and the use of said
trunk lines to the extent of not more than 5,000 gallons of sewage per
month. [Amended 7-10-1973 by Ord. No. 846; 12-29-1981 by Ord.
No. 1297; 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
B. This charge, however, shall not be applicable to the owners of
properties or buildings for which fixed sum sewer use charges or
tapping fees for such trunk line sewers have been previously paid or
credited in full pursuant to any previous ordinance of the Municipality
188. Editor's Note: This Authority's name was revised 5-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2223 to be the
"Monroeville Municipal Authority."
§ 316-51 § 316-52
316:626
§ 316-53. Lateral use and tapping charge.
of Monroeville or pursuant to previous written agreement with the
Municipality of Monroeville.
C. For purposes of this section, the abandonment of a municipally owned
sewage treatment plant in favor of a trunk line sewer connected to the
sewer system of the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority shall be
considered as a substitution of means of ultimate disposal, and no
charges under this section shall be made against the owners of those
buildings and properties that were previously connected into such
treatment plant; provided, however, that this exception shall not apply
to those previously connected to such treatment plant who, or whose
predecessors in title, had not fully paid for such privilege pursuant to
prior agreements or ordinances of the Municipality of Monroeville.
A. In addition to any other charges set forth in this article, the owners of
all buildings which are presently or which may be hereafter connected
to, either directly or indirectly, or accommodated, either directly or
indirectly, by any part of the lateral sanitary sewers of the Municipality
of Monroeville, wheresoever located within the Monroeville Sanitary
Sewer District, shall pay to the Municipality of Monroeville the sum as
provided in Chapter 194, Fees, for tapping and connecting into the
municipal sanitary sewers to the extent of not more than 5,000 gallons
of sewage per month. [Amended 7-10-1973 by Ord. No. 846;
12-29-1981 by Ord. No. 1297; 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
B. This charge, however, shall not be applicable to the owners of
properties or buildings for which fixed sum sewer use charges or
tapping fees for such lateral sewers have been previously paid or
credited in full pursuant to any previous ordinance of the Municipality
of Monroeville or pursuant to previous written agreement with the
Municipality of Monroeville.
C. The charges established under this section shall also be made for the
privilege of connecting any building or property directly into what
otherwise may be designated as a trunk line sewer.
D. The charges set forth in Subsection A above shall further be
inapplicable where all of the system of lateral sewer lines servicing the
properties and buildings within a developed area were or are hereafter
installed, constructed and paid for by any person, firm or corporation or
agency other than the Municipality of Monroeville or its lessors. This
exception shall not apply, however, where the owners of the property or
building involved are not the original installer of such lateral sewer
system or a subsequent purchaser from such original installer. This
exception shall further be inapplicable unless such private installation
of lateral sanitary sewers has been installed with the knowledge and
approval of the Municipality of Monroeville and has been dedicated or
offered for dedication to the Municipality of Monroeville as an
§ 316-52 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-53
316:627
§ 316-54. Trunk line sewer extended use charges.
§ 316-55. Lateral sewer extended use charges.
additional part of the municipal sanitary sewer system, with the right in
the Municipality to connect other users into the same system.
A. In addition to any other charges set forth in this article, the owners of
all buildings which are presently or which may be hereafter connected
to, either directly or indirectly, or accommodated, either directly or
indirectly, by any part of the trunk line sanitary sewers of the
Municipality of Monroeville, wheresoever located within the
Monroeville Sanitary Sewer District, shall pay to the Municipality of
Monroeville an extended use charge for the sum of the trunk line
sanitary sewer system or any part thereof in excess of 5,000 gallons of
usage per month according to the schedule of rates as provided in
Chapter 194, Fees, as measured by water meters installed on the
premises by the Water Authority189 or utility servicing the same or,
where applicable, by sewage meters installed as hereinafter set forth.
[Amended 2-1-1975 by Ord. No. 901; 10-14-1980 by Ord. No.
1246; 12-29-1981 by Ord. No. 1297; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No.
1648; 12-11-1990 by Ord. No. 1729; 1-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1734;
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
B. Charges for sewer usage as set forth in this section shall be subject to a
penalty of 5% if payment for the same is not received by the
Municipality of Monroeville or its collection agency within 30 days from
the date of billing.
C. These charges, however, shall not be applicable to the owners of
properties or buildings for which fixed sum sewer use charges or
tapping fees for such trunk line sanitary sewers have been previously
paid or credited in full pursuant to any previous ordinance of the
Municipality of Monroeville or pursuant to previous written agreement
with the Municipality of Monroeville. This subsection, however, shall
apply only to the extent of the use of said sewer system by such
properties or buildings at the time such payments or credits were
made, and should the use of the sanitary sewer system have been
increased or be hereafter increased by additions to such properties or
buildings, such properties and additional buildings and the owners
thereof shall be subject to the charges set forth in Subsection A of this
section.
A. In addition to any other charges set forth in this article, the owners of
all buildings which are presently or which may be hereafter connected
to, either directly or indirectly, by any part of the lateral sanitary sewers
of the Municipality of Monroeville, wheresoever located within the
Monroeville Sanitary Sewer District, shall pay to the Municipality of
189. Editor's Note: This Authority's name was revised 5-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2223 to be the
"Monroeville Municipal Authority."
§ 316-53 § 316-55
316:628
Monroeville an extended use charge for the sum of lateral sanitary
sewer system or any part thereof in excess of 5,000 gallons of usage per
month according to the schedule of rates as provided in Chapter 194,
Fees, as measured by water meters installed on the premises by the
Water Authority190 or utility servicing the same or, where applicable, by
sewage meters installed as hereinafter set forth. [Amended 2-1-1975
by Ord. No. 901; 10-14-1980 by Ord. No. 1246; 12-29-1981 by
Ord. No. 1297; 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 1648; 12-11-1990 by Ord.
No. 1729; 1-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1734; 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
B. Charges for sewer usage as set forth in this section shall be subject to a
penalty of 5% if payment for the same is not received by the
Municipality of Monroeville or its collection agency within 30 days from
the date of billing.
C. These charges, however, shall not be applicable to the owners of
properties or buildings for which fixed sum sewer use charges or
tapping fees for such lateral sanitary sewers have been previously paid
or credited in full pursuant to any previous ordinance of the
Municipality of Monroeville or pursuant to previous written agreement
with the Municipality of Monroeville. This subsection, however, shall
apply only to the extent of the use of said sewer system by such
properties or buildings at the time such payments or credits were
made, and should the use of the sanitary sewer system have been
increased or be hereafter increased by additions to such properties or
buildings, such properties and additional buildings and the owners
thereof shall be subject to the charges set forth in Subsection A of this
section.
D. The charges established under this section shall also be made for the
privilege of connecting any building or property directly into what
otherwise may be designated as a trunk line sewer.
E. The charges set forth in Subsection A above shall further be
inapplicable where all of the system of lateral sewer lines servicing the
properties and buildings within a developed area were or are hereafter
installed, constructed and paid for by any person, firm or corporation or
agency other than the Municipality of Monroeville or its lessors. This
exception shall not apply, however, where the owners of the property or
building involved are not the original installer of such lateral sewer
system or a subsequent purchaser from such original installer. This
exception shall further be inapplicable unless such private installation
of lateral sanitary sewers has been installed with the knowledge and
approval of the Municipality of Monroeville and has been dedicated or
offered for dedication to the Municipality of Monroeville as an
additional part of the municipal sanitary sewer system, with the right in
the Municipality to connect other users into the same system.
190. Editor's Note: This Authority's name was revised 5-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2223 to be the
"Monroeville Municipal Authority."
§ 316-55 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-56
316:629
§ 316-56. Optional fixed-sum trunk line extended use charges.
[Amended 2-1-1975 by Ord. No. 901; 12-29-1981 by Ord. No. 1297;
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
In lieu of the trunk line extended use charges set forth in § 316-54 above,
the owners of any property or building subject thereto may elect, at their
own option, to pay a fixed sum according to the schedule of rates as
provided in Chapter 194, Fees.
§ 316-57. Optional fixed-sum lateral extended use charges.
[Amended 2-1-1975 by Ord. No. 901; 12-29-1981 by Ord. No. 1297;
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
In lieu of the lateral extended use charges set forth in § 316-55 above, the
owners of any property or building subject thereto may elect, at their own
option, to pay a fixed sum according to the schedule of rates as provided in
Chapter 194, Fees.
§ 316-58. Single-family residence usage.
For purposes of §§ 316-52 through 316-57, inclusive, of this article, it shall
be conclusively presumed that the sewer usage of any single-family
residential building used for residential purposes only by one family shall
not exceed 5,000 gallons per month.
§ 316-59. Determination of usage for existing buildings.
For purposes of §§ 316-56 and 316-57 of this article, the sanitary sewer
usage of any existing building shall be determined by taking the average
usage for the 12 previous months prior to the effective date of this article. If
such existing building was not in full use for 12 prior months, as determined
by the Municipal Manager, then such sewer usage shall be determined as
for a new building. Furthermore, the owner of any such existing building
may request of the Municipal Manager a redetermination of usage, in which
case such existing building shall be treated as a new building.
§ 316-60. Determination of usage for new buildings.
A. For purposes of §§ 316-56 and 316-57 of this article, the sanitary sewer
usage of any new buildings shall be determined by the Municipal
Manager, based upon the experience of similar buildings and uses
within the Municipality of Monroeville or, in the absence of such similar
uses within the Municipality of Monroeville, then within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Municipal Manager shall consider
the following factors in determining the extent of such usage:
(1) The size of the building in square feet.
(2) The proportion of total area normally occupied by people.
(3) The type of building usage.
§ 316-56 § 316-60
316:630
§ 316-61. Change of usage.
(4) The number and type of plumbing facilities.
(5) The estimated maximum occupancy of the building.
(6) The average occupancy of the building.
(7) The portion of time that the building is occupied.
(8) The portion of occupants that would have access to and occasion to
use sanitation facilities.
(9) Estimates of sanitary sewer usage or water usage, as determined
and published by various departments and agencies of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States government.
B. After 12 full calendar months of experience on actual sewer usage,
commencing after the building contemplated is completely erected and
fully occupied, as determined by the Municipal Manager, either the
Municipality or the property owner may request a redetermination of
the usage charge based on actual experience. If such experienced
usage is less than 90% or greater than 110% of the usage originally
determined by the Municipal Manager, the charges made pursuant to
§§ 316-56 and 316-57 shall be reset consistent with such experienced
usage and additional charges or rebates shall be made to the property
owner consistent therewith. If the Manager should determine that the
12 calendar months experienced usage was not truly indicative of
future usage, he may require an additional 12 calendar months of
experienced usage before making the final redetermination of charges.
If it is further determined by the Municipal Manager that efforts had
been made to affect the experience usage by temporarily or partially
limiting the use of some of the sanitary facilities in the building, the
Municipal Manager may disregard the experienced usage entirely and
refuse reimbursement from the original charge, in any event, all
reimbursement shall be made only with the approval of the Monroeville
Municipal Council.
A. If, after final determination of sewer charges under §§ 316-56 and
316-57 of this article has been made, the sewer usage of any building is
subsequently reduced, no rebate or reimbursement shall be allowed.
B. If, after final determination of sewer charges under §§ 316-56 and
316-57 of this article has been made, the sewer usage of any building is
increased, with no changes, alterations or additions made to the
building, no additional charges shall be made; provided, however, that
should such increase in sewer usage be due to the change in type of
usage of the building, as for example from a garage to a restaurant, the
Municipal Manager shall make a new determination of sewer use and
new charges under §§ 316-56 and 316-57 and shall treat such new
building use the same as in the construction of a new building, giving
full credit to such similar fixed sum charges previously paid.
§ 316-60 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-61
316:631
§ 316-62. Exercising optional charges.
§ 316-63. Conversion of method of extended use charges. [Amended
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
C. If, after final determination of sewer charges under §§ 316-56 and
316-57 of this article has been made and such building is subsequently
removed or partially removed, no reimbursement or rebate shall be
made for such sewer charges, but if a new building is subsequently
erected on substantially the same site, full credit shall be given for
charges on the new building for all sums previously paid on account of
similar sewer charges under §§ 316-56 and 316-57 hereof.
D. All additions to existing buildings shall be treated as new buildings.
A. Should an owner or any existing building elect to be charged pursuant
to §§ 316-56 and 316-57, in lieu of the extended use charges set forth in
§§ 316-54 and 316-55 of this article, he shall file with the Municipal
Manager, on forms provided by the Municipality of Monroeville, a
notice of such election within 30 days of the effective date of this
article. Such election shall then be effective upon payment in full of
such fixed sum charges as established hereunder.
B. For any new construction such election to pay extended use charges
under §§ 316-56 and 316-57 must be made and charges paid in full at
the time of or prior to the application for a building permit.
C. An election to be charged pursuant to §§ 316-56 and 316-57 of this
article must apply to both sections or it shall not be valid, except in the
case where only trunk line extended use charges are applicable.
A. Upon payment to the Municipality of Monroeville of a fee as provided in
Chapter 194, Fees, the owners of any property may elect to convert
from fixed sum extended use charges under §§ 316-56 and 316-57 to the
standard rate extended use charges under §§ 316-54 and 316-55. No
refund shall be made for any fixed sum use charges previously paid, but
such payments shall be applied against such standard charges for
sewer usage commencing as of the effective date of this article. It shall
be the burden of such property owner applying for conversion to supply
sufficient evidence acceptable to the Municipal Manager of the extent
of sewer usage prior to the application for conversion. If proof of prior
usage is inadequate, the privilege of conversion may be denied by the
Municipal Manager.
B. Upon payment to the Municipality of Monroeville of a fee as provided in
Chapter 194, Fees, the owners of any property may elect to convert
from standard rate extended use charges under §§ 316-54 and 316-55
to fixed sum extended use charges under §§ 316-56 and 316-57. No
credit or reimbursement, however, shall be given for any sums
previously paid under the standard rate sewer extended use charges
under §§ 316-54 and 316-55. Fixed sum sewer extended use charges
§ 316-61 § 316-63
316:632
§ 316-64. Inspection fee. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
In addition to any other charges set forth in this article, an inspection fee
as provided in Chapter 194, Fees, shall be charged for the connection of a
private sewer into the municipal sanitary sewer system. This charge shall
apply to all such connections made on or after May 9, 1961, the date of
the original enactment of such charge. Where two or more buildings have
common sanitary waste lines connected in such a manner that only one
sanitary sewer line leaves the combined buildings to join with the municipal
sanitary sewer system, only one such inspection fee shall be charged. If,
however, such group of two or more buildings has separate private sewer
lines leaving such building and joining together prior to connecting with the
municipal sanitary sewer system, a separate inspection fee shall be charged
for each private sanitary sewer line leaving such buildings.
§ 316-65. When charges effective.
All charges of any nature made under the terms of this article are effective
as of the effective date of this article, except as otherwise specifically
indicated below. Where a determination of usage is to be made by the
Municipal Manager under §§ 316-56 and 316-57 hereof, such charges under
those sections shall be effective and become due and payable upon notice
of the same mailed to the owners or the occupiers of the property involved.
For extended use charges under §§ 316-54 and 316-55, such charges shall
be applied on water meter readings read on or after November 1, 1964,
for the one-month period preceding such meter reading; provided, however,
that in any event all sewer usage chargeable under §§ 316-54 and 316-55
hereof shall be made and applied not later than November 1, 1964. For all
new buildings and additions to existing buildings and for change of type of
occupancy within existing buildings, the prepayment of all charges under
§§ 316-52, 316-53 and 316-64 of this article shall be a condition precedent
to the issuance of any building permit for the construction thereof or any
occupancy permit for change of type of occupancy.
§ 316-66. Collection of unpaid charges.
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Manager to collect all sums, charges
and rents, of any nature, imposed by this article, except for such collections
which have been or may be hereafter specifically delegated to the
Monroeville Water Authority191 by the Monroeville Municipal Council. The
Municipal Manager, however, shall be responsible for the collection of
all delinquent accounts until liens therefor are entered by the Municipal
Solicitor. If the Municipal Manager shall have failed to collect any charge
or account established under this article after having held such claim for a
shall then be determined as for an existing building under § 316-59
above.
191. Editor's Note: This Authority's name was revised 5-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2223 to be the
"Monroeville Municipal Authority."
§ 316-63 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-66
316:633
period of not more than one year, he or she shall thereupon give 30 days'
notice to the owner of the property where the delinquency exists, either by
certified or registered mail or by posting the premises, advising such owner
that a municipal claim shall be filed if such charges are not paid. At the end
of such thirty-day period of notice, such accounts, with the names of the
record owners, amount of charges and description of the premises, shall be
referred to the Municipal Solicitor for the filing of a municipal lien therefor.
Upon the filing of such municipal lien, an additional penalty of 5% of the
face amount of the claim shall be added thereto, and interest on the face
amount of such claim shall be further charged at the rate of 6% per annum.
§ 316-67. Rules and regulations.
The Municipal Manager shall establish such rules and regulations not
inconsistent with this article as he or she may deem necessary for the
proper and efficient administration of the provisions of this article.
§ 316-68. Buildings served but not connected.
The owners of all buildings that are served or accommodated by any part
of the sanitary sewer system of the Municipality of Monroeville but for
any reason are not connected thereto and in use thereof are, nevertheless,
subject to the payment of charges under §§ 316-51, 316-52 and 316-53
hereof and for the enforcement and collection thereof as hereinabove set
forth.
§ 316-69. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person, firm or the officers of any corporation who or which shall violate
any of the provisions of this article, except as may be otherwise limited by
law, shall, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice, be fined a sum
not to exceed $600, together with costs of prosecution, and, upon default
of payment of such fine and costs, may be committed to imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation shall be permitted
to continue shall constitute a separate offense and may be punishable as
such.
§ 316-70. Repealer; construal of provisions.
Any ordinance or part of ordinance in conflict with any of the provisions of
this article is hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. Articles I and II
of this chapter, pertaining to standards of construction of sanitary sewers,
are specifically saved and excepted from repeal and are incorporated herein
by reference thereto as part of this article. So much of Chapter 328,
Swimming Pools, as imposes a tapping fee of $500 for connecting
residential swimming pools into the sanitary sewer system, is repealed.
Furthermore, nothing herein contained shall be construed to in any way
diminish the rights of the Municipality of Monroeville to collect various
§ 316-66 § 316-70
316:634
charges for the use of the Municipality of Monroeville sanitary sewer system
imposed by prior ordinances.
§ 316-70 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-70
316:635

ARTICLE IV
Sewage and Industrial Waste Disposal
[Adopted 11-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1910192]
§ 316-71. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
hereafter designated:
ALCOSAN — The Allegheny County Sanitary Authority, including its
treatment facility and any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial
wastes of a liquid nature.
CORROSIVE WASTE — A waste or substance which has any of the following
properties:
HAZARDOUS WASTE — All wastes that are defined as hazardous under the
regulations enacted pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act (RCRA) as specified in 40 CFR 261 or under the regulations
promulgated pursuant to the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act as
specified in 25 Pa. Code 261.
IGNITABLE WASTE — A waste or substance which can create a fire hazard
in the sewage collection system or the ALCOSAN treatment facility which
has any of, but is not limited to, the following properties:
INTERFERENCE — A discharge originating in the Municipality which, alone
or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
It is aqueous and has a pH of less than or equal to five or greater than
or equal to 10, as determined by a pH meter.
A.
It is a liquid and corrodes steel (SAE1020) at a rate greater than 6.35
millimeters (0.250 inch) per year at a test temperature of 55° C. (130°
F.).
B.
It is liquid with a flash point less than 60° C. (140° F.) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
A.
B. It is an oxidizer as defined in 49 CFR 173.151.
Inhibits or disrupts the ALCOSAN facilities, its treatment processes or
operation or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
A.
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of ALCOSAN's
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (hereinafter referred
to as ("NPDES") permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use
or disposal by ALCOSAN in compliance with the following statutory
provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more
B.
192. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded Ord. No. 1434, adopted 9-11-1984, which
comprised former Article IV, Discharges.
§ 316-71 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-71
316:637
PASS-THROUGH — Any discharge of a pollutant through ALCOSAN into
the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with other discharges from
other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the ALCOSAN's
NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity or its legal representatives, agents or
assigns.
PH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions, expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, emissions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt or other industrial, municipal or agricultural waste discharged
into water.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and/or radiological integrity of water.
REACTIVE/EXPLOSIVE WASTE — A waste or substance which can create
an explosion hazard in the sewage collection system or the ALCOSAN
treatment facility which has any of, but is not limited to, the following
properties:
stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water
Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (including Title 2 or more commonly
referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act" and
including state regulations contained in the State Sludge Management
Plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act),
the Clean Air Act and the Toxic Substances Control Act.
It is normally unstable and readily undergoes violent change without
detonating.
A.
B. It reacts violently with water.
C. It forms potentially explosive mixtures with water.
When mixed with water, it generates toxic gases, vapors or fumes
in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human health or the
environment.
D.
It is a cyanide- or sulfide-bearing waste which can generate toxic gases,
vapors or fumes in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human
health or the environment.
E.
It is capable of detonation or explosive reaction if it is subjected to a
strong initiating source or if heated under confinement.
F.
§ 316-71 § 316-71
316:638
THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
"Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1351 et seq.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency
pursuant to Section 307(A) of the Act.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed
directly or indirectly into the facilities of ALCOSAN.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through or border upon the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any portion thereof.
§ 316-72. Interference with treatment facilities prohibited.
No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced directly or indirectly
into the facilities of ALCOSAN, or into any sewer, pipe or other conveyance
located in the Municipality and transmitting substances into the facilities of
ALCOSAN, any toxic pollutant or other wastewater which will:
§ 316-73. Prohibited substances.
No person shall introduce, permit or cause to be introduced, directly or
indirectly, into the facilities of ALCOSAN, or into any piped sewer, pipe or
other conveyance located in the Municipality and transmitting substances
into the facilities of ALCOSAN, any of the following:
It is readily capable of detonation, explosive decomposition or reaction
at standard temperature and pressure.
G.
It is a forbidden explosive as defined in 40 CFR 173.51 or a Class A
explosive as defined in 49 CFR 173.53 or a Class B explosive as defined
in 49 CFR 173.88.
H.
A. Cause interference with the operation or performance of ALCOSAN's
treatment plant or other facilities.
B. Pass through ALCOSAN's treatment plant or other facilities.
A. Any substance which will endanger the life, health or safety of the
treatment plant sewer maintenance and plant operations personnel or
which would preclude safe entry into the sewer system or any portion of
the treatment plant.
B. Any ignitable, reactive, explosive, corrosive or hazardous waste, except
as provided for by ALCOSAN's rules and regulations.
§ 316-71 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-73
316:639
§ 316-74. Adherence to county regulations; inclusion by reference.
C. Any wastewater with a temperature greater than 140° F. (60° C.).
D. Any waste which exceeds the naturally occurring background levels for
either alpha, beta or gamma radiation and/or any wastewater
containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration not in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
E. Any solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operations of
ALCOSAN's facility or facilities discharging into the ALCOSAN system.
F. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly
or by interaction with other wastes may create a public nuisance or
adversely affect public health or safety.
G. Pathological wastes from a hospital or other medical establishment.
H. Garbage, whether ground or not, except properly shredded food waste
garbage resulting from the proper use of a garbage grinder or disposer
type approved by ALCOSAN and maintained in good operating
condition.
I. Sludges or other materials from septic tanks or similar facilities or from
sewage or industrial waste treatment plants or from water treatment
plants, unless the discharge of such sludges and other materials is
specifically approved by ALCOSAN.
J. Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants, released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference with the ALCOSAN facilities.
K. Any substance which will cause ALCOSAN's effluent or any other
product of the ALCOSAN facilities, such as residues, sludges or scums,
to be unsuitable for reclamation processes, including any substance
which will cause the ALCOSAN facility to be in noncompliance with
sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed
under Section 405 of the Act or any criteria, guidelines or regulations
promulgated pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state laws or regulations
applicable to the treatment or disposal of such effluent or such product.
A. No person shall take any action or do or cause to be done anything in
violation of any rule or regulation of ALCOSAN.
B. The pretreatment regulations of the Allegheny County Sanitary
Authority are incorporated into this article by reference as though fully
set forth herein.
§ 316-73 § 316-75
316:640
§ 316-75. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $1,000 for each offense,
recoverable with costs, and, in default of payment of the fine and costs,
shall be subject to imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Each day a violation is continued shall constitute
a separate offense. In addition, any person violating any provision of the
ALCOSAN pretreatment regulations may be subject to administrative and
civil penalties as provided for by the pretreatment regulations and
administered by ALCOSAN. Such penalties may include but are not limited
to injunctive relief and penalties of up to $25,000 per day, per violation,
as provided for by the Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law, 35
P.S. § 752.1 et seq. Authority to so enforce the pretreatment regulations is
granted to ALCOSAN and is in addition to but not in place of any other
remedy available to the Municipality.
§ 316-76. (Reserved)
§ 316-77. (Reserved)
§ 316-75 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-77
316:641

ARTICLE V
Collection of Sewer Rents; Delinquent Accounts
[Adopted 10-13-1987 by Ord. No. 1590]
§ 316-78. Authority authorized to collect rents.
The Municipality does hereby authorize and empower the Monroeville
Water Authority193 (hereinafter referred to as the "Authority") to act for and
on behalf of the Municipality for the purpose of collecting all sewage rents
authorized by the Municipality.
§ 316-79. Payment to Authority.
The Municipality does hereby authorize and empower the Authority to
receive from the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority fees paid by the
Allegheny County Sanitary Authority to the Authority for the preparation
and mailing of all sewage bills. The Municipality shall not be responsible for
any other payment to the Authority for the Authority's billing and collection
of sewage charges to all recipients of said service.
§ 316-80. Billings; payments to Municipality.
The Authority shall prepare regular billings for sewage charges which, at
the sole discretion of the Authority, may be incorporated by the Authority
in its regular water billing procedures and practices. The Authority shall
pay to the Municipality sewage moneys received by it for the payment of
sewage charges and provide to the Municipality an accurate and complete
statement of all billings and collections for sewage charges.
§ 316-81. Sewer payment required.
No person shall fail to pay any sewage fee imposed by or for which the
Municipality is responsible.
§ 316-82. Late payment of sewer charges.
For the failure to pay any sewage fee imposed by the Municipality, the
recipient of this service who fails to pay a sewage bill within 15 days after
said bill shall become due shall pay a penalty equal to 0.83% of the total bill,
which shall include both water and sewage charges.
§ 316-83. Delinquent accounts.
All accounts which are more than 30 days delinquent in payment of the
sewage fee may be subject to a termination of water service. An account
shall be delinquent when no payment of the bill has been made within
30 days of the date due on the billing. To effectuate said termination,
the Authority is hereby authorized and required to terminate water supply
193. Editor's Note: This Authority's name was revised 5-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2223 to be the
"Monroeville Municipal Authority."
§ 316-78 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-83
316:643
to such premises until all such overdue sanitary sewer service charges,
together with penalty, are paid. Termination can be requested prior to the
filing of a claim or lien by the Municipality for nonpayment for sanitary
sewer service. Any termination shall be done by the Authority and shall
comply with the provisions of the Act of November 26, 1978, P.L. 1255, 68
P.S. § 399.1 et seq. The Authority, for the forgoing, is further set forth and
granted in accordance with the Act of July 20, 1974, P.L. 561, 53 P.S. § 2261.
§ 316-84. Water-sewer service termination.
A. Following the expiration of 15 days from the date of the original billing,
the Authority shall add the late payment charged to the customer's
account. The amount of the late payment shall be reflected on the next
billing, but in no event more than 35 days from the original bill due
date. Said statement shall reflect the past due balance and, further,
reflect that if payment is not made immediately additional penalty
charges shall occur.
B. All notices shall be by United States Mail, first class, postage prepaid.
C. Notice of termination shall be given in the following way:
(1) By United States Mail, first class, postage prepaid;
(2) By personal service to the recipient; or
(3) By posting the premises with the notice if personal service cannot
be affected.
D. Notice of termination shall include:
(1) The date of termination, which shall be at least 10 days from the
date of the notice of termination.
(2) Notice that, unless the Authority receives complete payment of the
amount shown on the notice prior to the date of termination, water
service shall be terminated.
(3) Notice that, in lieu of paying the entire amount shown, a recipient
of the service, prior to the date of termination, may notify the
Authority that the recipient disputes the correctness of part or all
of the amount shown, if all or part of the amount shown was not the
subject of a previous dispute.
(4) Notice that the recipient's notice is to be communicated to the
manager of the Authority or such other person employed by the
Authority authorized to receive payment of fees.
E. If, prior to the date of termination, the Authority has not received
complete payment of the amount shown on the notice of termination.
The recipient whose account is delinquent has not requested the
establishment of a deferred payment plan, or the recipient whose
account is delinquent has not notified the Authority that the recipient
§ 316-83 § 316-84
316:644
§ 316-85. Requests for hearing.
§ 316-86. Claims and liens.
Nothing contained in this article shall preclude the Authority from filing a
claim or lien for unpaid sewer service charges.
§ 316-87. Authorized charges.
The Authority is authorized to charge for the termination and reinstatement
of water service in accordance with the Authority's prevailing rates for such
function. The delinquent recipient of service shall be responsible for said
charges. The Authority shall charge back the sewage account referred to in
§ 316-83 the sum of $18,000 per year as a flat fee for performing the billing
service. Said fee will be deducted from the sewage revenues collected by
the Authority at a rate of $1,500 per month or 1/12 of the total fee. Said
charge shall be increased upon review by the Authority of its out-of-pocket
costs for performing the billing service.
§ 316-88. Indemnification.
The Authority shall indemnify and hold harmless the Municipality against
any damage, claim or loss whatsoever arising from any shutoff occurring
disputes the correctness of all or part of the amount shown on the
notice of termination, then the Authority shall cause to be terminated
the water service provided the recipient whose account is delinquent
on the date of termination.
A. Any recipient who disputes any penalty or order to terminate service
may request a hearing to challenge the propriety of such penalty or
termination. All requests for hearing shall be made to the Manager
within 15 days of notice of the penalty or notice of termination of
service. Upon request for hearing, all proceedings will stay.
B. The hearing will be conducted by the Manager or his designated agent.
The Manager or his agent will hold a hearing. The Manager or
designated agent will, within 24 hours, notify the person whose account
is delinquent of his decision.
C. The Manager, in deciding to waive the penalty or cause water supply to
be terminated, shall consider the following:
(1) The payment history of the recipient relative to delinquent sanitary
sewage accounts;
(2) Prior notices of delinquency;
(3) Promptness of the recipient in response to the notice of
delinquency; and
(4) Other criteria bearing on the general welfare of the Municipality.
§ 316-84 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-88
316:645
as a result of a violation of this article or any other law, rule, regulation
or procedure, and the Authority shall provide the Municipality with an
attorney for its defense of any action filed against the Municipality as well
as pay for any money verdicts or settlements, including costs which may
be assessed, levied, ordered or imposed upon the Municipality by reason
of termination of water services as a result of any violation as set forth
above. In the event, however, that the Authority acts in accordance with
this article and other applicable laws, rules, regulations and procedures, the
Municipality shall indemnify and hold harmless the Authority for any such
loss, damage or claim resulting from water service being shut off by the
Authority.
§ 316-88 § 316-88
316:646
ARTICLE VI
Sewer Status Certificates
[Adopted 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2248194]
§ 316-89. Certification required prior to sale of real estate.
After the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to
sell real estate within the Municipal of Monroeville on which a building or
improvement exists, without first delivering unto the purchaser a document
of certification or temporary document of certification from the proper
officers of the Monroeville Municipal Authority.
§ 316-90. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOCUMENT OF CERTIFICATION — An official statement from the proper
officer of the Monroeville Municipal Authority stating that there are no
known illegal storm- or surface water connections into the sanitary sewer
on the specific property which is being sold.
ILLEGAL STORM- OR SURFACE WATER CONNECTIONS — Includes but is
not limited to the discharge of ground- or surface water or the connection
of downspouts, roof drainage, surface areaway drainage, or foundation or
basement drainage into the sanitary sewer system.
MUNICIPAL LIEN AND PROPERTY TAX VERIFICATION LETTER — A
written letter from the proper official of the Municipality of Monroeville or
Monroeville Municipal Authority concerning municipal liens and property
taxes.
PERSON — Any person, syndicate, associate, partnership, firm, corporation,
institution, agency, Authority, or other entity recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties.
TEMPORARY DOCUMENT OF CERTIFICATION — A temporary statement
of certification from the proper officer of the Monroeville Municipal
Authority, issued pursuant to the terms of § 316-92 of this article.
§ 316-91. Document of certification application.
A. Any person selling real estate located within the Municipality of
Monroeville (hereinafter "applicant") shall make application on a form
furnished by the Monroeville Municipal Authority at least 30 days
before the date of sale. The Authority shall perform, at is deems
necessary, the following tests:
(1) Dye-testing at each downspout and area drain.
194. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. VI, Evidence of Compliance With
Sewer Connection Regulations, adopted 6-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1947.
§ 316-89 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-91
316:647
§ 316-92. Temporary document of certification.
A temporary document of certification may be issued at the Authority's sole
discretion when either:
(2) Dye-testing foundation drains by flooding or injection.
(3) Smoke-testing public sewer and sewer lateral to the house trap.
(4) Smoke-testing building drain on house side of trap.
(5) Air-testing lateral.
(6) Hydrostatic testing lateral.
(7) Televising of main sewer and/or lateral sewer during periods of
saturated ground and/or precipitation.
(8) All testing shall be on a pass-fail basis with the Authority having the
right to reject any tests or test results which it feels are
inconclusive or inaccurate.
B. In the event that there are no illegal storm- or surface water
connections and the existing drainage system is sound, the Monroeville
Municipal Authority Inspector or his designate shall issue a document
of certification upon the payment of any established fee. When an illegal
storm or surface water connection or malfunctioning drainage system is
discovered by the means of the above-mentioned testing, no document
of certification will be issued until the illegal connections/
malfunctioning drainage system are removed/repaired, the system
retested and certification of such removal/repair by a registered,
licensed plumber is received.
A. The applicant proves that such testing cannot be performed because of
weather conditions, and when such is the case, the applicant shall
provide the Authority with security in the amount of $3,000 to
guarantee that the appropriate test will be performed. The Authority
will cause to have performed the appropriate test within the 14 days of
subsequent written notification to the applicant, which will be given at
such time as weather conditions make such testing possible. In
addition, the applicant shall provide a signed written acknowledgment
from the purchaser of the real estate, agreeing to correct, at the said
purchaser's sole expense, any violations/defects that may be discovered
as the result of subsequent tests. Nothing in this subsection shall
prohibit any purchaser from requiring the applicant to reimburse the
purchaser for any costs incurred; provided, nevertheless, that primary
liability shall run with the land and no such agreement shall affect the
Municipality or Authority's enforcement powers or excuse the current
owner from performance.
B. When an illegal storm- or surface water connection or malfunctioning
drainage system has been discovered and the necessary remedial
§ 316-91 § 316-92
316:648
§ 316-93. Rules and regulations.
§ 316-94. Scope and applicability.
Nothing in this article shall limit, in any fashion whatsoever, the
Municipality's right or the Authority's right to enforce any ordinance,
resolution or law of the Municipality of Monroeville, County of Allegheny
or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the intent being that this article shall
supplement already existing resolutions and ordinances dealing with the
enforcement of sanitary sewer status within the Municipality of
Monroeville. Nothing in this article shall be a defense of any citation issued
activities to correct such connection would require a length of time
such as to create a practical hardship for the applicant, the applicant
may apply to the Authority Manager for a temporary document of
certification which may only be issued when the applicant provides the
Authority with all of the following:
(1) A bona fide executed contract between the applicant and a
registered, licensed plumber to complete the necessary remedial
work with the Authority listed therein as a third party beneficiary;
(2) Cash security in the amount of said contract as posted with the
Authority; and
(3) An agreement by the purchaser to be responsible for all cost
overruns related to the remedial work, together with a license to
the Authority to enter upon the property to complete work in case
of default by the contractor. The Authority Manager shall
determine when such temporary document of certification shall
expire, at which time the security shall be forfeited, and the
Authority may use the security to have the necessary remedial
work completed.
A. The Authority Manager is hereby authorized, empowered and directed
to make reasonable rules and regulations for the operation and
enforcement of this article as he deems necessary, which shall include,
but not be limited to:
(1) Establishing acceptable forms of security or guarantees;
(2) Acceptable testing methods;
(3) Establishing the forms of applications, purchaser
acknowledgments and plumber certifications;
(4) Limiting the times of year in which temporary documents of
certification are available for reasons of weather.
B. All rules and regulations issued pursuant to this section shall be in
writing and be approved by the Monroeville Municipal Authority Board
prior to such rules and regulations being effective.
§ 316-92 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 316-94
316:649
by any municipal corporation or the commonwealth pursuant to any other
law or ordinance.
§ 316-95. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall fail; neglect or refuse to, comply with any of the terms
or provisions of this article, or of any regulation or requirement pursuant
thereto and authorized thereby, shall, upon conviction before any District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of $1,000 and costs of prosecution, and
in default of payment thereof, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days.
§ 316-96. Effective date.
The effective date of this article shall be the first day of June 2003.
§ 316-94 § 316-96
316:650
Chapter 319
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Department and Planning
Commission — See Ch. 101.
Building construction — See Ch. 162.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 214.
Grading and sediment control — See Ch. 225.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 324.
Zoning — See Ch. 359.
§ 316-96 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 316-96
319:651

ARTICLE I
Stormwater Peak Flow Rate Management195
[Adopted 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 1788]
§ 319-1. General provisions.
A. Purpose. These regulations are adopted and implemented to achieve
the following general purposes and objectives:
(1) To manage and control stormwater runoff resulting from land
alteration and disturbance activities in accordance with the
watershed stormwater management plans adopted pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Act, Act 167 of 1978, as
amended.196
(2) To utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage
systems and to preserve the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
(3) To encourage natural infiltration of rainfall to preserve
groundwater supplies and stream flows.
(4) To provide for adequate maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management structures in the Municipality.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply to all subdivisions
and land development activity within the Municipality of Monroeville.
C. Repealer. This article shall repeal all other ordinances, or parts thereof,
which are contrary to or conflict with the provisions of this article to the
extent necessary to give this article full force and effect.
D. Severability. Should any section or provision of this article be declared
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of this article as a whole or any other part hereof; the
parts or sections remaining shall remain in effect as if the part of the
section declared unconstitutional had never been a part of this article.
E. Liability disclaimer.
(1) Neither the granting of any approval under the stormwater
management provision of this article, nor the compliance with the
provision of this article, or with any condition imposed by a
municipal official hereunder, shall relieve any person from any
responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting
therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability
upon the Municipality for damages to persons or property.
195. Editor's Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 2331, adopted 4-12-2005, provided as follows: "This
ordinance shall be entitled and known as 'Storm Water Peak Flow Rate Management
Ordinance.' The requirements of this Ordinance shall be read in conjunction with the
stormwater quality requirements set forth in Ordinance No. 2332." (See Art. II hereof.)
Specific amendments by Ord. No. 2332 are indicated in the text of this Art. I.
196. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 319-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-1
319:653
§ 319-2. Stormwater management performance standards.
(2) The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater
management facilities shall not constitute a representation,
guaranty or warranty of any kind by the Municipality, or by an
official or employee thereof, of the practicability or safety of any
structure, use or other plan proposed, and shall create no liability
upon or cause of action against such public body, official or
employee for any damage that may result pursuant thereto.
A. Stormwater management performance districts.
(1) Districts created; subdivision of districts.
(a) For purposes of stormwater management, the Municipality of
Monroeville is divided into the following stormwater
management district: Turtle Creek Watershed.
(b) one or more of these districts may be further subdivided into
subareas which have similar hydrological characteristics and
drain to a common point.
(2) The location and boundaries of the watershed and subareas are
shown on the "Municipal Stormwater Management District Map"
which is hereby adopted as a part of this section.197
B. General standards.
(1) The following provisions shall be considered the overriding
performance standards against which all proposed stormwater
control measures shall be evaluated and shall apply throughout the
Municipality of Monroeville:
(a) Any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration or
development of land which may affect stormwater runoff
characteristics shall implement such measures as are
reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or
other property. Such measures shall include such actions as
are required:
[1] To assure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is
not greater after development than prior to development
activities; or
[2] To manage the quantity, velocity and direction of resulting
stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise
adequately protects health and property from possible
injury.
(2) The stormwater management plan for the development site must
consider all the stormwater runoff flowing over the site.
197. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Municipal Manager's office.
§ 319-1 § 319-2
319:654
(3) No discharge of toxic materials shall be permitted into any
stormwater management system.
C. Watershed standards: Turtle Creek Stormwater Management District.
(1) The stormwater performance standards contained in this section
are intended to implement the standards and criteria contained in
the Turtle Creek Stormwater Management Plan, adopted and
approved in accordance with the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Management Act.198 If there is any discrepancy between the
provisions of this section and the standards and criteria of the plan,
or if the watershed plan is subsequently amended, then the
standards/criteria of the current watershed plan shall govern.
(2) Storm frequencies. Stormwater management facilities on all
development sites shall control the peak stormwater discharge for
the two-, ten-, twenty-five- and one-hundred-year storm
frequencies. The SCS twenty-four-hour, Type II rainfall distribution
shall be used for analyzing stormwater runoff for both pre- and
post-development conditions. The twenty-four-hour total rainfall
for these storm frequencies in the watershed are:
Storm Frequency
(years)
Rainfall Depth
(inches)
2 2.50
10 3.61
25 4.31
100 5.71
(3) Calculation methods.
(a) Development sites. For the purpose of computing peak flow
rates and runoff hydrographs from development sites,
calculations shall be performed using one of the following: SCS
publication, Technical Release (TR) 55 or 20, HEC I, or Penn
State Runoff Model.
(b) Stormwater collection/conveyance facilities. For the purposes
of designing storm sewers, open swales and other stormwater
runoff collection and conveyance facilities, any of the abovelisted
calculation methods or the Rational Method may be
used. Rainfall intensities for design should be obtained from
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation rainfall charts.
(c) Predevelopment conditions. Predevelopment conditions shall
be assumed to be those which exist on any site at the time of
adoption of the Turtle Creek Stormwater Management Plan.
Hydrologic conditions for all areas with pervious cover (i.e.,
198. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 319-2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-2
319:655
fields, woods, lawn areas, pastures, cropland, etc.) shall be
assumed to be in "good" condition, and the lowest
recommended SCS runoff curve number (CN) shall be applied
for all pervious land uses with the respective range for each
land use and hydrologic soil group.
(4) Release rate percentage.
(a) Definition. The release rate percentage defines the percentage
of the predevelopment peak rate of runoff that can be
discharged from an outfall on the site after development. It
applies uniformly to all land development or alterations within
a subarea. A listing of the release rate percentage by subarea
appears in Appendix A of this article;199 the subareas are
delineated on the Municipal Stormwater Management District
Map.200
(b) Procedure for use.
[1] Identify the specific subarea in which the development site
is located from the watershed map and obtain the subarea
release rate percentage from Appendix A.201
[2] Compute the pre- and post-development runoff
hydrographs for each stormwater outfall on the
development site using an acceptable calculation method
for two-, ten-, twenty-five-, and one-hundred-year storms.
Apply no on-site detention for stormwater management
but include any techniques to minimize impervious
surfaces and/or increase the time of concentration for
stormwater runoff flowing from the development site. If
the postdevelopment peak runoff rate and the runoff
volume are less than or equal to the predevelopment peak
runoff rate and volume, then additional stormwater control
shall not be required at the outfall. If the postdevelopment
peak runoff rate and volume are greater than the
predevelopment peak runoff rate and volume, then
stormwater detention will be required and the capacity of
the detention facility must be calculated in the manner
prescribed below. The disturbed area used to generate the
predevelopment and postdevelopment runoff hydrographs
must be clearly shown on the plot plan. In all cases, the
sum of the predevelopment areas runoff release rate
applies to the entire disturbed area. "Disturbed area"
consists of any area which changes because of grading,
transportation, fill, construction and any other activity
199. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the office of the Municipal Manager.
200. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the office of the Municipal Manager.
201. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the office of the Municipal Manager.
§ 319-2 § 319-2
319:656
§ 319-3. Design criteria for stormwater management controls.
which causes land to be exposed to the danger of erosion.
[Amended 4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2331]
[3] Multiply the subarea release rate percentage by the
predevelopment rate of runoff from the development site
to determine the maximum allowable release rate from
any detention facility for the four prescribed storm events.
[4] Design the outlet control facilities and size the volume of
the detention facility using the calculated
postdevelopment hydrograph and accepted hydrograph
routing procedures in consideration of the maximum
allowable release rate. All detention structures shall have
a 10% sediment storage volume allowance applied to the
maximum required storage calculated from the routed
storm events. [Amended 4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2331]
[5] The use of any gravel-filled detention structure is
prohibited because future inspection and maintenance of
this type of facility is not practical. This is not intended to
discourage the use of gravel infiltration facilities intended
to reduce the volume of stormwater runoff. [Added
4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2331]
(5) No-harm evaluation.
(a) An applicant may seek to exceed the otherwise applicable
subarea release rate percentage by performing the no-harm
evaluation. This evaluation requires an independent
engineering analysis to demonstrate that other reasonable
options exist to prevent the occurrence of increased
stormwater runoff discharge rates and/or velocities or that
measures can be provided to prevent increased stormwater
discharge rates and/or velocities from increasing flood
elevations and accelerating erosion at all downstream points in
the watershed.
(b) A no-harm evaluation will be considered only in instances
where the discharge to a stream channel from the development
occurs through a properly sized and designed regional
stormwater detention facility.
(c) The analysis for the no-harm evaluation shall be submitted to
the Municipal Engineer and Allegheny Planning Department
for review and approval.
A. General criteria.
(1) Applicants may select runoff control techniques, or a combination
of techniques, which are most suitable to control stormwater runoff
§ 319-2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-3
319:657
from the development site. All controls must be subject to approval
of the Municipal Engineer. The Municipal Engineer may request
specific information on design and/or operating features of the
proposed stormwater controls in order to determine their
suitability and adequacy in terms of the standards of this article.
(2) The applicant should consider the effect of the proposed
stormwater management techniques on any special soil conditions
or geological hazards which may exist on the development site. In
the event that such conditions are identified on the site, the
Municipal Engineer may require in-depth studies by a competent
geotechnical engineer. Not all stormwater control methods may be
advisable or allowable at a particular development site.
(3) The stormwater management practices to be used in developing a
stormwater management plan for a particular site shall be selected
according to the following order of preference:
(a) Infiltration of runoff on-site.
(b) Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales and natural
depression.
(c) Stormwater detention/retention structures.
(4) Infiltration practices shall be used to the extent practicable to
reduce volume increases and promote groundwater recharge. A
combination of successive practices may be used to achieve the
applicable minimum control requirements. Justification shall be
provided by the applicant for rejecting each of the preferred
practices based on actual site conditions.
B. Criteria for infiltration systems.
(1) Infiltration systems shall be sized and designed based upon local
soil and groundwater conditions.
(2) Infiltration systems shall be greater than three feet deep and shall
be located at least 10 feet from basement walls.
(3) Infiltration systems shall not be used to handle runoff from
commercial or industrial working or parking areas.
(4) Infiltration systems may not receive runoff until the entire drainage
area to the system has received final stabilization.
(5) The stormwater infiltration facility design shall provide an overflow
system with measures to provide a nonerosive velocity of flow
along its length and at the outfall.
C. Criteria for stormwater detention facilities.
(1) If detention facilities are utilized for the development site, the
facilities shall be designed such that postdevelopment peak runoff
§ 319-3 § 319-3
319:658
rates from the developed site are controlled to those rates defined
by the subarea release rate percentage for the two-, ten-, twentyfive-,
and one-hundred-year storm frequencies.
(2) All detention facilities shall be equipped with outlet structures to
provide discharge control for the four designated storm
frequencies. Provisions shall also be made to safely pass, at
minimum, the postdevelopment one-hundred-year storm runoff
without breaching or otherwise damaging (i.e., impairing the
continued function of) the facilities.
(3) Shared-storage facilities, which provide detention of runoff for
more than one development site within a single subarea may be
considered and are encouraged. Such facilities shall meet the
criteria contained in this section. In addition, runoff from the
development sites involved shall be conveyed to the facility in a
manner that avoids adverse impacts (such as flooding or erosion) to
channels and properties located between the development site and
the shared-storage facilities.
(4) Where detention facilities will be utilized, multiple use facilities,
such as wetlands, lakes, ball fields or similar recreational/open
space uses are encouraged wherever feasible, subject to the
approval of the Municipality.
(5) Other considerations which should be incorporated into the design
of the detention facilities include:
(a) Inflow and outflow structures shall be designed and installed to
prevent erosion, and bottoms of impoundment type structures
should be protected from soil erosion.
(b) Control and removal of debris both in the storage structure and
in all inlet or outlet devices shall be a design consideration.
(c) Inflow and outflow structures, pumping stations and other
structures shall be designed and protected to minimize safety
hazards.
(d) The water depth at the perimeter of a storage pond should be
limited to that which is safe for children. This is especially
necessary if bank slopes are steep or if ponds are full and
recirculating in dry periods. Restriction of access (fence, wall,
etc.) may be necessary depending on the location of the facility.
(e) Side slope of storage ponds shall not exceed a ratio of two-andone-
half to one (2.5:1) horizontal to vertical dimension.
(f) Landscaping shall be provided for the facility which
harmonizes with the surrounding area.
§ 319-3 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-3
319:659
(g) Detention facilities shall be located to facilitate maintenance
and consider the frequency and type of equipment that will be
required.
(h) A staff gauge shall be permanently installed at all outlet
structures in order to facilitate inspection and maintenance.
The staff gauge shall be constructed of weather-resistant
materials and shall be calibrated in one-tenth-foot increments.
Zero elevation of the gauge shall be set at the invert elevation
of the outlet control device. [Added 4-12-2005 by Ord. No.
2331]
D. Criteria for collection/conveyance facilities.
(1) All stormwater runoff collection or conveyance facilities, whether
storm sewers or other open or closed channel, shall be designed in
accordance with the following basic standards:
(a) All sites shall be graded to provide drainage away from and
around the structure in order to prevent any potential flooding
damage.
(b) Lots located on the high side of streets shall extend roof and
French drains to the curbline storm sewer (if applicable). Low
side lots shall extend roof and French drains to a stormwater
collection/conveyance/control system or natural watercourse
in accordance with the approved stormwater management
plan for the development site.
(c) Collection/conveyance facilities should not be installed parallel
and close to the top or bottom of a major embankment to avoid
the possibility of failing or causing the embankment to fail.
(d) All collection/conveyance facilities shall be designed to convey
the twenty-five-year storm peak flow rate from the contributing
drainage area and to carry it to the nearest suitable outlet such
as a stormwater control facility, curbed street, storm sewer or
natural watercourse.
(e) Where drainage swales or open channels are used, they shall
be suitably lined to prevent erosion and designed to avoid
excessive velocities.
(2) Wherever storm sewers are proposed to be utilized, they shall
comply with the following criteria:
(a) Where practical, designed to traverse under seeded and
planted areas. If constructed within 10 feet of road paving,
walks or other surfaced areas, drains shall have a narrow
trench and maximum compaction of backfill to prevent
settlement of the superimposed surface or development.
§ 319-3 § 319-3
319:660
§ 319-4. Erosion and sedimentation controls.
(b) Preferably installed after excavating and filling in the area to
be traversed is completed, unless the drain is installed in the
original ground with a minimum of three feet cover and/or
adequate protection during the fill construction.
(c) Designed with cradle when traversing fill areas of
indeterminate stability, with anchors when gradient exceeds
20%, and with encasement or special backfill requirements
when traversing under a paved area.
(d) Designed to adequately handle the anticipated stormwater
flow and be economical to construct and maintain. The
minimum pipe size shall be 15 inches in diameter.
(e) Drain pipe, trenching, bedding and backfilling requirements
shall conform to the requirements of the Municipality and/or
applicable PennDOT Specifications, Form 408.
(f) All corrugated metal pipe shall be polymer coated, and with
asbestos bonding and paved inverts where prone to erode. Pipe
within a municipal right-of-way shall be reinforced concrete
pipe with a minimum diameter of 15 inches.
(g) Storm inlets and structures shall be designed to be adequate,
safe, self-cleaning and unobtrusive and consistent with
municipal standards.
(h) Appropriate grates shall be designed for all catch basins,
stormwater inlets and other entrance appurtenances.
(i) Manholes shall be designed so that the top shall be at finished
grade and sloped to conform to the slope of the finished grade.
Top castings of structures located in roads or parking areas
shall be machined or installed to preclude "rattling."
(j) Where a proposed sewer connects with an existing storm
sewer system, the applicant shall demonstrate that sufficient
capacity exists in the downstream system to handle the
additional flow.
(k) Storm sewer outfalls shall be equipped with energy dissipation
devices to prevent erosion and conform with applicable
requirements of the Pennsylvania DEP for stream
encroachments (Chapter 105 of Pennsylvania DEP Rules and
Regulations). [Amended 4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2331]
A. An erosion/sedimentation plan shall be provided in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Erosion/Sedimentation Regulations (25 PA Code, Chapter
102) and the standards and guidelines of the County Conservation
District.
§ 319-3 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-4
319:661
§ 319-5. Maintenance of stormwater management controls.
B. Proposed erosion/sedimentation measures shall be submitted with the
stormwater management plan as part of the preliminary and final
applications.
C. Erosion/sedimentation measures shall be constructed in accordance
with Chapter 225, Grading and sediment control.
A. Maintenance responsibilities.
(1) The stormwater management plan for the development site shall
contain an operation and maintenance plan prepared by the
developer and approved by the Municipal Engineer. The operation
and maintenance plan shall outline required routine maintenance
actions and schedules necessary to ensure proper operation of the
facility(ies).
(2) The stormwater management plan for the development site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and
maintenance of all proposed stormwater control facilities,
consistent with the following principles:
(a) If a development consists of structures or lots which are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers and other
public improvements are to be dedicated to the Municipality,
stormwater control facilities should also be dedicated to and
maintained by the Municipality.
(b) If a development site is to be maintained in single ownership or
if sewers and other public improvements are to be privately
owned and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance
of stormwater control facilities should be the responsibility of
the owner or private management entity.
(3) The governing body, upon recommendation of the Municipal
Engineer, shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the
stormwater management plan. The governing body reserves the
right to accept the ownership and operating responsibility for any
or all of the stormwater management controls.
(4) The operation and maintenance plan for the development sites
shall be filed, in the form that meets the requirements for
recording, at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny
County. [Added 4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2331]
B. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater facilities.
(1) Prior to final approval of the site's stormwater management plan,
the property owner shall sign and record a maintenance agreement
§ 319-4 § 319-5
319:662
covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be privately
owned. The agreement shall stipulate that:
(a) The owner shall maintain all facilities in accordance with the
approved maintenance schedule and shall keep all facilities in
a safe and attractive manner.
(b) The owner shall convey to the Municipality easements and/or
rights-of-way to assure access for periodic inspections by the
Municipality and maintenance, if required.
(c) The owner shall keep on file with the Municipality the name,
address and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for maintenance activities; in the event of a
change, new information will be submitted to the Municipality
within 10 days of the change.
(d) If the owner fails to maintain the stormwater control facilities
following due notice by the Municipality to correct the
problem(s), the Municipality may perform the necessary
maintenance work or corrective work, and the owner shall
reimburse the Municipality for all costs.
(2) Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all
facilities. The maintenance agreement shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Municipal Solicitor and governing body.
C. Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund.
(1) Persons installing stormwater storage facilities shall be required to
pay a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater Maintenance
Fund to help defray costs of periodic inspections and maintenance
expenses. The amount of the deposit shall be determined as
follows:
(a) If the storage facility is to be privately owned and maintained,
the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspection
performed by the Municipality for a period of 10 years, as
estimated by the Municipal Engineer. After that period of time,
inspections will be performed at the expense of the
Municipality.
(b) If the storage facility is to be owned and maintained by the
Municipality, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for
maintenance and inspections for 10 years. The Municipal
Engineer will establish the estimated costs utilizing
information submitted by the applicant.
(c) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to
present worth of the annual series values. The Municipal
§ 319-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-5
319:663
§ 319-6. Stormwater plan requirements.
Engineer shall determine the present worth equivalents which
shall be subject to the approval of the governing body.
(2) If a storage facility is proposed that also serves as a recreation
facility (e.g., ball field, lake), the Municipality may reduce or waive
the amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the value
of the land for public recreation purposes.
(3) If at some future time a storage facility (whether publicly or
privately owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm
sewers or other storage facility, the unused portion of the
maintenance fund deposit will be applied to the cost of abandoning
the facility and connecting to the storm sewer system or other
facility. Any amount of the deposit remaining after the costs of
abandonment are paid will be returned to the depositor.
A. General requirements.
(1) No final subdivision/land development plan shall be approved, no
permit authorizing construction issued, or an earthmoving or land
disturbance activity initiated until the final stormwater
management plan for the development site is approved in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Exemptions for small developments.
(1) At the time of application, the Municipality shall determine if the
subdivision/land development qualifies as a small development and,
therefore, is eligible for a simplified stormwater plan submission.
For the purpose of this article, a small development is any
subdivision or land development which results (or will result when
fully constructed) in the creation of 5,000 square feet or less of
impervious area and one acre or less of any land cover changes.
(2) Application for small developments shall include a plan which
describes the type and location of proposed on-site stormwater
management techniques or the proposed connection to an existing
storm sewer system. The plan should show accurately site
boundaries, two-foot interval contours, locations of watershed and/
or subarea boundaries on the site (if applicable) and any
watercourses, floodplain or existing drainage facilities or
structures located on the site. Contingent upon the approval of the
Municipal Engineer, alternative runoff computational techniques
such as the Rational Method may be used where applicable. The
Municipality reserves the right to require that the plan be prepared
by a registered professional engineer, surveyor or landscape
architect.
§ 319-5 § 319-6
319:664
(3) The Municipal Engineer shall review and approve the proposed
provisions for stormwater management in accordance with the
standards and requirements of this article.
C. Stormwater plan contents.
(1) General format. The stormwater plan shall be drawn to a scale of
not less than one inch equals 200 feet. All sheets shall contain a
title block with: the name and address of applicant and engineer,
scale, north arrow, legend and date of preparation.
(2) Existing and proposed features. The plan shall show the following:
(a) Watershed location: provide a key map showing the location of
the development site within the watershed and watershed
subarea(s); on all site drawings, show the boundaries of the
watershed and subarea(s) as they are located on the
development site and identify watershed name(s) and subarea
number(s).
(b) Floodplain boundaries: identify the one-hundred-year
floodplain on the development site (as appropriate) based on
the municipal Flood Insurance Study maps.
(c) Natural features: show all bodies of water (natural or
artificial), watercourses (permanent and intermittent), swales,
wetlands and other natural drainagecourses on the
development site, or which will be affected by runoff from the
development.
(d) Soils: provide an overlay showing soil types and boundaries
within the development site (consult county, SCS, and U.S.
Geological Survey for information).
(e) Contours: show existing and final contours at intervals of two
feet; in areas with slopes greater than 15%, five-foot contour
intervals may be used.
(f) Land cover: show existing and final land cover classifications
as necessary to support and illustrate the runoff calculations
performed.
(g) Drainage area delineations: show the boundaries of the
drainage areas employed in the runoff calculations performed.
(h) Stormwater management controls: show any existing
stormwater management or drainage controls and/or
structures, such as sanitary and storm sewers, swales,
culverts, etc., which are located off-site but will be affected by
runoff from the development.
(3) Professional certification. The stormwater management plan
(including all calculations) must be prepared and sealed by a
§ 319-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-6
319:665
registered professional engineer, surveyor or landscape architect
with training and expertise in hydrology and hydraulics.
Documentation of qualifications may be required by the
Municipality.
(4) Runoff calculations. Calculations for determining pre- and
postdevelopment discharge rates and for designing proposed
stormwater control facilities must be submitted with the
stormwater management plan. All calculations shall be prepared
using the methods and data prescribed by § 319-2 of this article.
(5) Stormwater controls. All proposed stormwater runoff control
measures must be shown on the plan, including methods for
collecting, conveying and storing stormwater runoff on-site which
are to be used both during and after construction. Erosion and
sedimentation controls shall be shown in accordance with
applicable municipal and County Conservation District
requirements. The plan shall provide information on the exact type,
location, sizing, design and construction of all proposed facilities
and relationship to the existing watershed drainage system.
(a) If the development is to be constructed in stages, the applicant
must demonstrate that stormwater facilities will be installed to
manage stormwater runoff safely during each stage of
development.
(b) A schedule for the installation of all temporary and permanent
stormwater control measures and devices shall be submitted.
(c) If appropriate, a justification should be submitted as to why
any preferred stormwater management techniques, as listed in
§ 319-3, are not proposed for use.
(6) Easements, rights-of-way, deed restrictions. All existing and
proposed easements and rights-of-way for drainage and/or access
to stormwater control facilities shall be shown and the proposed
owner identified. Show any areas subject to special deed
restrictions relative to or affecting stormwater management on the
development site.
(7) Other permits/approvals. A list of any permits/approvals relative to
stormwater management that will be required from other
governmental agencies (e.g., an obstructions permit from
Pennsylvania DEP) and anticipated dates of submission/receipt
should be included with the stormwater plan submission. Copies of
permit applications may be requested by the Municipality where
they may be helpful for the plan review. [Amended 4-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 2331]
(8) Maintenance program. The application shall contain a proposed
maintenance plan for all stormwater control facilities in
accordance with the following:
§ 319-6 § 319-6
319:666
§ 319-7. Plan review procedure.
(a) Identify the proposed ownership entity (e.g., Municipality,
property owner, private corporation, homeowner's association
or other entity).
(b) Include a maintenance program for all facilities, outlining the
type of maintenance activities, probable frequencies,
personnel and equipment requirements and estimated annual
maintenance costs.
(c) Identify the method of financing continuing operation and
maintenance if the facility is to be owned by other than the
Municipality or governmental agency.
(d) Submit any legal agreements required to implement the
maintenance program and copies of the maintenance
agreement as required by this article.
(9) Financial guaranties. Submit financial guaranties in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
A. Preapplication phase.
(1) Before submitting the stormwater plan, applicants are urged to
consult with the Municipality, County Planning Department and
County Conservation District on the requirements for safely
managing stormwater runoff from the development site in a
manner consistent with the municipal ordinances and applicable
watershed stormwater management plan. These agencies may also
be helpful in providing necessary data for the stormwater
management plan.
(2) Applicants are encouraged to submit a sketch plan with a narrative
description of the proposed stormwater management controls for
general guidance and discussion with the Municipality and other
agencies.
(3) The preapplication phase is not mandatory; any review comments
provided by the Municipality or other agencies are advisory only
and do not constitute any legally binding action on the part of the
Municipality or any county agency.
B. Stormwater plan reviews.
(1) Submission of plans. Stormwater plan applications shall be
submitted with the preliminary and final subdivision/land
development applications.
(2) Notification of affected municipalities. The Municipality shall notify
municipalities upstream and downstream of the development site
which may be affected by the stormwater runoff and proposed
controls of the site. Copies of the plans will be made available to the
§ 319-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-7
319:667
municipalities upon request. Comments received from any affected
Municipality will be considered by the Municipal Engineer and
county agencies in their reviews.
(3) Review by Municipal Engineer and County Conservation District.
Stormwater plans shall be reviewed by the Municipal Engineer and
County Conservation District. At its discretion, the Municipality
and/or county may also engage other specialists in hydrology or
hydraulics to assist with the stormwater plan review. The
Conservation District will review the plan for general compliance
with the watershed plan standards and criteria and watershed-wide
impacts and, where appropriate, may consult with adjacent
counties for their comments. If the Conservation District's review
identifies the improper application of the watershed standards and
criteria or the possibility of harmful impacts downstream from the
development site's proposed stormwater management system, the
applicant and Municipal Engineer will be notified so that the
necessary modifications can be made to promote safe stormwater
management.
(4) County planning review.
(a) A copy of the stormwater plan, along with all runoff
calculations, shall be forwarded to the Allegheny County
Planning Department. A report of the findings will be returned
to the Municipality within 30 days.
(b) If the Planning Department review identifies that the plan fails
to comply with the watershed standards and criteria or that a
possibility exists for harmful downstream impacts from the
development site, the applicant will be advised so that the
necessary modifications can be made to the stormwater
management controls for the development site. The Municipal
Engineer shall not approve the development site's stormwater
management plan until modifications are made and the plan
receives a positive review from the County Planning
Department.
(5) Municipal Engineer's review. The Municipal Engineer shall approve
or disapprove the stormwater management plan based on the
requirements of the municipal ordinances, the standards and
criteria of the watershed plan and good engineering practice. The
Engineer shall submit a written report, along with supporting
documentation, stating the reasons for approval or disapproval.
(6) Status of Engineer's determination. The approval/disapproval of
the site's stormwater management plan by the Municipal Engineer
shall be considered final. The governing body shall not reverse the
Engineer's determination by approving or disapproving the site's
stormwater management plan or any specific control measure in
contradiction to the Engineer's action. The governing body may
§ 319-7 § 319-7
319:668
§ 319-8. Status of stormwater plan after approval.
§ 319-9. Stormwater plan modifications.
request modifications or alternative approaches to the stormwater
management controls, provided that these are agreed to by the
Municipal Engineer and the applicant's engineer.
(7) Permits required from other governmental agencies. Where the
proposed development requires an obstruction permit from the
Pennsylvania DEP or an erosion/sedimentation permit from the
County Conservation District, then final stormwater management
plan approval shall be conditional upon receipt of such permits.
However, no building permit shall be issued, nor construction
started, until the permits are received and copies filed with the
Municipality. [Amended 4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2331]
A. Upon final stormwater plan approval and receipt of all necessary
permits, the applicant may commence to install or implement the
approved stormwater management controls.
B. If site development or building construction does not begin within two
years of the date of final approval of the stormwater management plan,
then before doing so, the applicant shall resubmit the stormwater
management plan to verify that no condition has changed within the
watershed that would affect the feasibility or effectiveness of the
previously approved stormwater management controls. Further, if for
any reason development activities are suspended for two years or more,
then the same requirement for resubmission of the stormwater
management plan shall apply.
C. Upon completion of construction of all stormwater runoff controls,
including collection, conveyance, and storage facilities, as-built plans,
in a digital form approved by the Engineer, shall be provided to the
Municipality. The data shall be geo-referenced to the Pennsylvania
State Plan Coordinate System of 1983, Southern Zone. [Added
4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2331]
A. If the request for a plan modification is initiated before construction
begins, the stormwater plan must be resubmitted and reviewed
according to the procedures contained in § 319-7 above.
B. If the request for a plan modification is initiated after construction is
underway, the Municipal Engineer shall have the authority to approve
or disapprove the modification based on field inspection, provided that
the requested changes in stormwater controls do not result in any
modifications of other approved municipal land use/development
requirements (e.g., building setbacks, yard, etc.) and the performance
standards in § 319-2 are met. Notification of the Engineer's action shall
be sent to the governing body which may issue a stay of the plan
modification within five days and require the permittee to resubmit the
§ 319-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-9
319:669
§ 319-10. Inspection of stormwater management controls.
§ 319-11. Financial guaranties; dedication of public improvements.
plan modification for full stormwater plan review in accordance with
§ 319-7 above.
A. The Municipal Engineer or a designated representative shall inspect
the construction of the temporary and permanent stormwater
management system for the development site. The permittee shall
notify the Engineer 48 hours in advance of the completion of the
following key development phases:
(1) At the completion of preliminary site preparation, including
stripping of vegetation, stockpiling of topsoil and construction of
temporary stormwater management and erosion control facilities.
(2) At the completion of rough grading but prior to placing topsoil,
permanent drainage or other site development improvements and
ground covers.
(3) During construction of the permanent stormwater facilities at such
times as specified by the Municipal Engineer.
(4) Completion of permanent stormwater management facilities,
including established ground covers and plantings.
(5) Completion of final grading, vegetative control measures or other
site restoration work done in accordance with the approved plan
and permit.
B. No work shall commence on any subsequent phase until the preceding
one has been inspected and approved in writing. If there are
deficiencies in any phase, the Municipal Engineer shall issue a written
description of the required corrections and stipulate the time by which
they must be made.
C. If during construction the contractor or permittee identifies any site
condition, such as subsurface soil conditions, alterations in surface or
subsurface drainage, which could affect the feasibility of the approved
stormwater facilities, he or she shall notify the Municipal Engineer
within 24 hours of the discovery of such condition and request a field
inspection. The Municipal Engineer shall determine if the condition
requires a stormwater plan modification.
D. In cases where stormwater facilities are to be installed in areas of
landslide-prone soils or other special site conditions exist, the
Municipality may require special precautions such as soil tests and core
boring, full-time inspectors and/or similar measures. All costs of any
such measures shall be borne by the permittee.
§ 319-9 § 319-11
319:670
A. Guaranty of completion. A completion guaranty in the form of a bond,
cash deposit, certified check or the negotiable securities acceptable to
the Municipality shall be filed. The guaranty shall cover all streets,
sanitary sewers, stormwater management facilities, water systems, fire
hydrants, sidewalks and other required improvements; it shall be in the
amount and form prescribed by the Municipalities Planning Code
(Section 509).202
B. Release of completion guaranty. The completion guaranty shall be
returned or released upon written certification by the Municipal
Engineer or a designated agent that improvements and facilities have
been installed and completed in accordance with the approved plan and
specifications. The procedures for requesting and obtaining a release of
the completion guaranty shall be in a manner prescribed by the
Municipalities Planning Code. (Section 510).203
C. Default of completion guaranty. If improvements are not installed in
accordance with the approved final plan, the governing body may
enforce any corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and
equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond or other security are
insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections
to all the improvements covered by said security, the governing body
may at its option install part of such improvements in all or part of the
development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to
recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the
improvements. All proceeds, whether resulting from the security or
from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or
both, shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements
covered by such security and not for any other municipal purpose.
D. Dedication of public improvements.
(1) When streets, sanitary sewers, stormwater management facilities,
water lines or other required improvements in the development
have been completed in accordance with the final approved plan,
such improvements shall be deemed private until such time as they
have been offered for dedication to the Municipality and accepted
by separate ordinance or resolution or until they have been
condemned for use as a public facility.
(2) Prior to acceptance of any improvements or facilities, the
Municipal Engineer shall inspect it to ensure that it is constructed
in accordance with the approved plan and is functioning properly.
In the case of any stormwater control facility, it must be free of
sediment and debris.
(3) The owner shall submit as-built plans for all facilities proposed for
dedication.
202. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
203. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510.
§ 319-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-11
319:671
§ 319-12. Fee schedule.
The Municipality of Monroeville may adopt by resolution from time to time
a reasonable schedule of fees to cover the cost of plan reviews, inspections
and other activities necessary to administer the provisions of this article.
All fees shall be set in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
Municipalities Planning Code,204 and any dispute over the fee amount shall
be resolved in the manner prescribed by the Planning Code.
§ 319-13. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
E. Maintenance guaranty. Prior to acceptance of any improvements or
facilities, the applicant shall provide a financial security to secure the
structural integrity and functioning of the improvements. The security
shall be in the form of a bond, cash, certified check or other negotiable
securities acceptable to the Municipality, be for a term of 18 months,
and be in an amount equal to 15% of the actual cost of the
improvements and facilities so dedicated.
A. Right of entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Municipality may enter at reasonable times upon
any property to investigate or ascertain the condition of the subject
property in regard to an aspect regulated by this article.
B. Notification. In the event that the applicant, developer, owner or his or
her agent fails to comply with the requirements of this article or fails to
conform to the requirements of any permit, a written notice of violation
shall be issued. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the
violation(s) and establish a time limit for correction of the violation(s).
Upon failure to comply within the time specified, unless otherwise
extended by the Municipality, the applicant, developer, owner or his or
her agent shall be subject to the enforcement remedies of this article.
C. Preventive remedies.
(1) In addition to other remedies, the Municipality may institute and
maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct
or abate a violation, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover
damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building or
premises.
(2) In accordance with the Planning Code (Sec. 515.1),205 the
Municipality may refuse to issue any permit or grant approval to
further improve or develop any property which has been developed
in violation of this article.
D. Enforcement remedies; violations and penalties.
204. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
205. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10515.1.
§ 319-11 § 319-13
319:672
§ 319-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT — The Stormwater Management Act (Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864
No. 167; 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 through 680.17, as amended by Act of May 24,
1984, No. 63).
(1) Any person who has violated or knowingly permitted the violation
of the provisions of this article shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Municipality, pay a fine of not less than $50 and not more than $500
plus court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred by
the Municipality. No judgment shall commence or be imposed,
levied or be payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the District Justice.
(2) If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to applicable
rules of civil procedure.
(3) Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the District Justice further determines that there
was a good-faith basis for the person violating the article to have
believed that there was no such violation. In such case, there shall
be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the District Justice's determination of a
violation; thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
(4) All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney's fees collected for
the violation of this article shall be paid over to the Municipality.
(5) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling for per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(6) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Municipality the
right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this
section.
E. Additional remedies. In addition to the above remedies, the
Municipality may also seek remedies and penalties under applicable
Pennsylvania statues, or regulations adopted pursuant thereto,
including but not limited to the Stormwater Management Act (32 P.S.
§§ 680.1 through 680.17) and the Erosion and Sedimentation
Regulations (25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102). Any activity
conducted in violation of this article or any Pennsylvania approved
watershed stormwater management plan may be declared a public
nuisance by the Municipality and abatable as such.
§ 319-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-14
319:673
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application for
development, including his or her heirs, successors and assigns.
CHANNEL — A perceptible natural or artificial waterway which periodically
or continuously contains moving water or which forms a connecting link
between two bodies of water. It has a definite bed and banks which confine
the water.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Allegheny County Conservation District.
CULVERT — A closed conduit for the free passage of surface drainage under
a highway, railroad, canal or other embankment.
DESIGN CRITERIA —
DESIGN STORM — See "storm frequency."
DETENTION POND — A pond or reservoir, usually small, constructed to
impound or retard surface runoff temporarily.
DEVELOPER — The person, persons or any corporation, partnership,
association or other entity or any responsible person therein or agent
therefor that undertakes the activities associated with changes in land use.
The term "developer" is intended to include but not necessarily be limited
to the term "subdivider," "owner" and "builder," even though the individuals
involved in successive stages of a project may vary.
DEVELOPMENT — Any activity, construction, alteration, change in land use
or practice that affects stormwater runoff characteristics.
DISCHARGE — The flow or rate of flow from a canal, conduit, channel or
other hydraulic structure.
DRAINAGE — In general, the removal of surface water from a given area.
Commonly applied to surface water and ground water.
DRAINAGE AREA —
ENCROACHMENT — Any structure or activity which in any manner
changes, expands or diminishes the course, current or cross-section of any
watercourse, floodway or body of water.
EROSION — Wearing away of the lands by running water, winds and waves.
EROSION CONTROL — The application of measures to reduce erosion of
land surfaces.
A. Engineering guidelines specifying construction details and materials.
Objectives, results or limits which must be met by a facility, structure
or process in performance of its intended functions.
B.
The area of a drainage basin or watershed, expressed in acres, square
miles or other unit of area. Also called "catchment area," "watershed"
or "river basin."
A.
The area served by a sewer system receiving storm- and surface water
or by a watercourse.
B.
§ 319-14 § 319-14
319:674
GROUND COVER — Materials covering the ground surface.
GROUNDWATER — Subsurface water occupying the saturation zone, from
which wells and springs are fed.
IMPERVIOUS — Not allowing or allowing only with great difficulty the
movement of water; impermeable.
INFILTRATION —
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the changing, grading,
transportation, fill and any other activity which causes land to be exposed
to the danger of erosion.
MAINTENANCE — The upkeep necessary for efficient operation of physical
properties.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville.
NATURAL STORMWATER RUNOFF REGIME — A watershed where natural
surface configurations, runoff characteristics and defined drainage
conveyances have attained the conditions of equilibrium.
OUTFALL —
OUTLET CONTROL STRUCTURE — The means of controlling the
relationship between the headwater elevation and the discharge place at
the outlet or downstream end of any structure through which water may
flow.
The flow or movement of water through the interstices or pores of a soil
or other porous medium.
A.
B. The absorption of liquid by the soil.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features;
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
The point, location or structure where drainage discharges from a
sewer, drain or other conduit.
A.
B. The conduit leading to the ultimate discharge point.
§ 319-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-14
319:675
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A standard which establishes an end result
or outcome which is to be achieved but does not prescribe specific means
for achieving it.
PEAK FLOW — Maximum flow.
PENNSYLVANIA DEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.[Amended 4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2331]
RELEASE RATE PERCENTAGE — The watershed factor determined by
comparing the maximum rate of runoff from a subbasin to the contributing
rate of runoff to the watershed peak rate at specific points of interest.
RETENTION POND — A basin, usually enclosed by artificial dikes, that
is used to retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and
releasing it at a predetermined rate.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval in years over which an event of a
given magnitude can be expected to recur.
RUNOFF — That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
RUNOFF CHARACTERISTICS — The surface components of any watershed
which affect the rate, amount and direction of stormwater runoff. These
may include but are not limited to: vegetation, soils, slopes and man-made
landscape alterations.
SCS — The United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation
Service.
SEDIMENT — Mineral or organic solid material that is being transported or
has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or ice and has come to
rest.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving water, wind or gravity.
STORAGE FACILITY — See "detention pond" and "retention pond."
STORM FREQUENCY — The average interval in years over which a storm
event of a given precipitation volume can be expected to occur.
STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries intercepted surface runoff, street
water and other drainage but excludes domestic sewage and industrial
waste.
STORMWATER — That portion of precipitation which runs over the land.
STORMWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM — Natural or man-made structures
that collect and transport stormwater through or from a drainage area to
the point of final outlet, including but not limited to any of the following:
conduits and appurtenant features, canals, channels, ditches, streams,
culverts, streets and pumping stations.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing stormwater
runoff adopted by Allegheny County and Westmoreland County as required
by the Stormwater Management Act.
§ 319-14 § 319-14
319:676
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
WATERCOURSE — Any channel for conveyance of surface water having
a defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a river or other body
of water, whether natural or artificial. A "designated watershed" is an area
delineated by the Pennsylvania DEP and approved by the Environmental
Quality Board for which counties are required to develop watershed
stormwater management plans.[Amended 4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2331]
WATERSHED STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for
managing stormwater runoff throughout a designated watershed adopted
by Allegheny County and Westmoreland County as required by the
Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Act.206
206. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 319-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-14
319:677

ARTICLE II
Stormwater Quality Management
[Adopted 4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2332207]
§ 319-15. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the Municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in this article, through provisions designed to:
A. Manage stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities that cause the problems.
B. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
C. Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems as much as
possible.
D. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, which requires
a minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.
E. Focus on infiltration of stormwater, to maintain groundwater recharge,
to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality and to
otherwise protect water resources.
F. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
G. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain
"existing uses" and maintain the level of water quality to support those
uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water quality in
"special protection" streams.
H. Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambeds.
I. Provide for proper operations and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management BMPs that are implemented in the
Municipality.
J. Provide a mechanism to identify controls necessary to meet the NPDES
permit requirements.
K. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program to
address nonstormwater discharges into the Municipality's separate
storm sewer system.
207. Editor's Note: Section 1 of this ordinance provided as follows: "This ordinance shall be
entitled and known as 'Storm Water Quality Management Ordinance.' The requirements of
this Ordinance shall be read in conjunction with the stormwater peak flow rate
requirements set forth in Ordinance No. 1788. Additionally, Ordinance No. 1788 is
affirmed to the extent it does not conflict with the terms and conditions of this within
Ordinance." (NOTE: Ord. No. 1788 is codified as Art. I of this chapter.)
§ 319-15 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-16
319:679
§ 319-16. Statutory authority.
The Municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
stormwater impacts by the authority of Municipal Planning Code.208
§ 319-17. Applicability.
§ 319-18. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the Municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this article is hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 319-19. Severability.
In the event that any section or provision of this article is declared invalid by
a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity
of any of the remaining provisions of this article.
§ 319-20. Compatibility with other requirements.
A. This article applies to any regulated earth disturbance activities within
the Municipality, and all stormwater runoff entering into the
Municipality's separate storm sewer system from lands within the
boundaries of the Municipality.
B. Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing state law and implementing
regulations. This article shall operate in coordination with those
parallel requirements; the requirements of this article shall be no less
restrictive in meeting the purposes of this article than state law.
A. Approvals issued and actions taken under this article do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals
for activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
To the extent that this article imposes more rigorous or stringent
requirements for stormwater management, the specific requirements
contained in this article shall be followed.
B. Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect any of the
Municipality's requirements regarding stormwater matters which do
not conflict with the provisions of this article, such as local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). Conflicting
provisions in other municipal ordinances or regulations shall be
construed to retain the requirements of this article addressing state
water quality requirements.
208. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 319-16 § 319-21
319:680
§ 319-21. Definitions and word usage.
For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
D. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of human activities and the natural
processes, at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application for approval to engage in any regulated earth disturbance
activity at a project site in the Municipality.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated earth disturbance activities, to meet state water quality
requirements, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet
the purposes of this article. BMPs include but are not limited to
infiltration, filter strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds,
permeable paving, grassed swales, forested buffers, sand filters and
detention basins.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Allegheny County Conservation
District.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DEVELOPER — A person that seeks to undertake any regulated earth
disturbance activities at a project site in the Municipality.
DEVELOPMENT — See "earth disturbance activity." The term includes
redevelopment.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land where any earth
disturbance activities in the Municipality are planned, conducted or
maintained.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road
§ 319-21 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-21
319:681
maintenance, building construction and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including
channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan for a project
site which identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and
sedimentation.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of
water into the ground. "Impervious surface" includes, but is not limited
to, any roof, parking or driveway areas, and any new streets and
sidewalks. Any surface areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed
stone shall be assumed to be impervious surfaces.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water
Act, which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point
where the Municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface
waters of the commonwealth.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties.
POINT SOURCE — any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in State
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated earth
disturbance activities in the Municipality are planned, conducted or
maintained.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been disturbed or developed.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Earth disturbance
activity one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface
waters or the Municipality's storm sewer system, or five acres or more
regardless of the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on
any portion of, part, or during any stage of, a larger common plan of
development. This only includes road maintenance activities involving
25 acres or more or earth disturbance.
§ 319-21 § 319-21
319:682
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road cross-section, such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches and other similar activities.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — — As defined under state
regulations - protection of "designated" and "existing" uses (See 25 Pa.
Code Chapters 93 and 96) - including:
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation
reaching the ground surface.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other
bodies or channels of conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as
a stream or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a "designated use," such
as "cold water fishery" or "potable water supply," which are listed
in Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained,
under state regulations.
(1)
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated earth
disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water
quality in special protection streams.
(2)
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can be
impacted by addition of pollutants such as sediment, and changes
in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result
of changes in land surface area from those activities. Therefore,
permanent discharges to surface waters must be managed to
protect the stream bank, streambed and structural integrity of the
waterway, to prevent these impacts.
(3)
§ 319-21 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-22
319:683
§ 319-22. General requirements for stormwater management.
§ 319-23. Permit requirements by other government entities.
The following permit requirements may apply to certain regulated earth
disturbance activities, and must be met prior to commencement of
regulated earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities within the Municipality shall
be designed, implemented, operated and maintained to meet the
purposes of this article, through these two elements:
(1) Erosion and sediment control during the earth disturbance
activities (e.g., during construction); and
(2) Water quality protection measures after completion of earth
disturbance activities (e.g., after construction), including
operations and maintenance.
B. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Municipality shall
commence until the requirements of this article are met.
C. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth disturbance
activities shall be addressed as required by § 319-24.
D. Postconstruction water quality protection shall be addressed as
required by § 319-25. Operations and maintenance of permanent
stormwater BMPs shall be addressed as required by § 319-26 et seq.
E. All best management practices (BMPs) used to meet the requirements
of this article shall conform to the state water quality requirements, and
any more stringent requirements as determined by the Municipality.
F. Techniques described in Appendix A (Low Impact Development) of this
article209 are encouraged, because they reduce the costs of complying
with the requirements of this article and the state water quality
requirements.
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by DEP under 25
Pa. Code Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way, or require access from a state highway, shall be
209. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 319-22 § 319-23
319:684
§ 319-24. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
§ 319-25. Water quality requirements after regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete.
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PENNDOT).
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa.Code Chapter
105.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Municipality shall
commence until approval by the Municipality of an erosion and
sediment control plan for construction activities.
B. DEP has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan
for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more, under
25 Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
C. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a DEP "NPDES construction
activities" permit is required for regulated earth disturbance activities.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the Municipality. The
issuance of an NPDES construction permit (or permit coverage under
the statewide general permit (PAG-2) satisfies the requirements of
§ 319-24A.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project
site at all times.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Municipality shall
commence until approval by the Municipality of a plan which
demonstrates compliance with state water quality requirements after
construction is complete.
B. The BMPs must be designed, implemented and maintained to meet
state water quality requirements, and any other more stringent
requirements as determined by the Municipality.
C. To control postconstruction stormwater impacts from regulated earth
disturbance activities, state water quality requirements can be met by
BMPs, including site design, which provide for replication of
preconstruction stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions, so that
postconstruction stormwater discharges do not degrade the physical,
chemical or biological characteristics of the receiving waters. This may
be achieved by the following:
§ 319-23 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-25
319:685
§ 319-26. General requirements for stormwater BMP operations
and maintenance plans.
(1) Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration
conditions;
(2) Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure filtering
out of the chemical and physical pollutants from the stormwater
runoff; and
(3) Streambank and streambed protection: management of volume and
rate of postconstruction stormwater discharges to prevent physical
degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring).
D. DEP has regulations that require municipalities to ensure design,
implementation and maintenance of best management practices
(BMPs) that control runoff from new development and redevelopment
after regulated earth disturbance activities are complete. These
requirements include the need to implement postconstruction
stormwater BMPs with assurance of long-term operations and
maintenance of those BMPs.
E. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office must be provided to
the Municipality. The issuance of an NPDES construction permit [or
permit coverage under the statewide general permit (PAG-2)] satisfies
the requirements of § 319-25A.
F. BMP operations and maintenance requirements are described in
§ 319-26 et seq. of this article.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Municipality shall
commence until approval by the Municipality of BMP operations and
maintenance plan which describes how the permanent (e.g.,
postconstruction) stormwater BMPs will be properly operated and
maintained.
B. The following items shall be included in the BMP operations and
maintenance plan:
(1) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements
for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny
County, and shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch by thirty-sixinch
or thirty-inch by forty-two-inch sheets. The contents of the
map(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs;
(b) The location of the project site relative to highways, municipal
boundaries or other identifiable landmarks;
§ 319-25 § 319-26
319:686
§ 319-27. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance of BMPs.
(c) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others as
appropriate;
(d) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within
the project site area;
(e) Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainagecourses, and areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved;
(f) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines within 50 feet of property lines of the
project site;
(g) Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative
cover, including the type and amount of impervious area that
would be added;
(h) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings;
and
(i) A fifteen-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
BMPs that would provide ingress to and egress from a public
right-of-way.
(2) A description of how each permanent stormwater BMP will be
operated and maintained, and the identity of the person(s)
responsible for operations and maintenance;
(3) The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of
the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the
plan; and
(4) The stormwater BMPs must be prepared and sealed by a registered
professional engineer, surveyor and/or landscape architect with
training and expertise in hydrology and hydraulics. Documentation
of qualification may be required by the Municipality;
(5) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or removed only
after approval by the Municipality.
A. The BMP operations and maintenance plan for the project site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance
of all permanent stormwater BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the Municipality, stormwater BMPs may also
be dedicated to and maintained by the Municipality;
§ 319-26 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-27
319:687
§ 319-28. Municipality review of BMP operations and maintenance
plan.
§ 319-29. Adherence to approved BMP operations and maintenance
plan.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan, or to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to an
approved BMP operations and maintenance plan, unless an exception is
granted in writing by the Municipality.
§ 319-30. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately
owned stormwater BMPs.
§ 319-31. Stormwater management easements.
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single
ownership, or if sewers and other public improvements are to be
privately owned and maintained, then the operation and
maintenance of stormwater BMPs shall be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
B. The Municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The Municipality reserves
the right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater BMPs.
A. The Municipality shall review the BMP operations and maintenance
plan for consistency with the purposes and requirements of this article,
and any permits issued by DEP.
B. The Municipality shall notify the applicant in writing whether the BMP
operations and maintenance plan is approved.
C. The Municipality may require an "as-built survey" of all stormwater
BMPs, and an explanation of any discrepancies with the operations and
maintenance plan.
A. The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance
agreement with the Municipality covering all stormwater BMPs that are
to be privately owned. The agreement shall be substantially the same as
the agreement in Appendix B of this article.210
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of
all permanent stormwater BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Municipality.
210. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 319-27 § 319-31
319:688
§ 319-32. Recording of approved BMP operations and maintenance
plan and related agreements.
§ 319-33. Municipal stormwater BMP operation and maintenance
fund.
§ 319-34. Inspections.
A. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the Municipal
Engineer.
B. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property
owner if necessary for 1) access for inspections and maintenance, or 2)
preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas and other BMPs, by persons other than the property
owner. The purpose of the easement shall be specified in any agreement
under § 319-30.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed or implemented, as described in the BMP operations and
maintenance plan, shall record the following documents in the Office of
the Recorder of Deeds for Allegheny County, within 15 days of approval
of the BMP operations and maintenance plan by the Municipality:
(1) The operations and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof;
(2) Operations and maintenance agreements under § 319-30; and
(3) Easements under § 319-31.
B. The Municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
A. If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the Municipality for dedication,
the Municipality may require persons installing stormwater BMPs to
pay a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater BMP Operation
and Maintenance Fund, to help defray costs of operations and
maintenance activities. The amount may be determined as follows:
(1) If the BMP is to be owned and maintained by the Municipality, the
amount shall cover the estimated costs for operations and
maintenance for 10 years, as determined by the Municipality.
(2) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
B. If a BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g., ball
field, lake), the Municipality may adjust the amount due accordingly.
A. DEP or its designees (e.g., County Conservation Districts) normally
ensure compliance with any permits issued, including those for
§ 319-31 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-34
319:689
§ 319-35. Right of entry.
§ 319-36. Fees and expenses.
The Municipality may charge a reasonable fee for review of BMP operations
and maintenance plans to defray review costs incurred by the Municipality.
The applicant shall pay all such fees.
§ 319-37. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this article may cover:
stormwater management. In addition to DEP compliance programs, the
Municipality or its designee may inspect all phases of the construction,
operations, maintenance and any other implementation of stormwater
BMPs.
B. During any stage of the regulated earth disturbance activities, if the
Municipality or its designee determines that any BMPs are not being
implemented in accordance with this article, the Municipality may
suspend or revoke any existing permits or other approvals until the
deficiencies are corrected.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Municipality may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the Municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operation and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in
regard to any aspect governed by this article.
B. BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf of the
Municipality ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of determining compliance with this article.
C. Persons working on behalf of the Municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any BMP in the Municipality such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges
from such BMP.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Municipality access to a BMP is a
violation of this article.
A. Administrative/clerical costs.
B. The review of the BMP operations and maintenance plan by the
Municipal Engineer.
C. The site inspections including, but not limited to, preconstruction
meetings, inspections during construction of stormwater BMPs, and
final inspection upon completion of the stormwater BMPs.
D. Any additional work required to monitor and enforce any provisions of
this article, correct violations, and assure proper completion of
stipulated remedial actions.
§ 319-34 § 319-38
319:690
§ 319-38. Prohibited discharges.
A. No person in the Municipality shall allow, or cause to allow, stormwater
discharges into the Municipality's separate storm sewer system which
is not composed entirely of stormwater, except 1) as provided in
Subsection B below, and 2) discharges allowed under a state or federal
permit.
B. Discharges which may be allowed based on a finding by the
Municipality that the discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to
pollution to surface waters of the commonwealth, are:
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(2) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
(3) Potable water sources including dechlorinated water line and fire
hydrant flushings.
(4) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(5) Lawn watering.
(6) Irrigation drainage.
(7) Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Routine external building wash-down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(9) Air-conditioning condensate.
(10)Water from individual residential car washing.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(12) Springs.
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(14)Water from crawl space pumps.
C. In the event that the Municipality determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection B significantly contribute to pollution of waters
of the commonwealth, or is so notified by DEP, the Municipality will
notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
D. Upon notice provided by the Municipality under Subsection C, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
Municipality, to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
§ 319-38 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-38
319:691
§ 319-39. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 319-38B
above:
§ 319-40. Roof drains.
§ 319-41. Alteration of BMPs.
§ 319-42. Public nuisance.
§ 319-43. Enforcement; notice of violation.
E. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter the separate storm sewer system,
and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks; and
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the separate storm sewer system which has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records, and approved by the
Municipality.
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches, except as provided in Subsection B.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted by the Municipality.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, unless it is part of an approved maintenance program,
without the written approval of the Municipality.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement, which would limit or
alter the functioning of the BMP, without the written approval of the
Municipality.
A. The violation of any provision of this article is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 319-38 § 319-43
319:692
§ 319-44. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
A. Whenever the Municipality finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the
Municipality may order compliance by written notice to the responsible
person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) The implementation of stormwater BMPs; and
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the Municipality or designee and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this article. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Municipality from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by
the Municipality may be suspended or revoked by the Municipality for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this article; or
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the Municipality
when:
(1) The Municipal Engineer or designee has inspected and approved
the corrections to the stormwater BMPs, or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance; and/or
§ 319-43 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 319-44
319:693
§ 319-45. Violations and penalties.
§ 319-46. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Municipality or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this article, may appeal to the relevant judicial
or administrative body according to law, within the time period allowed.
(2) The Municipality is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance, law,
or rule and regulation has been corrected.
C. A permit or approval which has been revoked by the Municipality
cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under
the procedures outlined in this article.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs, or imprisonment
of not more than 30 days, or both. Each day that the violation continues
shall be a separate offense.
B. In addition, the Municipality, through its Solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this article. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
§ 319-44 § 319-46
319:694
Chapter 320
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 202.
Land disturbance — See Ch. 243.
Parades and motorcades — See Ch. 270.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 316.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 324.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 352.
§ 319-46 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 319-46
320:695

ARTICLE I
Outdoor Displays of Merchandise
[Adopted 3-8-1962 by Ord. No. 331]
§ 320-1. Findings.
Due to the increasingly heavy flow of motor vehicular traffic on the streets
and highways within the Municipality of Monroeville and due to the heavy
flow of motor vehicular traffic to and from private business establishments
adjacent to said streets and highways, it has become necessary to regulate
the outdoor display of wares and merchandise stored, parked or displayed
on private property to improve visibility and observance of oncoming traffic.
§ 320-2. Outdoor displays restricted.
From and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful to store,
park or display wares or articles of merchandise, whether or not offered for
sale, on that portion of any lot within the Municipality of Monroeville lying
within 10 feet of the right-of-way line of any Municipality, county or state
street or highway.
§ 320-3. Display within right-of-way unlawful.
Any storage, parking or display of wares or merchandise within the rightof-
way limits of any state, county or Municipality street or highway is
prohibited.
§ 320-4. Applicability.
This article shall apply equally to all properties within the Municipality of
Monroeville presently used in whole or in part for the outdoor display of
such wares or merchandise, as well as other properties not presently so
used.
§ 320-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person violating any provision or regulation of this article shall, after
reasonable notice and upon conviction thereof before any District Justice,
be fined a sum not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, upon
default of payment of said fine and costs, may be committed to
imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceeding 30
days. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist after written notice has
been served by the Municipal Manager shall constitute a separate offense
and may be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 320-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 320-5
320:697

ARTICLE II
Vegetation at Intersections
[Adopted 7-11-1972 by Ord. No. 798]
§ 320-6. Height of vegetation at intersections.
No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any property within
the Municipality of Monroeville shall permit any shrubbery, bushes, trees,
ornamental plants, flowers, evergreens, weeds, wild plants or grass to grow
on such private property at the intersections of public roads to such a height
so as to obstruct the vision of motorists or pedestrians in their use of such
public roads. Use of public roads shall not include ingress or egress from
private driveways.
§ 320-7. Standards.
In the area 10 feet from the edge of the cartway, whether on a public
right-of-way or private property, no vegetation in excess of three feet in
height shall be permitted so as to obstruct sight distance along the traveled
portion of the road or sidewalk to less than 90 feet. In determining whether
vegetation is of such a height as to obstruct the vision of motorists or
pedestrians, the criteria for sight distances set forth in § 324-17E of Chapter
324, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the Municipality of Monroeville
shall be applied; provided, however, that in special cases the Ordinance
Officer may enforce a stricter standard if a safety hazard is found.
§ 320-8. Enforcement.
A. With respect to vegetation found to be in violation of this article on
private property, it shall be the duty of the Municipal Manager or
person designated by him as Ordinance Officer to give notice, by
personal service or by United States mail, to the owner or occupant of
such private property whereon such vegetation is growing or remaining
in violation of this article, directing such person, firm or corporation to
remove, trim or cut such vegetation within 10 days after issuance of
such notice. In case any person, firm or corporation shall neglect, fail or
refuse to comply with the notice provided in this section within the
period of time stated herein, the municipal authorities may cause such
vegetation to be removed, trimmed or cut at the expense of such
person, firm or corporation, as set forth in § 320-10 of this article.
B. With respect to such vegetation in violation of this article which is in the
public right-of-way, the municipal authorities may cause such
vegetation to be removed, trimmed or cut even if such vegetation was
planted and maintained by an adjacent property owner or occupant.
Such removal, trimming or cutting of vegetation within the public rightof-
way shall be at the expense of the Municipality; provided, however,
that the Municipality shall not be liable for any claims or damages in
connection with the removal of such vegetation within the public rightof-
way.
§ 320-6 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 320-9
320:699
§ 320-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate or fail, neglect
or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that
each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense and a separate notice
to the offender shall not be necessary in order to constitute an offense.
§ 320-10. Work done by Municipality; costs to become lien.
The actual cost of labor involved for each time the Municipality shall cause
vegetation to be removed, trimmed or cut on private property shall
constitute a municipal lien, and the owner or occupant, as the case may be,
of the premises shall be billed after the same has been completed. Should
any bill or bills for the removing, trimming or cutting of vegetation be
unpaid after 30 days from the issuance of the bill, the Municipal Solicitor is
hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings, in the name
of the Municipality of Monroeville, in any court having jurisdiction over such
matter for the collection of such bill, including actions at law or the filing of
a municipal lien against the property. A penalty of 10% per annum shall be
added to claims which remain unpaid.
§ 320-9 § 320-10
320:700
ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Construction and Maintenance
[Adopted 6-8-1976 by Ord. No. 1016]
§ 320-11. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Monroeville Sidewalk
Ordinance."
§ 320-12. Purpose.
This article has been adopted in order to:
§ 320-13. Definitions and word usage.
A. Ensure that all sidewalks within the municipal corporation limits
situated within public rights-of-way fronting and/or abutting all
residential, commercial, industrial, public and semipublic properties
which are utilized and serve as pedestrian walkways will be adequately
maintained and kept in a state of good repair, in order to reduce or
otherwise eliminate any condition that would constitute a hazard to or
result in possible injury to the pedestrian public.
B. Prescribe the general minimum condition or conditions which
constitute a hazard in an existing sidewalk which would require
remedial action on the part of a property owner to correct.
C. Prescribe minimum standards and specifications for the construction of
new sidewalks or sections thereof, and for the repair and/or
reconstruction of existing sidewalks or sections thereof which may be
required to be corrected under this article.
D. Prescribe a method for the equitable administration and enforcement of
this article, including penalties for the violation thereof.
E. Generally promote, protect and facilitate the public health, safety and
general welfare and to further promote the sound development of an
important community facility.
A. Words and phrases in the singular number include the plural and vice
versa. Words and phrases used in the present tense include the future.
The words "used for" include the meaning "designed for." The word
"shall" is mandatory and not optional. The word "abut" shall include the
words "directly across from." The word "building" shall include the
word "structure."
B. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases
shall have the meaning given herein:
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The individual who, in addition to other duties,
shall have responsibility for administering and enforcing the provision
of this article.
§ 320-11 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 320-13
320:701
ENGINEER — A registered professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for
the Municipality.
GOVERNING BODY — The Council of the Municipality of Monroeville.
HARDSHIP — That there are unique physical circumstances or
conditions peculiar to the property and that the unnecessary hardship
is due to such conditions; and that because of such physical conditions
there is no possibility that sidewalks can be installed on the property
in strict conformity with the provisions of this Article III, Sidewalk
Construction and Maintenance; and that such unnecessary hardship
has not been created by the applicant; that the relief granted will
not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in
which the property is located and will represent the minimum relief
and least modification of this Article III, Sidewalk Construction and
Maintenance.[Added 11-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2235]
LOT, WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines at the
front street property line.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville.
PROPERTY OWNER — The person, firm, company, corporation or
individuals who are the owners in fee simple of property, whose name(s)
appear last in the Recorder of Allegheny County Tax Assessor's office.
For the purpose of this article, the "property owner" may also include
any individual who is a legal agent of the owner.
SIDEWALK — That portion of the street, road or highway lying within
the public right-of-way, primarily constructed for the use of pedestrians.
SIDEWALK INSPECTOR — The Building Official or a duly appointed
agent.
SIDEWALK PERMIT — The legal permit issued by the sidewalk
inspector upon application by a property owner or his authorized agent
to open, repair, replace or extend an existing sidewalk, or any portion
thereof, or construct a new sidewalk. No work on any of the above shall
commence until such permit has been issued.
SIDEWALK STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS — The standards and
specifications for the construction, reconstruction or repair of
sidewalks contained in and hereby made a part of this article.211
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other public rights-of-way used or
intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians.
VIOLATION, NOTICE OF — The legal notice issued to a property owner
by the Building Official informing said property owner of any violation
of the provisions of this article or a violation or departure from the
sidewalk standards and specifications contained in this article in cases
211. Editor's Note: The Standards for Construction are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 320-13 § 320-13
320:702
§ 320-14. Areas in which sidewalks are required.
Sidewalks shall be required in all new subdivisions and elsewhere as may
be required by site plan, conditional use or other approval granted by the
Planning Commission and/or Municipal Council.
§ 320-15. Applicability.
Sidewalk standards adopted by this article shall take effect immediately and
be applicable in subdivisions previously approved and requiring sidewalks
under Chapter 324, Subdivision of Land, but lacking actual installation of
sidewalks. The sidewalk standards shall apply to all streets, boulevards or
roadways except the following areas:
§ 320-16. Hardship appeals. [Amended 11-12-2002 by Ord. No.
2235]
where sidewalk construction or reconstruction has been commenced or
completed.
A. Residential. Where, in the judgment of the Municipal Council,
applicable to simple subdivision only, the inclusion of sidewalks would
be out of character with the abutting properties and with the proviso
that the owner of the simple subdivision would enter into a legal
agreement with the Municipality of Monroeville stipulating that when
sidewalks are required or put in on abutting property, the owner would
agree to install sidewalks to current specifications within six months of
notification by the Municipality of Monroeville and provide, within 30
days of notification, a bond, in a form approved by the Municipal
Solicitor, sufficient to guarantee the installation of sidewalks.
A. Application. Upon submission of sidewalk hardship appeal application
and fee to the Department of Community Development, and providing
support documentation demonstrating the allegations that strict
compliance with these regulations will result in a hardship, the
hardship appeal-shall be referred to the Director of Community
Development, for an administrative investigative review, determining
whether or not a hardship as defined herein has been established by the
applicant. The Director of Community Development shall review the
hardship appeal, and if necessary, adjoin any municipal staff, Solicitor
or consultants to review the hardship appeal, conveying those
additional review costs for time and expenses to the applicant.
Hardship shall be judged on a case-by-case basis and will be subject to
final plan approval by Municipal Council. However, such variation of the
regulations will not have the affect of nullifying the intent and purpose
of the spirit of this section. Such hardship appeals must be submitted to
the Department of Community Development 30 days prior to Council
action on the land development application. Failure to make such
appeal due to alleged hardships prior to such Council action shall
constitute a waiver of any hardship then existing.
§ 320-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 320-16
320:703
§ 320-17. Duties of property owner.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the abutting property to keep
the sidewalk, together with any portion of his property paved and used
as a sidewalk or public walk, immediately in front of his property in good
order and repair and, at all times, free and clear of all obstruction to safe
and convenient passage. This shall include keeping and maintaining such
sidewalks free and clear of all dirt, trash and similar debris, including
the reasonable removal of snow and ice, and shall also include keeping
and maintaining the sidewalk free of any merchandise, signs or other
B. Findings. Written findings regarding the hardship appeal shall be
generated by the Director of Community Development, and forwarded
to Monroeville Council for review and action prior to the final approval
of the land development application.
C. In lieu of action. Should it be determined in the findings of the Director
of Community Development that there are unique physical
circumstances or conditions peculiar to the property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions; and that because of
such physical conditions sidewalks cannot be constructed, Monroeville
Council may approve that a hardship, as defined herein, does exist, and
in lieu of the construction of sidewalks, the applicant shall make
payment to the Municipality of Monroeville a sum equal to the costs of
constructing the sidewalk should the hardship not exist, calculate at an
annual bid price for sidewalks, at a per square yard/foot multiplied by
the amount of surface area of sidewalk. Said money shall be escrowed
and put into a fund known as "The Municipality of Monroeville General
Sidewalk Fund" and be used to fund sidewalks in various locations in
the Municipality of Monroeville as directed by the Municipality of
Monroeville. Said findings and sidewalk fee shall be entered into the
record as part of the resolution and conditions of approval for the land
development.
D. Substitute regulations action. In the event that upon review of the
application and supporting documentation, the Director of Community
Development finds that a hardship exists but there is a substitute or
alternate method or manner complying with the regulations of this
section, then Council may approve the adoption of the substitute or
alternative method or manner of complying with the regulation
contained in this section. Said findings and substitute regulations shall
become part of the applicant's land development application and site
plan.
E. Denial of hardship appeal. Upon review of the findings of the Director of
Community Development, Monroeville Council may determine that a
hardship, as defined herein, does not exist, and the applicant will be
required to install sidewalks. Said findings and the location of sidewalks
shall become part of the applicant's land development application and
site plan.
§ 320-16 § 320-17
320:704
unauthorized structure or appurtenance when the removal of the same is
ordered by the sidewalk inspector.
§ 320-18. Opening, removal or reconstruction.
No person, property owner, firm, corporation or public utility shall open or
remove, in part or in whole, any existing sidewalk or portion thereof for any
purpose, including the repair and/or reconstruction of such sidewalk, until
the property owner or his authorized agent or the public utility company
legally authorized makes application and obtains a sidewalk permit from the
sidewalk inspector.
§ 320-19. Correction of violations.
Upon being issued a notice of violation, the property owner shall take the
necessary steps to correct such violation(s) within a reasonable period of
time, but in no case shall any violation remain uncorrected for a period of
more than 20 days beyond the date of receipt of such legal notice. Failure to
comply shall subject such property owner to any or all penalties contained
in this article.
§ 320-20. Failure to comply; emergency repairs.
If a property owner fails to comply with the requirements of a notice of
violation, the enforcing authority of the Municipality may serve a written
notice upon him requiring him to do what is necessary. If such property
owner continues to fail to comply with such notice within 20 days from
the date of its service, the Municipality may make the necessary repairs,
remove any obstruction or eliminate any hazard to pedestrian safety. The
cost of the same, together with a penalty of 10%, shall be paid by the
delinquent property owner and be collected by an action of assumpsit, or
the enforcing authority may file a municipal lien against the property. The
notice provided for in this section may be served on the property owner
in person, by leaving the same at his place of residence or, if he has no
residence in the Municipality, then by posting the same on the premises
and mailing a copy thereof to the owner at his last known address as
obtained from the Allegheny County Tax Assessor's office. Notwithstanding
the previous provisions and those of § 320-19 of this article, in an
emergency situation as determined by the sidewalk inspector and where
the property owner cannot be immediately contacted the Municipality may
effect such necessary repairs or correct or abate any dangerous condition
and collect the costs thereof in the manner described above.
§ 320-21. Conditions requiring repairs or replacement.
If one or more of the following conditions, as set forth in Subsections A
through D, is evidenced in an existing sidewalk or portion thereof, it shall
constitute sufficient notice to the property owner that such condition(s)
shall be corrected voluntarily by the property owner by making application
for a sidewalk permit and performing the necessary work. In lieu of such
§ 320-17 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 320-21
320:705
action, the sidewalk inspector may, in the course of conducting his normal
duties or upon complaint, make inspection of such condition and issue a
notice of violation to the property owner. Any property owner, agent of
said owner or legal tenant of occupied premises may request the sidewalk
inspector to authorize an inspection of a faulty sidewalk and make a
determination of the need and extent of any required repairs.
§ 320-22. Safety warning procedures and devices.
When a hazardous condition exists in a sidewalk and/or a sidewalk permit
or notice of violation shall have been issued, the property owner and/or his
contractor shall provide for the following minimum warning procedures and
devices:
A. The removal of all or any portion of a sidewalk panel(s) for any reason.
Any removal panel or section thereof shall be immediately replaced to
restore the sidewalk to a condition for safe pedestrian travel.
B. When 50% or more of a sidewalk panel(s) has cracked lines or is
spalled, weathered or deteriorated, rendering the section(s) unsafe
underfoot. This does not include hairline cracks that have not disturbed
the grade and level of the sidewalk.
C. When one or more edges of a sidewalk panel(s) has been raised one
inch or more along 50% or more of its length above an adjacent panel at
grade level, whether such defect has been caused by frost section, root
growth, cracking or actual breaking.
D. When a sidewalk panel or adjacent panels have sunk below or tilted
above or below the general original grade more than one inch out of
level of the general grade of the balance of the sidewalk.
A. Prior to beginning actual work, if a sidewalk condition exists which
presents a particularly hazardous condition, a suitable barrier and/or
warning signs shall be placed at the sidewalk section where the danger
exists. This may include night lighting (see Subsection C) if work cannot
be commenced immediately.
B. During the workday when actual repair or construction work is
underway, a suitable pathway shall be maintained around the work area
to allow free and clear pedestrian travel. Preferably, such pathway
should be provided for around the inside of the work area as opposed to
the street side, unless an adequately barricaded pathway is provided.
C. At the end of the workday, newly poured concrete shall be adequately
covered, suitable barricading shall be erected (portable or
semipermanent), the required pathway shall be free and clear of
obstructions and suitable warning lighting placed which shall be
illuminated between dusk and sunrise of the following day. Suitable
lighting shall include, but need not be limited to, two standard red
globed kerosene lanterns, battery-operated blinking reflectors and/or
electric lighting.
§ 320-21 § 320-22
320:706
§ 320-23. Placement of sidewalks.
§ 320-24. Excavated materials.
During the construction period, all excavated concrete pieces, old fill
material and/or earth shall be temporarily stored at a point suitably
removed from the sidewalk area and any required pedestrian pathway or
passageway. This shall also include the similar storing of all construction
materials, i.e., wood or metal forms, concrete bags, sand, gravel, etc.,
including concrete boxes or mixers. In no case shall any of these materials
be left at the curbline or in the street gutter overnight. All such materials
shall be completely removed at the time of final cleanup.
§ 320-25. Cement concrete sidewalks.
D. In cases where construction work is underway adjacent to the proposed
sidewalk construction area, the required pathway shall be a suitably
constructed semiopen passageway (Saf-way type) that affords safe
separation from the adjacent building site along its entire length and
overhead. This type of passageway shall be inspected and approved by
the sidewalk inspector.
E. Prior to the issuance of any permit or the granting of any approvals for
any property on which sidewalks are to be constructed, a surety bond or
other security which, in the opinion of the Solicitor, is legally adequate
must be posted with the Municipal Manager, naming the Municipality of
Monroeville as the claimant or beneficiary, in an amount which, in the
opinion of the Municipal Engineer, is sufficient to pay for the entire cost
of the installation of the sidewalk in the event that the same is not
properly completed by the owner, developer or builder.
A. Commercial. Sidewalks shall be placed on grade abutting the rear of
the curb. If no curbs exist, the owner shall install curb to prevailing
specifications prior to installation of the sidewalk.
B. All other. Sidewalks shall be placed on grade at a uniform distance from
the curb as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved
by the Municipal Council. The intent is to have a uniform aesthetically
pleasing expanse of sidewalk parallel to the curb. [Amended 6-9-1987
by Ord. No. 1574]
A. This work shall consist of constructing cement concrete sidewalks in
accordance with these specifications and within reasonably close
conformity to the lines, grades and dimensions shown on the drawings
or established by the Engineer.
B. Minimum size requirements.
(1) Along residential streets. Sidewalks along minor residential streets
shall be a minimum of four feet in width, and on residential
collector streets the minimum shall be increased to five feet.
§ 320-22 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 320-25
320:707
§ 320-26. Materials.
Materials shall be as follows: Section 704.1(G)1, Class AA cement concrete,
other materials and aggregate.
§ 320-27. Construction requirements.
(2) Along commercial streets. Sidewalks along minor streets shall be a
minimum of four feet in width, and on all other higher classification
streets the minimum shall be increased to five feet.
A. Reference to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation latest
edition of Form 408 specifications.
B. Preparation of foundation.
(1) The foundation for the sidewalk subbase shall be formed at a depth
of eight inches below and parallel with the finished surface of the
sidewalk, unless otherwise indicated on the drawings or specified.
Unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced with approved
material, and the foundation shall be thoroughly compacted and
finished to a firm, even surface.
C. Placing aggregate for bed. The approved aggregate shall be spread on
the prepared foundation to form a compacted bed four inches in depth,
unless otherwise indicated on the drawings or specified. This material
shall be thoroughly compacted. Satisfactory outlets for draining the
subbase shall be provided where this type of drainage structure is
required.
D. Forms. Forms shall be of wood or metal, straight, free from warp and of
sufficient strength when staked to resist the pressure of the concrete
without springing. If wood, they shall be nominal two-inch planks
surfaced on the inside and the top, or if metal, they shall be of approved
section. Forms shall have a depth equal to the depth of the concrete and
shall be thoroughly cleaned and oiled before concrete is placed against
them. Forms that are worn, bent or damaged shall not be used.
E. Joints. Sidewalks shall be constructed in separate slabs not more than
30 feet in length, except for closures. These slabs shall be separated by
transverse premolded expansion joint filler, 1/2 of an inch in thickness,
for the full depth of the concrete. Transverse premolded expansion joint
filler shall also be placed adjacent to existing structures where
directed. The slabs between expansion joints shall be divided into
blocks not more than six feet in length by scoring transversely. Where
the slabs are more than six feet in width, they shall be scored
longitudinally in the center. Transverse and longitudinal scoring shall
extend for a depth of at least 3/8 of an inch into the concrete slab. In the
case of large areas of new concrete walks, the transverse and
longitudinal scoring shall extend to a depth of at least 1/5 the thickness
of the concrete slabs. Premolded expansion joint filler, 1/2 of an inch in
§ 320-25 § 320-27
320:708
thickness for the full depth of the concrete, shall be placed
longitudinally where the sidewalk slab is to be constructed in contact
with curbs. Where existing light standards, poles, fire hydrants, trees
and similar structures are within the limits of the sidewalk area, the
concrete around such structure shall be separated in a block eight
inches wider than the maximum dimension of the structure at the
sidewalk elevation. In the case of trees, two rows of blocks at least
four inches wide shall be placed. (See construction sketches for both
types of installations.212) Prior to placing the concrete around such
structures, premolded expansion joint filler, 1/2 of an inch in thickness,
shall be placed around the structure for the full depth of the concrete
in the sidewalk.
F. Placing concrete.
(1) The concrete shall be proportioned, mixed and placed in
accordance with specifications for Section 704.1(G)1, Class AA
concrete. The concrete shall be four inches in depth, unless
otherwise indicated on the drawings or specified. In commercial
districts, the concrete shall be six inches in depth and include 6/6 x
6/6 reinforcement. The concrete shall be struck off, finished and
tested, except that manual operations may be permitted by the
Engineer. Unless otherwise directed, an edger having a one-fourthinch
radius shall be used for edging all joints. The concrete shall be
cured and protected in accordance with the latest Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Section 501.3(N) specifications.
(2) At residential driveways, the concrete shall be six inches, including
6/6 x 10/10 wire mesh reinforcement placed 1 1/2 inches above the
base of the concrete. In commercial and industrial district
driveways and alleys, the concrete shall be seven inches, including
design-required wire mesh and/or reinforcement base.
G. Removal of forms. Side forms shall not be removed within 12 hours
after the concrete has been placed. After removal of the forms, minor
honeycombed areas shall be filled with mortar composed of one part of
cement and two parts of fine aggregate. Major honeycombed areas will
be considered as defective work and shall be removed and replaced.
H. Backfilling. After the concrete has cured for a period of not less than 72
hours, the spaces adjacent to the sidewalk shall be backfilled with
approved material, which shall be thoroughly compacted to the
required elevation and cross-section.
I. Final cleanup. Upon the completion of all work items, removal of forms
and final inspection and approval where required, the property owner
or contractor shall remove all dirt, trash, debris, unused materials and
other appurtenances from the sidewalk and surrounding work area and
leave the same in a clean and usable condition.
212. Editor's Note: The Standards for Construction are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 320-27 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 320-28
320:709
§ 320-28. Amendments.
This article may be amended from time to time, in whole or in part, by action
of the Municipal Council. All such amending ordinances shall be prepared
by the Municipal Solicitor with the advice of the sidewalk inspector. Notice
of such amendment shall be published once each week for two consecutive
weeks in one newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality at least
30 days prior to the time of adoption of such amendment by the legislative
authority. Such notice shall contain the title of the amending ordinance and
convey the meaning of the proposed change(s), either by including both
the unchanged and proposed change of those portions of the text that are
involved or by including a concise explanation of the amendment.
§ 320-29. Enforcement.
In the case of any sidewalk hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired or maintained in violation of this article or any ordinance
or regulation made under authority conferred hereby, the Superintendent
of Streets and Highways or the legislative authority or other proper official
may, in addition to other remedies contained herein, institute any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent, remove or correct such
violation.
§ 320-30. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person, property owner, firm, corporation or public utility who or which
shall violate any provision(s) of this article shall, upon conviction thereof
in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600,
plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day that a violation is
continued from the date of receipt of the notice of violation shall constitute
a separate offense. All fines collected for the violation of this article shall be
paid over to the general fund of the Municipality.
§ 320-31. Fees. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
The fee for a general sidewalk permit shall be as provided in Chapter 194,
Fees, payable to the Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 320-32. Construal of provisions.
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this article, they
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the use, maintenance,
repair, construction or reconstruction of sidewalks and are not intended to
interfere with, abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances;
provided, however, that when this article imposes greater restrictions or
requirements regarding sidewalks, the provisions of this article shall
prevail.
§ 320-28 § 320-32
320:710
ARTICLE IV
Standards for Street Construction and Acceptance
[Adopted 6-10-1986 by Ord. No. 1533]
§ 320-33. Minimum requirements.
All streets and roadways intended for public use or intended to be dedicated
by a developer and accepted by the Municipality shall be constructed
in accordance with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
specification Form 408, as amended, and the requirements of this article,
including the Standards For Construction dated March 1986, prepared by
R.F. Mitall and Associates, which is attached hereto.213 All material and
procedures set forth in this section are minimum requirements, and the
same may be upgraded in the discretion of the Municipal Engineer if
necessary for the proper completion of the project.
A. Grading. All excavation and grading shall be performed to the edge of
the right-of-way line. No cuts or fill shall exceed a slope of 2:1.
B. Subgrade. The subgrade must be well-drained at all times to prevent
soil saturation. All unstable or unsuitable subgrade material must be
removed and replaced with compacted approved material as directed
by the Municipal Engineer. Prior to the placement of any subbase, the
subgrade shall be proof rolled with a ten-to-fifteen-ton steel wheel roller
to determine the existence of any unsuitable or unstable material.
C. Subgrade draining. A triangular-shaped subsurface stone drain shall be
placed on each side of the roadway, having a depth of at least 12 inches
and a width of at least 24 inches. The drain shall be backfilled and
compacted with 2B slag or gravel or No. 4 stone. The subsurface drains
shall be connected to a storm sewer system. Where springs or wet areas
are encountered, a six-inch diameter perforated underdrain shall be
installed and carried to the nearest storm sewer. Subdrain grades may
be omitted by the Municipal Engineer where the grade outside the
cartway slopes deeply away from the pavement.
D. Pavement section. The pavement section shall be constructed in
accordance with the standard pavement drawing. Construction of
streets shall proceed in a timely manner without undue delay. The
subbase or aggregate base shall not be exposed to the weather or
allowed to become water-saturated. Saturated materials shall be
removed and replaced as directed by the Municipal Engineer. The
wearing course shall be placed in two layers. The first layer shall be
placed immediately after the bituminous base course, and the second
layer shall be placed after 85% of the lots on a street are completed or
within two years of placement of the first layer, whichever occurs first.
E. Utility installations. All utilities, including but not limited to waterlines,
gas lines, storm sewers, electric, telephone or cable television shall be
213. Editor's Note: The Standards for Construction are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 320-33 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 320-33
320:711
§ 320-34. Inspection and approval.
All public streets and roadways which are the subject of construction or
reconstruction by contractors and all private streets or roadways which
are the subject of construction by developers intended to be dedicated to
the Municipality shall be subject to inspection and approval as set forth
herein. Such inspection and approval may require a full-time inspector
to be present during all construction activities, in the discretion of the
Municipal Engineer, and the cost of any such inspections or the employment
of inspectors shall be reimbursed by any contractor of a public street or
roadway which is the subject of construction or reconstruction or by any
developer constructing a street or roadway intended to be dedicated to the
Municipality upon the Municipality's acceptance of the street or roadway.
The inspection and approval process is as follows:
placed outside of the cartway. All main lines or service line crossings
under the pavement shall be backfilled with approved aggregate such
as granulated slag, broken or weathered shale not larger than six
inches or two RC compacted to ninety-five-percent optimum density in
eight-inch layers.
F. Storm sewer. All storm sewer material shall be at least 15 inches in
diameter or as required by the volume of stormwater runoff as
determined by a methodology approved by the Municipal Engineer.
Inlets shall be of concrete, brick or precast concrete construction. The
tops of inlets shall be laid at the same grade as the street with the tops
depressed two inches below the road surface.
G. Crown. All streets shall have a transverse slope of 1/4 inch per foot.
H. Grades. No street shall have a grade exceeding that permitted by
Chapter 324, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the Municipality of
Monroeville. The minimum grade shall not be less than 1%.
I. Cartway and curbs. All streets shall be paved to a minimum width as
shown on the standard pavement section drawing. Curbs shall be of the
twelve-inch-wide bituminous wedge type six inches in height. Pavement
widths may be decreased on short cul-de-sac streets as permitted by
subdivision regulations.
A. There shall be a submission of all material delivery slips, which slips
shall show the following information:
(1) The date of delivery.
(2) The source of material.
(3) The hauler.
(4) The location of delivery.
(5) The type and class of material.
§ 320-33 § 320-34
320:712
(6) The weight or amount delivered.
B. At certain stages of construction, construction work shall halt and not
continue until the Municipal Engineer's authorized inspector inspects
and gives approval in writing. Said stages of construction are:
(1) Fine grading and proof rolling of the subgrade.
(2) Placement of base course.
(3) Placement of pavement.
C. A final inspection shall be conducted by the Municipal Engineer, the
inspector and the contractor or developer.
(1) In the case of the final inspection of the public street or roadway
constructed or reconstructed by a contractor, any deficiencies
noted during the inspection shall be corrected immediately by the
contractor. If there are any deficiencies in respect of the contractor
failing to supply all material delivery slips with appropriate
information contained thereon or failing to halt construction for
appropriate and complete inspections at certain stages of
construction work, either as set forth herein or as set forth in the
contract construction documents, or if there are deficiencies noted
during a visual inspection, the contractor shall take four-inch
diameter course samples of the pavement and base and have the
same verified by an independent testing laboratory designated by
the Municipal Engineer for material content, depth and density at
the cost of the contractor. one sample shall be taken for every 2,000
square yards of street surface paved, with a minimum of two
samples per street. All cores shall be backfilled and sealed
immediately with compacted approved material. A twelve-inch
square slab shall also be taken if required by the Municipal
Engineer for every 2,000 square yards and tested for material
content, depth and density, the cost of which shall be paid by the
contractor in the event that any deficiencies as set forth herein
have been noted.
(2) In the case of a developer having completed the construction or
reconstruction of a private street or roadway intended to be
dedicated to the Municipality prior to the final inspection, the
developer, at the developer's cost, shall take four-inch diameter
course samples of the pavement and base and have the same
verified by an independent testing laboratory designated by the
Municipal Engineer for material content, depth and density. one
sample shall be taken for every 2,000 square yards of street surface
paved, with a minimum of two samples per street. All cores shall be
backfilled and sealed immediately with compacted approved
material. A twelve-inch square slab shall also be taken if requested
by the Municipal Engineer for every 2,000 square yards and tested
for material content, depth and density at the cost of the developer.
Any deficiencies noted during the inspection or from the testing as
§ 320-34 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 320-34
320:713
§ 320-35. Dedication of private streets and roadways.
In the event that an owner or developer of a private street or roadway
intends to dedicate the same to the Municipality for acceptance by the
Municipality, a request for dedication shall be the subject of review and
consideration by the Municipal Council. Such request for dedication shall
cause the creation of a file for documents pertaining to the request, which
file shall be maintained by the Municipal Engineer and assigned a file
designation number.
described herein shall be corrected as a condition to any
acceptance of the offer of dedication.
A. Prereview.
(1) In respect of proposed streets and roadways intended to be
dedicated, plans shall be submitted for prereview by the Municipal
Engineer under the seal of an engineer or surveyor registered in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and such plans shall contain
the following:
(a) Block showing the applicant's name, location of the project,
engineer's or surveyor's name and address, date and scale.
(b) The location of all adjacent lot or boundary lines.
(c) A legal description of the right-of-way.
(d) The proposed width of the right-of-way.
(e) The location of all proposed or existing utilities.
(f) A profile of the existing and proposed center line.
(g) Horizontal and vertical data for all intersecting streets for a
distance of 250 feet in each direction from each intersection.
(h) Profiles of any existing or proposed utility lines in the right-ofway.
(i) The storm sewers and runoff calculation.
(j) Soil erosion and sediment control plan.
(k) The proposed cartway width.
(l) The location of any streams, springs or drainageways.
(m) Drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet.
(n) Plan sheets shall not be larger than 24 inches by 36 inches per.
(o) Other pertinent information, including subsurface soil
conditions necessary for adequate review.
§ 320-34 § 320-35
320:714
(2) In the event that the intended private street or roadway intended
for dedication has already been constructed, as-built plans
containing the width and described information shall be submitted
to the Municipal Engineer for prereview and a determination as to
what inspections and testing are necessary prior to any submission
to the Municipal Council.
B. The review of the Municipal Council shall include, but is not limited to:
(1) A determination as to whether the owner or the developer making
the request to dedicate a private street or roadway for acceptance
complied with any and all development proposals and conditions
attached thereto in respect of subdivisions or Zoning Ordinance214
developments where the private street or roadway is located.
(2) The obtaining of an engineering report as to what tests have been
performed and what tests need to be performed upon the private
street or roadway to determine whether it meets specifications of
the Municipality, the cost of which shall be paid by the owner or
developer.
(3) The obtaining of a report as to public safety and firesafety.
(4) The making of a determination as to the need for improvements
about the private street, including stormwater runoff and
sidewalks.
(5) A determination as to the appropriate types of bonds and terms of
bonds for the maintenance and reconstruction of the private street
or roadway if the same is to be accepted as a public street.
C. No public notice or advertising is required for any request by private
developer for dedication or consideration by the Municipal Council or
acceptance unless the Municipal Council specifically directs that public
notice or advertising be made.
D. The request by an owner or developer of a private street or roadway for
the acceptance by the Municipality or the review or consideration of the
same by the Municipality shall not impose any time limit or deadline or
liability upon the Municipal Council to make a final determination
whether to accept the offer of a dedication of a street or not to accept
the same.
E. The cost to the Municipality of all tests performed upon any private
street or roadway which is proposed to be accepted by the Municipality,
as well as the cost of engineering studies and reports, shall be paid by
the owner requesting that the Municipality accept the private streets or
roadways. Payment for such cost shall be made in advance in
accordance with the estimates of costs by the Municipal Engineer.
214. Editor's Note: See Ch. 359, Zoning.
§ 320-35 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 320-36
320:715
§ 320-36. Bond requirements.
In respect of public streets and roadways constructed or reconstructed by a
contractor, a one-hundred-percent maintenance bond for all improvements
guaranteeing the street or roadway free and clear from defects and material
workmanship for a period of not less than two years shall be filed, as
well as such other bonds as are required under the contract documents.
In respect of a private street or roadway intended to be dedicated by an
owner or developer, as a condition to acceptance of such private street
or roadway a one-hundred-percent maintenance bond shall be filed for all
improvements guaranteeing the street free from defects and material and
workmanship for a period of not less than two years, and a one-hundredpercent
performance bond shall be filed for the final one inch of wearing
course if such one inch of wearing course is not already in place or for any
improvement required as a condition of acceptance.
§ 320-36 § 320-36
320:716
ARTICLE V
Skateboards, Roller Skates, Scooters and Pedalcycles
[Adopted 9-13-1988 by Ord. No. 1640]
§ 320-37. Definitions.
Unless the contest otherwise requires, the following words or phrases shall
be construed according to the definitions set forth below:
PEDALCYCLE — A vehicle propelled solely by human-powered pedals.
§ 320-38. Unlawful acts.
No person shall be permitted to ride a skateboard, roller skates, scooters or
pedalcycle on the sidewalks of any business district within the Municipality
of Monroeville.
§ 320-39. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Monroeville Police Department to enforce the
provisions of this article.
§ 320-40. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Whosoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600, plus
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 320-37 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 320-40
320:717

ARTICLE VI
Road Occupancy
[Adopted 9-11-2001 by Ord. No. 2193215]
§ 320-41. Definitions; word usage.
Certain words used in this article are defined below. Words used in the
present tense shall include the future. The singular number shall include
the plural. and the plural the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory and
not permissive. The following words, when used herein, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person, as defined herein, who makes application for a
permit.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen occurrence or combination of
circumstances that calls for immediate action or remedy.
MUNICIPAL REPRESENTATIVE — The person officially appointed by the
Municipality of Monroeville to enforce this article.
MUNICIPAL ROADWAY — Any public street, highway, road, easement,
right-of-way or alley within the Municipality, including that portion of any
right-of-way that is improved with curbs and/or sidewalks.
MUNICIPAL ROADWAY OCCUPANCY — The opening of the surface; the
placing of facilities or structures in, on, or under; or opening an access
within any roadway of the Municipality.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
PERMIT — The approval issued to an applicant to perform any work covered
by the terms and conditions of this article.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit and has thereby
agreed to comply with all the terms and conditions of this article.
PERSON — Any natural person. partnership. firm, association, corporation,
municipal authority or other governmental entity.
WORK — Any and all activities of any kind or nature conducted by the
permittee, his agents, servants, employees, contractors, and subcontractors
which involves, to any extent, any roadway of the Municipality.
§ 320-42. Permits.
A. Permit required. No person shall engage in roadway occupancy within
the Municipality, without first securing a permit from the Municipality
for each separate undertaking. Any person maintaining pipe, lines or
underground conduits in or under the surface of any roadway by virtue
215. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. VI, Street Excavations, adopted
9-14-1953 by Ord. No. 25, as amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042.
§ 320-41 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 320-42
320:719
of any statute, ordinance or franchise may, however, proceed with
an excavation or opening without a permit when Emergency
circumstances demand that the work be done immediately for the
preservation of public health, safety or welfare, and provided further
that a permit could not reasonably and practically have been obtained
beforehand. Such person shall, thereafter, file an application for a
permit in accordance with the requirements of this article on the first
business day of the Municipality after the emergency. The permit shall
be retroactive to the date on which the work was begun.
B. Limitation. No permittee shall perform any work beyond that originally
authorized by his/her permit unless such excess work is approved, in
advance, by the municipal representative and the Municipality is paid
any additional fees occasioned thereby. Upon completion of any
additional work that is not covered by the original permit, the permittee
shall file a revised application with the Municipality reflecting the scope
of same.
C. Bonds. All bonds posted in connection with issuance of the permit shall
be deemed to cover all work which is covered by any permit issued
pursuant to this section.
D. Commencement of work. The work for which a permit is issued shall
commence within 60 days from the date of its issuance. If the work is
not commenced by that date, the permit shall automatically be
considered as revoked and, thereafter, a new permit for the work will
only be issued upon payment of a new permit fee and renewal of all
necessary bonds. The permittee shall notify the municipal
representative, at least 24 hours in advance, as to the date and time
when the work will commence.
E. Nontransferable. A permit is not transferable by the permittee to any
other person.
F. Expiration. A permit shall terminate at the end of the period of time
specified in the permit or upon completion of the work, whichever
occurs first. If the permittee is unable to complete the work within the
time specified in the permit, he/she shall, prior to its termination,
request an extension of time from the municipal representative, in
writing; the municipal representative to be provided with the reason for
the requested extension. If the municipal representative determines
that an extension is necessary, he may grant the permittee such
additional time as he deems appropriate for completion of the work.
G. Right to use roadway. All permits shall be issued subject to the rights of
the Municipality and the public to use any roadway which is the subject
of the permit for all purposes for which such roadway may lawfully be
used.
H. Revocation.
§ 320-42 § 320-42
320:720
§ 320-43. Duties and obligations of applicant.
In order to obtain a permit, the applicant shall provide the information
contained within the following sections.
(1) A permit may be revoked by the municipal representative, after
written notice to the permittee, as a result of any one of the
following:
(a) A violation of any condition of the permit; or
(b) A violation of any provision of this article or any applicable
statute, ordinance or regulation relating to the work; or
(c) The existence of any condition or the doing of any act by the
permittee which constitutes or creates a nuisance or which
endangers the safety or property of the public.
(2) Written notice of the revocation shall be served upon the permittee
or his agent. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the
reason for the revocation and it shall be effective if delivered either
by personal delivery to the permittee, or his agent, or by mailing
same to the permittee at the address on the application through the
United States Postal Service, certified mail, and obtaining a return
receipt.
A. The applicant shall complete and file a written application with the
Municipality, this on the form prescribed by the Municipality. No work
shall commence by the applicant until the municipal representative has
approved the application and the permit has been issued, other than
those exceptions set forth in § 320-42A pertaining to emergency work.
By the filing of the application for a permit, the applicant agrees that
he/she shall perform the work in accordance with the terms of this
article, the permit, as issued, and all applicable laws and regulations
pertaining thereto and that he shall be bound, in all respects, by the
terms and conditions of this article.
B. The applicant shall file two copies of all plans that show the extent of
the work for which the permit is being requested. Such plans shall
include all appropriate dimensions and other information that may be
required by the municipal representative, in addition to a traffic control
plan for the proposed work.
C. The applicant shall pay to the Municipality, at the time of filing of the
application, such fees for the permit as shall be established from time to
time by ordinance of the Municipality.
D. The applicant shall furnish such certificates of insurance as are
required by § 320-45B of this article.
E. The applicant shall post such bonds required by § 320-45C of this
article.
§ 320-42 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 320-43
320:721
§ 320-44. General specifications for roadway occupancy.
The following establishes general specifications for roadway occupancy
within the Municipality:
F. The applicant shall present evidence, if requested by the municipal
representative, that all material, labor, and/or equipment necessary to
accomplish the work are available to the applicant.
G. A copy of the permit shall, at all times while the work is in progress, be
available at the site of the work, and it shall be produced. upon demand,
to any authorized representative of the Municipality.
H. The applicant agrees, by filing an application, to save the Municipality,
its Commissioners, officers, employees and agents harmless and
indemnifies all, or any of them, from all claims, damages, suits,
liabilities and costs which may arise, or be claimed to arise, by reason of
the work, either as authorized or actually undertaken by the permittee.
The issuance of the permit, or the doing of any work provided for by this
article, shall constitute the agreement, by the person doing the work, to
the provisions of this section, irrespective of whether the same is
expressed elsewhere.
A. In general, the Municipality requires that facilities be placed outside of
the pavement or shoulder of a roadway unless there is no feasible way
for the permittee to perform the same. In the event that facilities must
be placed within the pavement or shoulder of a roadway, no excavation
in any roadway shall extend beyond the center line of such roadway
until the surface of the initial excavation is restored to a condition
which shall provide safe and convenient access for pedestrian and
vehicular traffic. At no time shall the improved part of the roadway be
completely closed to vehicular traffic or pedestrian traffic unless such
closing is authorized, in advance and in writing, by the municipal
representative.
B. No more than 250 feet, measured longitudinally, of any roadway shall
be opened in any roadway until such time as the previously opened
surface of the roadway is restored to a safe and convenient condition
for vehicular or pedestrian traffic unless such opening is authorized, in
advance and in writing, by the municipal representative.
C. No excavation shall be made, or attempted, if it shall or may interfere
with any utility lines or other underground facilities unless the
permittee has first secured the permission of the owners of all such
facilities.
D. The permittee shall locate all underground facilities, including sanitary
sewers, storm sewer, gas lines, water lines, electric, telephone,
communication and conduits of all other underground facilities,
sufficiently in advance of the commencement of the work in order to
prevent damage to any such facilities. The permittee shall also comply
§ 320-43 § 320-44
320:722
with the requirements of the Underground Utility Line Protection Law,
Act 287 of 1974, as amended.216
E. If an underground facility is damaged by the permittee, such damage
shall be repaired and/or restored by the permittee as necessary and in
accordance with the directions of the owner of the facility.
F. No monument of granite, concrete, iron, steel, brass or other lasting
material shall be removed or disturbed, or caused to be removed or
disturbed, without the permittee first obtaining permission, in advance
and in writing, by the municipal representative. The permittee shall pay
the Municipality for all of its expenses necessary and incidental to all
replacements of such monuments by the Municipality.
G. If a permittee shall cause any earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone or other
material to be either deposited upon or caused to roll, flow or wash onto
any roadway and thereby creates a nuisance or a danger to the public
health and safety, the permittee shall cause all such material to be
promptly removed from the roadway. In the event that any such
material is not removed within eight hours after notification of the
permittee by the municipal representative to do so, the Municipality
may then take all steps necessary to accomplish such removal, the costs
of the removal to be paid to the Municipality by the permittee.
H. The permittee shall place all such barriers, barricades, lights, warning
flags, danger signs and other such devices around the work area as are
reasonably necessary to protect the health and safety of the public. All
such safety requirements and precautionary measures shall be based
upon and conform, as applicable, to the requirements set forth in
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication 203, Work Zone
Traffic Control, latest addition. The permittee shall also comply with
any traffic control plan that forms part of the permit. In the event the
permittee fails to comply with the provisions of this subsection, the
Municipality may take the necessary steps to compel compliance, all
costs incurred by the Municipality in so doing shall be paid to it by the
permittee.
I. At all times while the work is in progress and prior to its completion, the
permittee shall maintain safe crossings for pedestrian and vehicular
traffic at all roadway intersections and, in addition, safe crossings for
pedestrians at intervals of not more than 300 feet. Two lanes of traffic
shall, where possible, be kept open at all intersections by the
installation of covering steel plates. All such steel plates shall be firmly
secured and, where appropriate, imbedded in bituminous material so as
to withstand the normal flow of traffic. If the size and character of the
excavation makes it impractical to use steel plates, the permittee shall
so advise the municipal representative at the time the application for
the permit is filed and the work shall not commence until the municipal
representative consents to same.
216. Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.
§ 320-44 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 320-44
320:723
J. The permittee shall maintain vehicular traffic access to all private
driveways except during working hours when construction operations
prohibit such access. The owner of any driveway that is affected by the
work shall be notified of such nonaccess by the permittee prior to the
commencement of the specific work. The permittee shall also insure
that there is free access, at all times, to fire hydrants in the area
covered by the scope of work.
K. All excavated material shall be placed compactly adjacent to the work
area so as to cause as little inconvenience and danger as possible to
vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Whenever the municipal
representative deems it necessary, in order to expedite the flow of
traffic or to abate a dirt or dust nuisance, containment measures shall
be taken by the permittee to prevent the spread of excavated material
into traffic lanes. Temporary wooden plank walks shall be installed
where the work may cause inconvenience to pedestrian traffic. If the
roadway is not sufficiently wide to hold excavated material, the
permittee may use up to 1/2 the width of the sidewalk along the
sidewalk line for such material, the remainder of the sidewalk to be
kept open for pedestrian traffic. No excavated material shall be
permitted to enter any stormwater inlet or sanitary sewer. All
excavations shall conform to the applicable requirements of Chapter
243, Land Disturbance, of the Code of the Municipality of Monroeville,
as amended.
L. All excavations shall conform to the following minimum standards:
(1) All work shall conform to the Municipality's standard specifications
contained within Appendix A of this article.217
(2) All excavations shall be backfilled with dry, compactable material in
accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Publication 408, Roadway Specifications, latest edition. Backfill
material shall be placed in loose layers not to exceed eight inches
prior to compaction and shall be thoroughly compacted by proper
tamping. The surface of the excavated area shall be restored to its
original, or equal condition, unless the permittee is authorized, by
the municipal representative to the contrary.
(3) Existing pavement which is removed in the course of the work shall
be removed for a distance of at least one foot beyond the outer
limits of the subgrade that is disturbed, this in order to prevent
settlement. The face of the remaining pavement is to be saw-cut
approximately vertical. In the case of flexible base pavement, full
lane-width restoration of the wearing course will be required in all
cases.
(4) For flexible base pavement restoration in which the wearing course
exceeds two inches in depth, additional BCBC or ID-2 binder
217. Editor's Note: The Standards for Construction are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 320-44 § 320-44
320:724
course shall be placed to within two inches of the finished elevation
prior to placement of the final wearing course.
(5) For cement concrete pavement restoration in which the opening
exceeds six feet in either length or width, reinforcing steel,
expansion ties bolts and load transfer devices shall be placed in
accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Roadway Construction Standard RC-26, latest edition.
(6) Temporary restoration shall be permitted when, in the opinion of
the municipal representative, final restoration is not immediately
feasible due to weather or site conditions. Final restoration shall
occur immediately upon the request of the municipal
representative or when weather or site conditions permit.
(7) All pavement markings disturbed during the course of work shall
be replaced upon final restoration.
M. An applicant shall set forth in detail on the application all tunneling or
boring which is contemplated under a roadway.
N. In the event any work performed by a permittee is deemed
unsatisfactory, in the opinion of the municipal representative, and if
such unsatisfactory work is not corrected in accordance with the
municipal representative's instructions, or, if the work is not completed
within the time frame specified in the permit, or any extension of time
thereof, the Municipality may proceed to correct such unsatisfactory
work or complete any uncompleted work, all costs thereby incurred by
the Municipality to be billed to and promptly paid by the permittee.
O. All backfilling, as well as all other work, shall be accomplished by the
permittee with due diligence so that no roadway is obstructed to a
greater extent or for a longer period of time than is actually necessary.
If the work is not executed with due diligence or, in the opinion of the
municipal representative, it does not comply with the terms of this
article, the permit or sound engineering practices, the municipal
representative shall so notify the permittee, and the permittee shall
then be required, within three working days from his receipt of such
notice, to proceed to complete the work or correct any deficiency in the
work. If the permittee does not comply with the terms of the notice, the
Municipality may then proceed against the permittee and the surety on
his Bond. In addition, the Municipality shall have the right to refuse to
issue any additional permits to a permittee who has not complied with
the requirements of this article relative to any prior permits issued to
him, the municipal representative to be the sole judge of such
noncompliance.
P. The municipal representative shall have the right to inspect all the work
and is also authorized to secure such outside inspection services as
may, in his judgement, be necessary in order to insure compliance by
the permittee with the provisions of this article and the permit.
§ 320-44 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 320-44
320:725
Q. Should settlement of a restored area of the work occur within a period
of two years from the date of completion of the permanent restoration
by the permittee, such settlement shall be considered conclusive
evidence of defective work, and the Municipality may then take all
action necessary to correct the condition, the cost of such corrective
action to be paid by the permittee.
R. The Municipality shall not, in any way, be responsible for any part of the
work which is either omitted or improperly done by the permittee, and
no officer or employee of the Municipality is authorized to assume any
jurisdiction of or responsibility for such part of the work except when
same becomes necessary in the exercise of the police power of the
Municipality in order to protect the public health and safety.
S. If, in the judgement of the municipal representative, traffic conditions
or the public health, safety or convenience require that any part of the
work be performed as Emergency work, it shall have the authority to
require that the permittee provide sufficient labor, material and
facilities, on a twenty-four-hour basis, to complete that part of the work
as soon as possible.
T. The municipal representative may, in addition to the conditions set forth
herein, impose such other conditions upon the issuance of the permit as
may be reasonably necessary to protect the health and safety of the
public during the course of the work.
U. Roadway occupancy for access. In addition to all other requirements of
this section, roadway occupancy for access shall meet the following
additional requirements:
(1) Applicant shall meet minimum acceptable site distance
requirements and other requirements, as defined in Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication RR-441, Access to and
occupancy of Highways by Driveways and Local Roads, latest
edition.
(2) All accesses shall be designed to accommodate the amount and
type of traffic they serve. The applicant shall be required to provide
a traffic impact study when, in the opinion of the Municipality, the
proposed access is expected to have a significant impact on the
safety and/or traffic flow of the affected roadway. Traffic impact
studies shall be prepared in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication 201, Engineering and
Traffic Studies, latest edition, and shall be prepared and sealed by
a qualified Professional Engineer registered in the State of
Pennsylvania. The traffic impact study shall, at a minimum, contain
the following components:
(a) An executive summary which shall give a general overview of
the development: the general trip generation and distribution;
a list of study intersections or locations; level of service tables;
mitigation measures necessary to mitigate existing/forecasted
§ 320-44 § 320-44
320:726
§ 320-45. Fees, insurance and restoration/maintenance bond.
The following describes the fees, insurance and bonding requirements that
must be maintained by the permittee:
deficiencies; mitigation measures necessary to mitigate the
proposed access; mitigation measures that the applicant is
willing to implement; signals warranted and when; and
auxiliary left turn lanes warranted and when. All supporting
documentation for the items contained within the executive
summary shall be supplied within the body of the traffic impact
study.
(b) The level of service tables shall summarize the locations
studied; the level of service in the base year; the level of
service in the design year without development; the level of
service in the design year with development and no mitigation;
and the level of service in the design year with development
and with mitigation. Each level of service shall be evaluated for
morning peak times and evening peak times. All calculations
generated for level of service or seconds/vehicle of delay must
be developed using the latest revision of H.C.S. or Transyt-7F
and must be contained within the report.
(c) A site location map, site plan, and supporting figures depicting
traffic volumes, trip percentages, and trip generation for all
levels of service.
(3) All proposed accesses shall comply with the provisions of Chapter
319, Stormwater Management, Article I, Stormwater Peak Flow
Rate Management, of the Code of the Municipality of Monroeville.
V. Roadway occupancy for aboveground facilities. In addition to all other
requirements of this section, roadway occupancy for aboveground
facilities shall meet the following additional requirements:
(1) Any aboveground structures, proposed to traverse a roadway shall
be designed by a qualified professional engineer, registered in the
State of Pennsylvania.
(2) Supporting structures shall be placed outside of the established
right-of-way for the roadway.
(3) Supporting structures shall be protected from vehicular damage
and vice versa.
(4) Structures crossing the roadway shall be a minimum of 18 feet
above the pavement surface and shoulder to preclude damage from
any vehicle.
(5) Utility poles shall be installed as near the right-of-way line of the
roadway as feasible.
§ 320-44 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 320-45
320:727
A. Fees. The Municipality may adopt by resolution from time to time a
reasonable schedule of fees to cover the cost of plan reviews,
inspections, and other activities necessary to administer the provisions
of this article.218 All fees shall be set in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code,219 and any dispute over
the fee amount shall be resolved in the manner prescribed by the
Planning Code.
B. Certificate of insurance. The applicant shall provide a certificate of
insurance to the Municipality, as part of its application for the permit,
same to reflect that the contractor, subcontractor or any other entity
who shall actually perform the work under the permit, is insured
against all claims for bodily injury, including death, as well as all claims
for property damage, any of which may arise out of its performance of
the work. This insurance shall include completed operations and
underground coverage and it shall name the Municipality as an
additional insured. The municipal representative may require increased
limits in the insurance coverage based upon the nature and extent of
the work; however, the minimum limits for bodily injury, including
death, shall be $500,000 for each person and $1,000,000 for each
occurrence and a minimum of $250,000 for property damage for each
occurrence. Any person maintaining pipe, lines or underground
conduits in or under the surface of any roadway by virtue of any statute,
ordinance or franchise may provide an annual certificate of insurance
to cover all work performed within the year, in an amount deemed
acceptable to the Municipal Solicitor.
C. Restoration/maintenance bond. Each applicant shall provide the
Municipality, prior to issuance of the permit, with a restoration/
maintenance bond to guarantee full performance and maintenance of
the work authorized by the permit, the form of the bond to be
acceptable to the Municipality. The amount of the bond shall equal the
cost to complete the work, as estimated by the municipal
representative, including maintenance of the work for a period of two
years from the date of its acceptance; however, in no event shall any
such bond be in an amount less than $1,000. All such bonds shall have,
as collateral thereto, either a cashier's check payable to the
Municipality or a corporate surety acceptable to the Municipality. The
municipal representative may, in the event that multiple permits are to
be issued to the same permittee, permit the applicant to furnish one
bond which shall be in such amount and subject to such terms as the
municipal representative deems necessary to cover all the work to be
done by the applicant under all such permits. Any person maintaining
pipe, lines or underground conduits in or under the surface of any
roadway by virtue of any statute, ordinance or franchise may. in lieu of a
restoration/maintenance bond for each activity, provide the
218. Editor's Note: Appendix A: Recommendations Regarding Fee Schedule for Roadway
Occupancy Permits, is included at the end of this chapter.
219. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101.
§ 320-45 § 320-45
320:728
§ 320-46. Default and penalties.
§ 320-47. Notifications.
Municipality with either an annual restoration maintenance bond or an
irrevocable letter of credit. the same in an amount deemed acceptable
to the municipal solicitor.
A. Default. If the municipal representative determines that there has been
a default in the performance of the work, he shall give written notice of
the default to the permittee and its corporate surety or creditor, if any,
on the restoration/maintenance bond or irrevocable letter of credit. The
notice shall state the action which is to be taken to correct the default,
the estimated cost of correction, and the time deemed reasonably
necessary for its completion.
B. Correction of default. In the event that, after receipt of the notice of
default, the default shall not be promptly corrected by the permittee
then, in the case of a corporate surety or creditor, the surety or creditor
shall be required, within the time specified, to either cause the required
corrections to be made or, in the alternative, pay over to the
Municipality a sum equal to the estimated cost of the municipal
representative for the making of the corrections. Upon receipt of such
funds, the municipal representative shall then proceed to have the work
completed; however, no liability shall be incurred by the Municipality as
a result of any such action taken by it, other than its responsibility to
see to the proper expenditure of any funds so received by it.
C. Forfeiture of cash bond. Should the permittee have posted a cashier's
check as collateral to the bond, the Municipality shall have the right,
either following or in the course of its completion of the work, to use
such portion of the funds represented by said check as necessary to pay
all costs and expenses incurred by it, any part of such funds remaining
thereafter to be returned to the permittee.
D. Term of bond. The effective term of the bond shall commence on the
date of issuance of the permit and it shall continue, in full force and
effect, until a date two years from the date of approval of the final
restoration of the work by the municipal representative.
A. Notice to property owners. If, in the opinion of the municipal
representative, the work to be undertaken is such that it will affect any
property which abuts or adjoins the area of the work, the municipal
representative may require the permittee to give written notice of the
same to the owners and/or tenants of each such affected property. The
permittee shall provide proof of such notification to the municipal
representative prior to the start of such work.
B. Notice to police/fire departments. If, in the opinion of the municipal
representative, the work to be undertaken is such that it will prohibit or
restrict the flow of traffic on any roadway within the Municipality, the
§ 320-45 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 320-47
320:729
§ 320-48. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or any other entity which shall
violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or to suffer
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Each day that any violation
of any provision of this article continues, it shall constitute a separate
offense.
municipal representative may require the permittee to give written
notice of the same to the Police and Fire Departments of the
Municipality. The permittee shall provide proof of such notification to
the municipal representative prior to the start of such work.
§ 320-47 § 320-48
320:730
Chapter 324
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Engineer — See Ch. 39.
Planning Department and Planning
Commission — See Ch. 101.
Building construction — See Ch. 162.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 176.
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Land disturbance — See Ch. 243.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 316.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 319.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 320.
Zoning — See Ch. 359.
§ 320-48 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 320-48
324:731

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 324-1. Applicability.
The standards and requirements set forth in these Subdivision Regulations
shall apply to the planning of all subdivisions, residential, commercial and
industrial.
§ 324-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision
Regulations of Monroeville Municipality."
§ 324-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 324-2
324:733

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 324-3. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates
otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings
indicated below:
ALLEY — A minor street for pedestrian or vehicular access to properties; it
shall have a minimum width of 20 feet.
APPLICANT — The owner or owners, legal or equitable, of land within the
Municipality of Monroeville or a representative who submits an application
for subdivision approval under the provisions of these Subdivision
Regulations and standards adopted by the Municipality of Monroeville.
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Municipality of
Monroeville.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The complete plan, or any of its parts, prepared
by the Planning Commission to guide the physical development and
redevelopment of the community, as evidenced by the Planning
Commission's minutes, actions, resolutions, maps, plans, reports and other
official acts and documents.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street intersecting another street at one end and
terminating at the other in a circular vehicular turnaround.[Amended
3-13-1990 by Ord. No. 1698]
DEVELOPER — That person, persons or any corporation, partnership,
association or other entity or any responsible person therein or agent
therefor that undertakes the activities covered by these regulations. The
term "developer" is intended to include but not necessarily be limited to
the terms "subdivider," "owner" and "builder," even though the individuals
involved in successive stages of the project may vary.
EASEMENT — The right-of-way for a limited use of land for a public or
private purpose.
LOT — A parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership, use or
improvement.
LOT WIDTH — The lot width of a lot measured at the building's setback line.
MINOR PLAT ADJUSTMENT — See the definition of "subdivision, minor plat
adjustment."[Added 8-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2270]
PARCEL — A portion of land not adequate in size to meet the requirements
of the Zoning Ordinance but which, by a later subdivision of abutting
property, can be made adequate to meet the requirements or a portion of
land not proposed to be divided into lots at the time of the subdivision.
PLAN —
A. SKETCH PLAN — — An informal plan not necessarily to the exact scale.
§ 324-3 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 324-3
324:735
STREET — A right-of-way intended primarily for vehicular traffic and
usually providing for utilities and pedestrian travel. A "street" may be
designated by other appropriate names, such as "highway," "thoroughfare,"
"boulevard," "parkway," "road," "avenue," "drive," "lane" or "place."
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling shall be exempted.[Amended 3-13-2001
by Ord. No. 2179]
SUBDIVISION, MINOR PLAT ADJUSTMENT — An adjustment that does
not change the subdivision in any material aspect or character.[Added
8-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2270]
UNITED STATES SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE — The District Office,
Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture.
ZONING ORDINANCE — Chapter 359, Zoning, of the Code of the
Municipality of Monroeville, as amended.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — — A tentative map indicating the subdivision
of land, prepared in accordance with provisions of Article IV of these
regulations for formal review by the Planning Commission.
B.
FINAL PLAN — — A map prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor
on tracing cloth, reflecting the conditions of approval of the preliminary
plan and laying out the subdivision in its complete form according
to these regulations for approval by the Planning Commission and
Municipal Council.
C.
§ 324-3 § 324-3
324:736
ARTICLE III
Plan Submission and Review
§ 324-4. Intent; purpose.
It is the intention of this procedure to encourage and assist developers in
their design with modern planning practice and with the shortest and most
flexible procedures and, at the same time, to protect the community against
undesirable conditions. Another purpose of these regulations is to create an
undisputable legal base for property descriptions for the developer as well
as the community.
§ 324-5. Preapplication consultation.
§ 324-6. Preliminary plan.
A. Before any design or engineering work and before any formal
application, the applicant may consult with the Planning Director
concerning the following problems:
(1) The type of development on the particular site.
(2) Access to and from the site.
(3) Public facilities, such as sanitary and storm sewers, water supply,
schools and parks, police and fire protection, etc.
(4) Other agencies involved in obtaining all permits for the
development.
B. At such meeting, the following details are required as a basis for the
discussions with the developer:
(1) A sketch plan showing the full property to be subdivided, with the
proposed street and sewer patterns and the location of any land
intended for public use, such as school, playground or conservancy
land.
(2) A location map showing the relation of the proposed subdivision to
existing community facilities within the property lines. The
following features shall be included:
(a) Traffic arteries (highways and streets).
(b) Public transportation lines (railroad and bus lines).
(c) Existing schools, parks, playgrounds or other public sites.
(d) Shopping centers.
(e) Natural watercourses and drainage areas.
A. The applicant shall file an application by submitting the following data:
§ 324-4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 324-6
324:737
(1) The application form provided by the Planning Department,
completed with required information.
(2) The preliminary plan: eight copies of the entire property drawn
accurately and legibly by a registered engineer or surveyor or by
an architect, planner or an able draftsman in one of these
professions.
(3) The fee shall be paid upon the filing of the preliminary plan for the
purpose of defraying the cost of the proceedings. The amount of
said fee shall be as provided in Chapter 194, Fees. [Amended
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
B. If the plan is withdrawn at a later date, the fee, minus 20%, should be
refunded to the applicant. The application must be submitted to the
Planning Department at least 30 days prior to the meeting at which the
Planning Commission is scheduled to consider the plan. Upon approval
of the preliminary plan by the Planning Commission, the preliminary
plan shall be submitted to the Municipal Council for its approval.
C. The preliminary plan may show areas that are marked "reserved for
future development"; however, said areas may be given preliminary
approval as part of the overall subdivision although it is intended that
they be developed in stages. Areas marked "reserved for future
development" may be developed in accordance with the provisions of
§ 324-7 hereof without other preliminary approval, provided that they
were initially subject to all of the requirements of this section.
D. Data required on the preliminary plan shall be as follows:
(1) Description:
(a) The name of the proposed subdivision.
(b) The name of the owner of the property.
(c) The North point, date and scale not smaller than one inch
equals 50 feet; if over 30 acres are involved, the scale may be
decreased.
(2) Existing conditions:
(a) Boundary line bearings and distances.
(b) Street and way names, widths and grades within 200 feet of
the subdivision.
(c) Easement locations, widths and purposes.
(d) Utilities on and adjacent to land to be used for the subdivision.
(e) Existing structures and other physical features within the
property and at least 100 feet beyond the property lines.
§ 324-6 § 324-6
324:738
§ 324-7. Final plan.
(f) Recording information on abutting properties, the plan name,
plan book volume and page number or the name of property
owners.
(g) In case of resubdivision, the lines, lot numbers, utilities,
easements, etc., of the original plan shall be shown in light
dashed line.
(h) Existing contour lines at five-foot intervals within the property
and 100 feet beyond property lines.
(i) Subsurface conditions of the property being developed.
(3) Proposed conditions:
(a) Streets and ways, with the name, width, grade and type of
construction.
(b) Lots, with numbers, approximate dimensions and square foot
area.
(c) Parcels reserved for any reason, for parks, playgrounds, school
or other public or private use.
(d) Easements for utilities, pedestrian walkways or other purpose.
(e) Building setback lines, in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance.
(f) Final contour lines at five-foot intervals within the property
and at least 100 feet beyond the property lines.
(g) When major grading is involved, the requirements to be met as
set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.
(h) Fire hydrant locations.
A. Within six months after the conditional approval of the preliminary plan
by the Planning Commission and the Municipal Council, a final plan of
the portion being developed shall be submitted to the Planning
Department. If development of the land is begun within said six-month
period, the period for the submission of a final plan shall be extended
for a period of six months. If a final plan is not submitted to the Planning
Department within the specified time period, the preliminary approval
shall be null and void, and a new application must be submitted. The
final plan must be submitted to the Planning Department at least 10
days before the Planning Commission meeting to consider the plan.
However, plans which have not been submitted for preliminary
approval within the previous 12 months or which are not required to
have preliminary approval shall be submitted at least 30 days before
the Planning Commission meeting to consider the plan.
§ 324-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 324-7
324:739
B. This plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or registered
surveyor and shall conform to the design standards of these regulations
(Article IV). It shall be prepared on tracing cloth with black India ink.
The original tracing shall be submitted together with one duplicate
tracing (sepia) and two prints.
C. Staged subdivisions. [Added 9-14-1971 by Ord. No. 763]
(1) In the case of subdivisions whose total land area is to be developed
in successive stages, the first stage of development shall be subject
to the six-month time period for submission of final plan or start of
construction. Thereafter, development of successive stages and
subsequent submissions for final plan approval shall not be subject
to the six-month time requirements stated herein.
(2) Approval of staged subdivisions shall be subject to the following:
(a) Review and approval by the Planning Commission and
Municipal Council of the logical limits of the various stages of
development of the total site, including the sequence of
development.
(b) Preliminary plan approval of the total site in accordance with
§ 324-6.
(c) The development of successive stages following the first stage
may be commenced following an administrative review of the
approved preliminary subdivision by the Municipal Engineer
and Zoning Officer with the applicant. The applicant shall then
file with the Zoning Officer his statement of intent to
commence development of a successive stage. Development
shall be completed within one year, at which time the final plan
shall be submitted on the stage under development.
(d) In lieu of development of the required improvements, in each
successive stage proper improvement bonds may be submitted
as required in § 324-8 following review with the Municipal
Engineer and Zoning Officer and final plan approval required.
D. Data required on the final plan shall be as follows:
(1) Description:
(a) The name of the subdivision.
(b) The name of the owner of the property.
(c) The North point, date and scale not smaller than one inch
equals 100 feet.
(d) The name, seal and registration number of the registered
engineer or registered surveyor who made the plan.
(2) Existing and proposed conditions:
§ 324-7 § 324-7
324:740
§ 324-8. Final approval.
Approval of the final plan by the Planning Commission and by the Municipal
Council is subject to the following requirements:
(a) Boundary of the plan in heavy line, with courses and distances
to the nearest 1/100 of a foot, based upon an accurate field
survey, which must be balanced and closed.
(b) Streets and ways, with names and right-of-way widths. The
street lines shall be heavy with bearings and distances to the
nearest 1/100 of a foot. Curving lines shall have the radii,
center angles and the arc distances.
(c) Lots, with bearings and distances, numbered consecutively
throughout the plan.
(d) Parcels reserved for public or private use should be identified
by capital letters and should have the note describing the
purpose of the parcel.
(e) Building setback lines in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance.
(f) Permanent monuments, in accordance with the standards and
specifications of the Municipal Engineer.
(g) Existing structures proposed to remain, with distances to the
nearest property and/or lot lines.
(h) Easements, with medium dashed lines and dimensions and
distances to the nearest property and/or lot lines.
(i) If the plan covers only a portion of the property being
subdivided, a small-scale location map of the entire property
must be included. The parts reserved for future subdivision
should be identified as parcels and should have a note:
"reserved for future development."
(j) Indentures, acknowledgments, endorsements, dedications,
certifications and private restrictions affecting the use of the
property. (See Appendix A.220)
A. Compliance with the standards of these regulations (Article IV).
B. Completion of construction (streets, sewers, survey monuments and
other improvements as may be required by these regulations) in
accordance with the specifications and standards of the Public Works
Department or full assurance of the required improvements as specified
in §§ 321-21 and 324-22.
220. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 324-7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 324-9
324:741
§ 324-9. Recording of plans.
After the approval of the final plan, it shall be recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County within 90 days of the date of the
approval or it will be declared null and void and have to be resubmitted
to the Municipal Planning Commission. A copy of the recorded plan shall
be filed with the Municipal Zoning Administrator within 30 days after
recording.
§ 324-9.1. Minor plat adjustment. [Added 8-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2270]
Final authority for approval or denial of a minor plat adjustment as defined
herein shall be vested in the Planning Director or his/her designee of
the Municipality of Monroeville upon application of the property owner or
authorized agent of the property owner filing an appropriate application
with the Municipality of Monroeville. The Municipality of Monroeville will
cause the application and request for a minor plat adjustment to be referred
to the Municipal Engineer who shall make a written recommendation for
approval or denial to the Planning Director. The Planning Director, or his/
her designee, shall then execute the minor plat adjustment Mylar and notify
the Manager of the Municipality of Monroeville and the applicant in writing
that the plat adjustment has been approved for recording. The Municipal
Engineer and the Planning Director of the Municipality of Monroeville
shall execute the Mylar in such a form and manner that the same would
be acceptable for recording in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Allegheny County. Both the Planning Director and the Municipal Engineer
shall expedite the handling of minor plat adjustments and the same should
be processed without referral to the Planning Commission or Council for the
Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 324-10. Small subdivisions.
In the case of a routine division of land, the preliminary procedure is not
required, provided that:
§ 324-11. Multiple-family, commercial and industrial developments.
The requirements and standards set forth in these Subdivision Regulations
shall apply to multiple-family, commercial and industrial developments
when more than one main structure is to be erected on the subject property
and it is not an approved unit group development as provided in the Zoning
Ordinance and/or if a street, public or private, is to be constructed.
A. No more than five lots are involved.
B. No new streets or other improvements are needed.
C. It is in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance.
§ 324-9 § 324-12
324:742
§ 324-12. Hillside subdivisions.
If a subdivision is on a site with an average slope of more than 15% (the
computation of the average slope of a subdivision shall exclude land with
a slope in excess of 25% if that land will not be disturbed in the course of
development), the Planning Commission may, in order to avoid the necessity
for excessive cut and/or fill and to preserve trees, groves, waterways, scenic
points, historic spots and other community assets and landmarks, allow
or require lot sizes, setbacks and yards of dimensions which differ from
the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, provided that the density of
the parcel being developed is not greater than that which would have
been permitted under the Zoning Ordinance had a uniform lot design been
applied to the entire site on lands with slopes of less than 20% and provided
that the total parcel has an area of at least 30 acres to allow variations
which result in smaller lot sizes. All portions of the parcel, however, shall
be taken up in lots, streets, public lands or other proposed uses so that
remnants and landlocked areas shall not be created.
§ 324-13. Accommodation of hardships.
Upon application and allegations in writing that extraordinary hardship
may result from strict compliance with these regulations, the case may
be referred to the Planning Commission for the purpose of hearing the
cause and determining substitute regulations to accommodate the specific
hardships. If by adopting the substitute regulations substantial justice may
be done and the public interest may be served, the Planning Commission
may approve the adoption of the substitute regulations, subject to final
plan approval by the Municipal Council, in lieu of the regulations causing
hardship, provided that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying
the intent and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan or the spirit of these
regulations.
§ 324-14. Limitation of soil erosion.
In subdivisions of more than five lots and/or an average slope of 10%
or greater, the Planning Commission may require review by the United
States Soil Conservation Service and utilize its recommendations in limiting
soil erosion both during and after construction. The Planning Commission
may, however, require reasonable safeguards against erosion derived from
recognized engineering practices on any subdivision if an erosion hazard is
imminent in the proposed subdivision design.
§ 324-15. Appendixes; more stringent provisions to prevail.
A. Appendix A, Procedure For Subdivisions, attached to this chapter,221
shall be considered a summary of the provisions of Article III and used
for reference and convenience in the administration of this chapter.
221. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 324-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 324-15
324:743
B. Appendix B, Indentures, Acknowledgments, Endorsements,
Dedications, shall be the official forms employed in the administration
of this chapter. These forms may be amended and added to without the
necessity of amending this chapter.222
C. Appendix C is Sections 501 through 516 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968,223 which provides
the grant of power for the enactment of this chapter and governs
certain aspects of subdivision control.224 Such sections of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code shall govern procedures in
the Municipality of Monroeville where this chapter is silent but shall be
superseded where this chapter provides more specific or more
stringent procedures and regulations.
222. Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Municipal Manager.
223. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10501 through 10516.
224. Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Municipal Manager.
§ 324-15 § 324-15
324:744
ARTICLE IV
Standards
§ 324-16. General standards.
§ 324-17. Streets.
A. The plan of subdivision shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan or
part of the plan as it may have been prepared and adopted by the
Municipality.
B. Land may be dedicated to the Municipality for public use, but such
dedication shall not bind the Municipal Council to accept or maintain
the same. All land dedicated to the Municipality must be provided with
adequate means of ingress and egress from other public lands or public
rights-of-way.
C. The Municipal Planning Commission may allow certain departures from
these regulations and standards, provided that they are not contrary to
the public interest and provided that some special conditions require
such variations.
A. Minor streets shall provide access to abutting properties. They shall be
so laid out as to discourage through traffic and shall have a minimum
right-of-way width of 50 feet. All horizontal curves shall have a
minimum center-line radius of 120 feet. Minimum vertical curve length
shall be calculated by multiplying the algebraic difference in grade
times 15 for crest curves and 10 for sag curves. A cul-de-sac street as a
minor street is acceptable with the following conditions:
(1) The length of the street shall not exceed 800 feet or shall not serve
more than 50 dwelling units.
(2) It shall have an adequate turnaround, in a circular form, with a
radius of a minimum of 50 feet. Cul-de-sac streets for properties
with topographic or other physical hardships, serving not more
than 20 housing units, may be permitted to have 40 feet of right-ofway,
provided that the roadway, sidewalks and slope areas are
properly designated and spaced inside of the right-of-way.
[Amended 3-13-1990 by Ord. No. 1698]
B. Collector streets provide connections between minor streets and
arterial streets and at the same time serve as access for the abutting
properties. They shall have a right-of-way of 60 feet. Horizontal curves
shall have a minimum center-line radius of 200 feet. The minimum
vertical curve length shall be calculated by multiplying the algebraic
difference in grade times 15 for crest curves and 20 for sag curves.
C. Street intersections:
(1) Streets should intersect each other as nearly as possible at right
angles (90°).
§ 324-16 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 324-17
324:745
(2) When two streets intersect a third street from opposite sides
(street jogs), the distance between the two street center lines
should be a minimum of 150 feet.
(3) Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius
of 25 feet for minor streets, with a radius of 35 feet for collector
streets and a radius of 50 feet for arterial streets (state highways).
D. Street grades:
(1) Street grades shall not exceed the following percentage, with
proper allowance for vertical curves:
(a) Minor street: 12%.
(b) Collector street: 10%.
(2) No street grades shall be less than 1%.
(3) Intersection grades of lesser connecting streets shall not exceed
4% within 40 feet from the right-of-way of the street intersected.
E. Sight distances.
(1) Along streets. Proper sight distance must be provided for both
horizontal and vertical curves. Sight distance measurements shall
be made along a simulated driver's line of vision. Minimum sight
distances, thus measured, shall be:
(a) Minor street: 110 feet.
(b) Collector street: 200 feet.
(2) At intersections. Appropriate sight distances must be maintained
on all approaches. When measured from the intersecting curbline
extension along an approach vehicle travel path, there shall be an
uninterrupted sight distance of:
(a) Minor street: 70 feet.
(b) Collector street: 90 feet.
F. Half and partial streets are permitted only:
(1) Where needed to complete existing partial streets.
(2) Where essential to good subdivision to combine two or more small
tracts for overall planning and where all of the interested parties
agree, in writing, to dedicate and improve their part of the street at
the time their property is being subdivided.
G. Alleys and ways may be required by the Planning Commission for
pedestrian or vehicular access to public or private open spaces or to the
rear of properties having inadequate physical access from a street.
Such alleys shall be not less than 20 feet in width and shall be improved
§ 324-17 § 324-17
324:746
§ 324-18. Utilities.
§ 324-19. Survey monuments.
Permanent monuments shall mark all streets at the beginning points of the
curvatures, set five feet inside of the right-of-way lines. The final location
and the number of monuments shall be determined by the Municipal
Engineer. The installation and certification should be made by a registered
engineer or a registered surveyor prior to the approval of the final
subdivision plan. In lieu of this prior installation, the developer may put
for the proper purpose with walks, steps or cartways, in accordance
with the specifications and standards of the Municipality.
H. Conformance with Master Plans. The Planning Commission may require
the street design to conform to adopted Master Plans of the
Municipality or other planning agencies having jurisdiction over the
subdivision.
A. Easements. Easements for all utilities shall be provided across lots or
centered along the rear or side lot lines where necessary and shall not
be less than 15 feet in width.
B. Water. All new subdivisions must be provided with public water supply
systems, or, in small subdivision cases only, where there are no existing
public water supply systems existing near the subdivision, each lot in
the plan must be provided with an individual water supply system
approved by the Allegheny County Health Department.
C. Sanitary sewers. All lots in a new subdivision must be connected into a
public sanitary sewer system. In exceptional cases where no public
sewers are available, the Planning Commission may approve small
subdivisions (not more than five lots), with the following conditions:
(1) A minimum of five acres of land is used.
(2) Prior and written approval of the Allegheny County Health
Department.
D. Storm sewers. Storm drainage facilities must be designed throughout
the entire subdivision so as to handle all the anticipated peak
discharges of stormwater from the property being subdivided, plus all
the anticipated runoff that will occur on abutting properties at a higher
elevation, when those properties will be fully developed. The
anticipated peak discharge shall be calculated according to criteria
established by the Municipal Engineer relative to peak storm cycles.
E. Electric and telephone. In all subdivisions submitted after the effective
date of these Subdivision Regulations, all electric, telephone and other
utilities shall be installed underground, in properly located and
recorded easements.
§ 324-17 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 324-19
324:747
up a bond or a cash guaranty in the form of a certified check of $50 per
monument required for the plan.
§ 324-20. Required improvements.
The following improvements shall be required as a condition to approval of
the final subdivision plan:
A. Pavements. Streets must be surfaced to the grades and dimensions on
the plans submitted by the applicant, in accordance with the standards
and specifications of the Municipality and approved by the Public Works
Department.
B. Curbs. On all new streets, curbs must be installed in accordance with
the standards and specifications of the Municipality.
C. Sidewalks.
(1) In all new commercial and residential subdivisions, sidewalks must
be installed on the owner's side of an existing paved street and on
both sides of new streets to be paved during subdivision
development, in accordance with the standards and specifications
of the Municipality.
(2) Sidewalks shall be installed a maximum of one year following the
application of the final top course of road construction and curbing.
D. Shade trees. For convenience and attractiveness and to improve the
living environment in the subdivision, shade trees must be planted on
both sides of the street, according to the following requirements:
[Amended 8-10-1971 by Ord. No. 751]
(1) Shade trees shall be planted within a five-foot-wide tree-planting
easement established adjacent to and on both sides of the
dedicated public right-of-way and running parallel to it for the
entire length of said right-of-way. The five-foot easement shall be
recorded on the subdivision tracing and shall be noted on the plan
as "Tree-Planting Easement - Type and Location of Trees as
Approved by the Shade Tree Commission."
(2) Shade trees shall be of a minimum of 1 1/2 inches in diameter.
(3) Shade trees shall be planted according to a plan approved by the
Shade Tree Commission and any of the varieties as recommended
by the Shade Tree Commission.
(4) The maximum number of trees required in the planting easement
shall not exceed the total number of trees had they been placed
uniformly on sixty-foot centers throughout the subdivision on both
sides of public rights-of-way.
(5) The installation of shade trees shall occur within the same time
period as allowed for sidewalks (Subsection C above).
§ 324-19 § 324-20
324:748
§ 324-21. Improvement bond.
The applicant shall submit an improvement bond in an amount equal to
100% of the estimated cost of the required improvements. Said bond shall
be:
§ 324-22. Maintenance bond.
Upon completion of the required improvements and installations, the
applicant shall provide a two-year maintenance bond, which shall cover all
sanitary and storm sewers, paving and curbing, sidewalks and any other
improvements installed by the developer and intended for acceptance by
the Municipality of Monroeville and:
E. Streetlights. For the safety, convenience and attractiveness of the
subdivision, streetlights must be installed on the streets on decorative
poles, in accordance with the standards and specifications as
prescribed by the Public Works Department.
A. In favor of the Municipality of Monroeville and provide satisfactory
surety.
B. Based on estimates by a registered engineer or a reputable contractor
and approved by the Municipal Engineer, excluding the cost of any of
the required utilities, improvements and installations which have been
or are going to be constructed, installed and completed by utility
companies or by the Municipality of Monroeville.
C. In force until and terminate in accordance with Section 510.225
A. Be in favor of the Municipality of Monroeville and provide surety
satisfactory to the Municipal Solicitor.
B. Be in an amount of not less than 10% of the cost, as determined by the
improvement bond.
C. Provide that for a period of two years after the completion of said
improvements and installations the applicant will, at his own expense,
make all repairs of said improvements and installations which may
become necessary by reason of improper workmanship of faulty
materials. Prior to and as a condition of the final approval, a written
commitment by the developer should be submitted to the Planning
Commission stating the willingness on the part of the developer to
comply with this requirement at the time of completion of this
construction.
225. Editor's Note: See Section 510, Release from improvement bond, of Appendix C (restating
53 P.S. § 10510), which is on file in the office of the Municipal Manager.
§ 324-20 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 324-23
324:749
§ 324-23. Cash guaranty.
In lieu of the required bonds, the applicant may deposit a cash guaranty in
the form of a certified or cashier's check or a line of credit satisfactory to the
Municipal Solicitor. Any funds deposited for guaranteeing the construction
shall be used only for the purpose of making the improvements, installation
or repair for which said bond or cash was provided.
§ 324-24. Construction bond.
A cash bond of $500 shall be deposited with the application for a building
permit on any lot, following the construction of sidewalks and/or final top
course of road and curbing, for the repair of any damage done to the same
during construction; provided, however, that the builder on the lot is not
also the applicant prior to the acceptance of said streets and sidewalks.
§ 324-23 § 324-24
324:750
ARTICLE V
Violations and Penalties; Construal of Provisions
§ 324-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person, copartnership or corporation who or which shall subdivide
any lot, tract or parcel of land, lay out, construct, open or dedicate any
street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer or water main for public use or travel or
erect any building in a subdivision without having first complied with these
regulations or who or which violates any provisions of these regulations
shall, upon conviction before a District Justice or other competent judicial
body, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $600 plus costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment thereof, by imprisonment in the Allegheny
County Jail not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation continues after
the service of notice shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 324-26. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of these regulations shall control wherever they impose
greater restrictions than those imposed by other laws, ordinances, rules,
regulations, permits, easements, agreements or covenants.
§ 324-25 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 324-26
324:751
Chapter 328
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 162.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 176.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 187.
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 316.
Zoning — See Ch. 359.
§ 328-1. Building permit required.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, no person or corporation
shall construct, maintain or operate a swimming pool on his, her or its
private residential premises unless he, she or it shall have secured a
building permit to construct such pool.
§ 328-2. Permit application; fees. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person or corporation desiring to construct a new swimming pool on
his, her or its residential premises and to thereafter maintain and operate
the same shall be required to file with the Council of the Municipality of
Monroeville an application for such a permit. The Council will grant such a
permit upon the payment of the sum as provided in Chapter 194, Fees, at
the time the application is made, provided that the following conditions are
observed:
A. The application shall be signed by the parties desiring to construct said
swimming pool, together with their addresses, and the permit will be
granted only to the persons holding the legal title to the residential
premises on which the pool is to be constructed.
B. No private swimming pool permit will be granted unless the outlet for
the same is into a storm or sanitary sewer of Monroeville and which
outlet shall be controlled by a gate-type valve with an opening not to
exceed two inches in diameter. Where the outlet for the same is into a
sanitary sewer, a tap fee in the sum as provided in Chapter 194, Fees,
shall be paid to the Municipality of Monroeville prior to the granting of
the permit.
C. The zoning provisions of the Municipality of Monroeville shall be
strictly observed, except the rear yard requirements in Chapter 359,
Zoning, of the Code of the Municipality of Monroeville. After the
installation of a private swimming pool, the depth of the rear yard, as
unaffected by private swimming pools, garages and any other structure,
shall not be less than 20 feet from the rear line of the lot.
§ 324-26 § 328-2
328:752
§ 328-3. Renewal of permit; fee. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
All of the permits for the construction, installation, maintenance and
operation of private swimming pools shall be renewable each year on or
before the 15th day of February of each year, occurring at least 12 months
after the date of the original issuance of the permit. Such renewals shall
certify that the present owners of the property on which the swimming pool
D. All private swimming pools shall be enclosed by an open-type
ornamental fence, constituting a barrier to small children, four feet in
height and with a gate in said fence which shall be locked when the pool
is not in use by or under the supervision of the owner or other
designated responsible person of the premises upon which it is
installed. Private swimming pools of the aboveground type which have
vertical walls of at least four feet from ground level and removable
steps shall not be required to be fenced, but it shall be the duty of the
owner to see that the removable steps are removed from the
aboveground swimming pool and taken indoors or otherwise locked up
when it is not in use by or under the supervision of the owner or other
designated responsible person of the premises upon which it is
installed. [Amended 6-9-1970 by Ord. No. 691]
E. The application for the permit to install the private swimming pool shall
be accompanied by detailed drawings, including a plot plan of the
premises affected, which said drawings shall bear the seal of an
architect or engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
on which it is certified to by said architect or engineer that the
construction of said swimming pool is adequate, giving due
consideration to ground conditions such as ground support, side hill
location, strength of pool structure and any other matter that might
affect the structural stability of such private swimming pool in place.
F. An agreement shall be signed on said permit wherein the permittee, for
himself, his successors and transferees, agrees that he, she or it will
comply with all of the health regulations of the federal government, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the County of Allegheny and the
Municipality of Monroeville insofar as they may relate to or affect
private swimming pools. He, she or it shall further agree to comply with
all regulations of the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority and pay all
fees, charges or rentals assessed by said Authority by reason of the use
of said facilities. He, she or it shall further agree that this will apply to
future, as well as present, regulations of said governmental units and
this agreement shall be in the nature of a covenant running with the
land.
G. The permittee shall sign an agreement to indemnify and save harmless
the Municipality of Monroeville from any claim, demand or suit of any
kind or nature whatsoever that may arise as a result of the construction,
installation, operation or maintenance of a private swimming pool by a
permittee of the Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 328-2 SWIMMING POOLS § 328-3
328:753
has been installed are familiar with the provisions of this chapter and that
they will operate and maintain said pool in strict accordance herewith. Such
renewal shall be upon a form furnished by the Municipality and shall be
accompanied by a renewal fee as provided in Chapter 194, Fees.
§ 328-4. Insurance requirements.
§ 328-5. Rental of private swimming pools.
No private swimming pool shall be the subject of income in any manner
whatsoever, and the rental use thereof shall make void any permit granted
hereunder.226
Chapter 334
TAXATION
CHARTER REFERENCES
Tax Collector — See Art. XI.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Mercantile licenses — See Ch. 256.
Tenant registration — See Ch. 338.
A. All applicants for permits to install private swimming pools are hereby
required and directed to procure comprehensive property damage
insurance in the amount of $10,000 for damage to property against any
loss, injury or damage that may hereafter be caused directly or
indirectly by said swimming pool. All applicants and owners of private
swimming pools are also required and directed to procure public
liability insurance covering personal injuries in the amount of
$100,000. The applicants and owners aforesaid shall furnish to the
Building Inspector certificates that such insurance is in effect each year
that the private swimming pools are in existence at the time of each
renewal.
B. The Building Inspector is hereby directed to refuse to issue a renewal
permit for a private swimming pool in case the applicant fails to procure
the above-specified insurance. The Building Inspector is directed to
order the removal of any swimming pool not insured as hereinabove
required. The owners of swimming pools now installed shall be allowed
30 days from the date of the enactment of this chapter to comply with
the requirements of this section.
226. Editor's Note: Original Section 6, which immediately followed this section and amended
Ord. No. 1, was deleted 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042.
§ 328-3 § 328-5
334:754
ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 10-11-1966 by Ord. No. 554]
§ 334-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The current period for which this tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. An actual
residence is not necessarily a "domicile," for "domicile" is the fixed place
of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. "Domicile" is the place in which a man has voluntarily fixed
the habitation of himself and his family, not for a mere special or limited
purpose, but with the present intention of making a permanent home,
until some event occurs to induce him to adopt some other permanent
home. In the case of businesses or associations, the "domicile" is that
place considered as the center of business affairs and the place where its
functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or his
personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or through
an agent, and whether in cash or in property; not including, however,
wages or compensation paid to persons on active military service, periodic
payments for sickness and disability other than regular wages received
during a period of sickness, disability or retirement or payments arising
under workers' compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar
legislation or payments commonly recognized as old age benefits,
retirement pay or pensions paid to persons retired from service after
reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment or payments
commonly known as "public assistance" or unemployment compensation
payments made by any governmental agency or payments to reimburse
expenses or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and
salary supplemental programs, including but not limited to programs
covering hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental
unemployment benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
§ 334-1 TAXATION § 334-1
334:755
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
INCOME TAX OFFICE OR OFFICER — A person, public employee or private
agency designated by the governing body to collect and administer the tax
on earned income and net profits.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, except corporations, after provision for all costs
and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a cash
or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting system used in such
business, profession or other activity but without deduction of taxes based
on income.
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the taxing district.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the taxing district.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits or to pay
a tax thereon.
§ 334-2. Tax imposed. [Amended 12-29-1981 by Ord. No. 1298;
2-12-1991 by Ord. No. 1738]
A. Tax under the Local Tax Enabling Act.227 The tax levied under this
article shall be applicable to earned income received and to net profits
earned in the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of
the year 1991, and the tax shall continue in force on a calendar-year
basis, without annual reenactment, unless the rate of the tax is
subsequently changed. Changes in rate shall become effective on the
date specified in the Article. Under provisions of Act 511, the Local Tax
Enabling Act, the tax is herewith levied at the rate of 1% on earned
income and net profits as provided for in the definition herein of earned
income and net profits, it being acknowledged that as of the date of this
article, the Gateway School District collects 0.5% of this one-percent
tax and the Municipality of Monroeville collects 0.5% of said tax.
B. Tax under the Home Rule Charter and Optional Plans Act. In addition to
the tax levied in Subsection A hereof, there is hereby levied, under the
provisions of Act 62, the Home Rule Charter and Optional Plans Act,228
227. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
228. Editor's Note: Act 62, the Home Rule Charter and Optional Plans Law, was previously
codified as 53 P.S. § 1-101 et seq., which was repealed 12-19-1996 by P.L. 1158, No. 177.
See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2901 et seq.
§ 334-1 § 334-2
334:756
§ 334-3. Declaration and payment of tax.
a tax at the rate of 0.5% on earned income and net profits as provided
for in the definitions herein of earned income and net profits.
A. Net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall pay to the Officer an annual
payment of tax due on or before April 15 of the succeeding year for
the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the
current year or, on or before April 15 of the current year, make and
file with the Officer, on a form prescribed or approved by the
Officer, a declaration of his estimated net profits during the period
beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the current year
and pay to the Officer in four equal quarterly installments the tax
due thereon as follows: the first installment at the time of filing the
declaration and the other installments on or before June 15 of the
current year, September 15 of the current year and January 15 of
the succeeding year, respectively.
(2) It is herewith required that where the taxpayer elects to file a
declaration and quarterly payments, any taxpayer who first
anticipates any net profit after April 15 of the current year shall
make and file the declaration hereinabove required on or before
June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the current year or
December 31 of the current year, whichever of these dates next
follows the date on which the taxpayer first anticipates such net
profit, and pay to the Officer in equal installments the tax due
thereon on or before the quarterly payment dates which remain
after the filing of the declaration.
(3) It is herewith required that every taxpayer making a declaration of
estimated net profits and quarterly payments of tax due on such
profits shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and
file with the Officer, on a form prescribed or approved by the
Officer, a final return showing the amount of net profits earned
during the period beginning January 1 of the current year and
ending December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax
due thereon and the total amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of
filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the Officer the
balance of tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the
case of overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth
quarterly installment of his estimated tax, elect to make and file
with the Officer on or before January 31 of the succeeding year the
final return as hereinabove required.
(4) The Officer is herewith authorized to provide by regulation for the
making and filing of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits
and for the payments of the estimated tax in cases where a
taxpayer who has filed the declaration hereinabove required
§ 334-2 TAXATION § 334-3
334:757
§ 334-4. Collection at source.
anticipates additional net profits not previously declared or finds
that he has overestimated his anticipated net profits.
(5) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the
tax due.
B. Earned income.
(1) Annual earned income tax return. For each year beginning with the
year 1967 every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the
succeeding year, make and file with the Officer, on a form
prescribed or approved by the Officer, a final return showing the
amount of earned income received during the period beginning
January 1 of the then-current year and ending December 31 of the
then-current year, the total amount of tax due thereon, the amount
of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon that has been
withheld pursuant to the provisions relating to the collection at
source and the balance of tax due. At the time of filing the final
return the taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or shall
make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(2) Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
and who received any earned income not subject to the provisions
relating to collection at source shall make and file with the Officer,
on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a quarterly return
on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year,
October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding
year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned income not
subject to withholding by him during the three-month periods
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current
year, respectively, and subject to the tax, together with such other
information as the Officer may require. Every taxpayer making
such return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the Officer the
amount of tax shown as due thereon.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the taxing jurisdiction imposing a tax
on earned income or net profits within the taxing district, who employs
one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation, who has not previously registered,
shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer, register with the
Officer his name and address and such other information as the Officer
may require.
§ 334-3 § 334-4
334:758
B. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the taxing jurisdiction imposing a tax
on earned income or net profits within the taxing district, who employs
one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation, shall deduct, at the time of payment
thereof, the tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to his
employee or employees and shall, on or before April 30 of the current
year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year and
January 31 of the succeeding year, file a return and pay to the Officer
the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding three-month
periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current
year, September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current
year, respectively. Such return, unless otherwise agreed upon between
the Officer and employer, shall show the name and social security
number of each such employee, the earned income of such employee
during such preceding three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom,
the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the
total earned income of all such employees during such preceding threemonth
period and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the
return. Any employer who for two of the preceding four quarterly
periods has failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part thereof, or has
failed to pay over the proper amount of the tax to the taxing authority
may be required by the Officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly.
In such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the Officer on or before
the last day of the month succeeding the month for which the tax was
withheld.
C. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the Officer:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of tax paid to
the Officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current year
and ending December 31 of the current year.
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, setting
forth the employee's name, address and social security number, the
amount of earned income paid to the employee during said period,
the amount of tax deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the
tax upon such employee and the amount of tax paid to the Officer.
Every employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return to
the employee for whom it is filed.
D. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
§ 334-4 TAXATION § 334-4
334:759
§ 334-5. Powers and duties of Officer; bond.
E. Except as otherwise provided in this article, every employer who
willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the deductions required by
this section shall be liable for payment of the taxes which he was
required to withhold, to the extent that such taxes have not been
recovered from the employee.
F. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
A. It shall be the duty of the Officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a
record showing the amount received by him from each person or
business paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. Each Officer, before entering upon his official duties, shall give and
acknowledge a bond to the Municipality. If the Municipality shall by
resolution designate any bond previously given by the Officer as
adequate, such bond shall be sufficient to satisfy the requirements of
the Act.229
(1) Each such bond shall be joint and several, with one or more
corporate sureties, which shall be surety companies authorized to
do business in this commonwealth and duly licensed by the
Insurance Commissioner of this commonwealth.
(2) Each bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the
Officer, his clerks, assistants and appointees of all trusts confided
in him by virtue of his office, upon the faithful execution of all
duties required of him by virtue of his office, upon the just and
faithful accounting or payment over, according to law, of all moneys
and all balances thereof paid to, received or held by him by virtue
of his office and upon delivery to his successor or successors in
office of all books, papers, documents or other official things held in
right of his office.
(3) Each such bond shall be taken in the name of the Municipality and
shall be for the use of the Municipality and for the use of such other
person or persons for whom money shall be collected or received or
as his or her interest shall otherwise appear in case of a breach of
any of the conditions thereof by the acts or neglect of the principal
on the bond.
(4) The Municipality, or any person, may sue upon said bond in its or
his own name for its or his own use.
229. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 334-4 § 334-5
334:760
(5) Each such bond shall contain the name or names of the surety
company or companies bound thereon. The Municipality shall fix
the amount of the bond at an amount equal to the maximum
amount of taxes which may be in the possession of the Officer at
any given time.
(6) The Municipality may, at any time, upon cause shown and due
notice to the Officer and his surety or sureties, require or allow the
substitution or the addition of a surety company acceptable to the
Municipality for the purpose of making the bond sufficient in
amount, without releasing the surety or sureties first approved
from any accrued liability or previous action on such bond.
(7) The Municipality shall designate the custodian of the bond required
to be given by the Officer.
C. The Officer charged with the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this article is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of
declarations and returns and of payments alleged or found to be
incorrect, or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to make refunds in case of overpayment, for any period of
time, not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the
sum involved, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration
of this article. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable
unless it has been approved by resolution of the Municipality. A copy of
such rules and regulations currently in force shall be available for
public inspection.230
D. The Officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer,
earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary
business expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer's employer.
E. The Officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any
taxpayer, or of any person whom the Officer reasonably believes to be
an employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any
declaration or return or, if no declaration or return was filed, to
ascertain the tax due. Every employer and every taxpayer, and every
person whom the Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or
taxpayer, is hereby directed and required to give to the Officer or to any
agent designated by him the means, facilities and opportunity for such
examination and investigations as are hereby authorized.
230. Editor's Note: Earned Income and Net Profits Tax Rules and Regulations were adopted
11-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2276. Section I of Ord. No. 2276 adopts "Exhibit 1," the text of the
rules and regulations, which is on file in the office of the Municipal Manager. Section II of
Ord. No. 2276 provides that the "The Rules and Regulations shall apply to all residents,
employers, and when applicable nonresidents."
§ 334-5 TAXATION § 334-5
334:761
§ 334-6. Compensation of Income Tax Officer.
The Income Tax Officer shall receive such compensation for his services and
expenses as shall be determined by the Municipality from time to time.
§ 334-7. Suit for collection of tax.
F. Any information gained by the Officer, his agents or by any other official
or agent of the taxing district as a result of any declarations, returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this
article shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by
law.
G. The Officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year.
A. The Officer may sue in the name of the Municipality for the recovery of
taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under
provisions of this article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person, or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return
in the possession of the Officer, reveals a fraudulent evasion of
taxes, there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Officer,
or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make the
deductions required by this article, there shall be no limitation.
(5) This section shall not be construed to limit the Municipality from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by this
Act.231
231. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 334-5 § 334-7
334:762
§ 334-8. Interest and penalties.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1%
of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit is
brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties
herein imposed.
§ 334-9. Violations and penalties.
§ 334-10. Additional powers and duties of Income Tax Officer.
The income tax officer shall have the further power, duty and responsibility
as imposed and delegated to such officer or Tax Collector as set forth under
C. The Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund, provided that
such suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that the
suit may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of the
refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees, any person who refuses to permit the Officer or any agent
designated by him to examine his books, records and papers and any
person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return
or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the
amount of his net profits or earned income in order to avoid the
payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this article shall,
upon conviction thereof before any District Justice or court of
competent jurisdiction of Allegheny County, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $500 for each offense, and costs, and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
District Justice or court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $500 for each offense, and costs, and, in default of
payment of said fines and costs, be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
§ 334-7 TAXATION § 334-10
334:763
Sections 14, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21 and 22 of said Local Tax Enabling Act, Act.
No. 511.232
232. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and, in particular, 53 P.S. §§ 6914, 6916, 6918,
6919, 6920, 6921 and 6922, respectively.
§ 334-10 § 334-10
334:764
ARTICLE II
Emergency and Municipal Services Tax233
[Adopted 5-14-1968 by Ord. No. 602; amended in its entirety
5-9-2006 by Ord. No. 2369234]
§ 334-11. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Emergency and
Municipal Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 334-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context indicates clearly a different
meaning, the following words shall have the meanings set forth below:
COMPENSATION — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, fees, tips,
gross receipts or any other income.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation. The
term shall not include those who hire domestic servants.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville.
OCCUPATION — Includes any livelihood, job, trade, profession, business or
enterprise of any kind, including services, domestic or other, for which any
compensation is received.
TAX — The tax imposed by this article.
TAX COLLECTOR — The Monroeville Municipal Manager or such other
person appointed by him for the collection of the taxes imposed under this
article.
TAXPAYER — Any natural person liable for the tax levied by this article.
§ 334-13. Levy; tax imposed; exception.
Ordinance No. 602 is affirmed in all respects, except the following portions
of said ordinance shall be amended and added to reflect the following:
233. Editor's Note: The title of this tax, previously "Occupational Privilege Tax," was revised
12-28-2004 by Ord. No. 2319, which also made text revisions where indicated in section
and subsection histories in this Art. II, to comply with 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., as amended
by P.L. 1729, No. 222, of 2004. Said Ord. No. 2319 also provided as follows: "All references
in any ordinance or resolution to a tax on the privilege or engaging in an occupation,
otherwise known as 'Occupational Privilege Tax,' shall be deemed a reference to an
'Emergency and Municipal Services Tax.'"
234. Editor's Note: Citing requirements set forth in Ord. No. 2236, Occupational Tax Rules and
Regulations were adopted 12-9-2003 by Ord. No. 2285. Section I of Ord. No. 2285 adopts
"Exhibit 1," the text of the rules and regulations, which is on file in the office of the
Municipal Manager. Section II of Ord. No. 2285 provides that the "Rules and Regulations
shall apply to all businesses not otherwise exempt by the Constitution of the United
States."
§ 334-11 TAXATION § 334-13
334:765
§ 334-13.1. Returns and due dates.
A. The Municipality of Monroeville shall assess, levy and collect from each
person who engages in an occupation for any length of time an
emergency and municipal services tax in the amount of $52 for each
calendar year, effective January 2005, and in accordance with the
provisions set forth herein and pursuant to the Local Tax Enabling Act
pursuant to Act 511, as amended by P.L. 1729, No. 222 of 2004, H.B.
197.
B. All references in any ordinance or resolution to a tax on the privilege of
engaging in an occupation, otherwise known as “occupational privilege
tax,” shall be deemed to be a reference to an emergency and municipal
services tax.
C. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment, but, in the event a
person is engaged in more than one occupation or an occupation which
requires his/her working in more than one political subdivision during
the calendar year, the priority of claim to collect such emergency and
municipal services tax shall be in the following order:
(1) The political subdivision in which a person maintains his/her
principal office or is principally employed;
(2) The political subdivision in which the person resides and works, if
such tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) The political subdivision in which a person is employed and which
imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person’s home.
D. The place of employment shall be determined as of the day the taxpayer
first becomes subject to the tax during the calendar year.
E. The Municipality shall only use the funds derived from the emergency
and municipal services tax for the following:
(1) Police, fire and/or emergency services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance; or
(3) Reduction of property taxes.
F. If Gateway School District chooses to levy an emergency and municipal
services tax, the amount shall not exceed $5 of the total $52.
A. The employee listing shall contain the name and address of the
employer, plus the full name, social security number and address of the
taxpayer.
B. Employers may submit the information to the Tax Collector on
preapproved written/printed reports or on magnetic media utilizing a
format acceptable to and preapproved by the Tax Collector, in lieu of
submitting paper records.
§ 334-13 § 334-13.1
334:766
§ 334-14. Duties of employers.
C. Signature of the appropriate corporate officer or the business owner is
required on the tax form when submitting this form to the Tax Collector.
D. Every return shall be made upon an approved form furnished by the Tax
Collector or on a document containing all required information listed on
the tax form. Failure to receive a tax return does not negate the liability
to file or remit payment.
E. Every person making a return shall certify the correctness thereof by
affidavit. The fact that an individual’s name is signed on the return shall
be prima-facie evidence that such individual is authorized to sign the
return on behalf of the taxpayer.
F. Any unsigned tax return form received by the Tax Collector shall be
considered as incomplete and unacceptable until it is properly signed.
G. Due dates:
(1) First tax period per calendar year: January 1 through March 31.
Due date: On or before April 30.
(2) Second tax period per calendar year: April 1 through June 30. Due
date: On or before July 31.
(3) Third tax period per calendar year: July 1 through September 30.
Due date: On or before October 31.
(4) Fourth tax period per calendar year: October 1 through December
31. Due date: On or before January 31 of subsequent calendar year.
A. Every employer shall, within 30 days after the effective date of this
article or within 30 days after first becoming an employer, register with
the Tax Collector the employer's name and address, employer's tax
identification number, nature of business activity in which he is
engaged, the employees' names and addresses and such other
information as the Tax Collector may require. Every person filing a
registration shall certify the correctness thereof by affidavit. If an
employer conducts business under a fictitious name, such employer
shall apply for registration in both the true and fictitious names of the
individual and entity and shall list the fictitious name first on the
application. Each separate employer shall apply for a separate
registration.
B. As to each taxpayer employed for any length of time on or before
January 1 of the calendar year for which the tax is imposed, each
employer shall deduct the tax from compensation payable to the
taxpayer, file a return on a form prescribed by the Tax Collector and pay
the Tax Collector the full amount of all such taxes on or before April 30
of the calendar year. As to each taxpayer for whom no prior deduction
has been made, who is employed for any length of time in any of the
§ 334-13.1 TAXATION § 334-14
334:767
§ 334-15. Direct payment by taxpayers.
Every taxpayer who is self-employed or whose tax for any reason is not
collected under § 334-14 of this article shall file a return on a form
prescribed by the Tax Collector and shall pay the tax directly to the Tax
Collector. Each such taxpayer who first becomes subject to the tax on or
before January 1 of any calendar year shall file the return and pay the tax
on or before April 30 of the calendar year, and each such taxpayer who first
becomes subject to the tax after January 1 of any calendar year shall file
the return and pay the tax on or before April 30, July 31 or October 31 of
the calendar year and January 31 of the ensuing year, whichever of such
payment dates first occurs at least 30 days after the taxpayer first becomes
subject to the tax.
three-month periods ending March 31 of the year, June 30 of the year,
September 30 of the year and December 31 of the year, each employer
shall deduct the tax from compensation payable to the taxpayer, file a
return on a form prescribed by the Tax Collector and pay to the Tax
Collector the full amount of all taxes deducted for each such threemonth
period on or before April 30, July 31 or October 31 of the
calendar year and January 31 of the ensuing year. A return must be filed
each quarter even if the liability is zero.
C. Employers who discontinue business prior to the completion of the
calendar year/tax year, shall, within 30 days after discontinuance of
business, file and furnish the returns required by the article, covering
all periods between the last such returns and date of discontinuing
business and transmit to the Municipality of Monroeville all tax
remaining due.
D. The failure of any employer to deduct tax shall not relieve the employee
from the duty to file a return and pay the tax. Any employer who fails to
deduct the tax as required by this section or who fails to pay such tax to
the Tax Collector shall be liable for such tax in full, as though the tax
had originally been levied against such employer.
E. As to employees who present official receipts evidencing prior payment
of the tax either directly or by collection through other employers, the
employer shall not deduct the tax but shall maintain adequate records
concerning such payment by the employees.
F. Employers who withhold the tax from employee earnings, and the
person responsible for the transmission of the tax by a corporate
employer, shall be a fiduciary charged with all the responsibilities of a
fiduciary with respect to taxes withheld and shall be subject to all duties
imposed by law on fiduciaries, including criminal penalties for breach of
duties.
§ 334-14 § 334-16
334:768
§ 334-16. Persons subject to tax.
Both resident and nonresident taxpayers shall, by virtue of engaging in an
occupation within the Municipality, be subject to the tax and the provisions
of this article.
§ 334-17. Powers and duties of Tax Collector; examination of
records.
A. The Tax Collector, on behalf of the Municipality, shall collect and
receive the taxes, interest, fines and penalties imposed by this article
and shall maintain records showing the amounts received and the dates
such amounts were received. The Tax Collector shall prescribe and
issue all forms necessary for the administration of the tax and may
adopt and enforce regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration of this article, including but not limited to requirements
for collection through employers, requirements for deductions,
requirements for evidence and records and provisions for the
examination and correction of returns. The Tax Collector and agents
designated by him may examine the records of any employer or
supposed employer or of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to
ascertain the tax due or verify the accuracy of any return. Every
employer or supposed employer and every taxpayer or supposed
taxpayer shall give the Tax Collector and any agent designated by him
all means, facilities and opportunity for the examinations hereby
authorized.
B. All employers who have a place of business located within the taxing
authority shall maintain complete records of all employees for a period
of six years in such form as to enable the Tax Collector to determine the
employers’ liability to withhold for each employee, the actual amount
withheld, the actual amount transmitted to the Tax Collector and such
other information available to such employers as will enable the Tax
Collector to carry out its responsibilities.
C. The limitations set forth in Subsection B should not prevent the
institution of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be
due in the following cases:
(1) Where no return was filed, there shall be no limitation;
(2) Where the return is fraudulent, there shall be no limitation; or
(3) Where there is an understatement of tax liability of 25% or more,
and not due to fraud, suit shall begin within six years.
D. If as a result of research or investigation conducted by or on behalf of
the Tax Collector, a declaration or return is found or is reasonably
believed to be incorrect, the Tax Collector is authorized to assess and
collect underpayments of taxes withheld at the source, or any
underpayments of tax owed by any employer or taxpayer with respect
to the tax. If no declaration or return has been filed and a tax is found or
§ 334-16 TAXATION § 334-17
334:769
determined to be due, the tax actually due may be assessed and
collected without the formality of obtaining a delinquent declaration or
return from the employer or taxpayer.
E. Hearings/meetings: Any person aggrieved by an assessment made by
the Tax Collector may, within 30 days after receipt of notice of the
assessment, appeal the assessment by forwarding a letter to the Tax
Collector stating in detail why the taxpayer believes the assessment to
be incorrect and including documentation to support the appellant’s
position. A meeting or hearing will be arranged within 30 days of the
receipt of the appeal notice. The appeal meeting or hearing may be
recorded at the decision of the Tax Collector. A decision on the appeal
shall be rendered by the Tax Collector within 30 days of the close of the
meeting or hearing. The person aggrieved may also properly file all
applicable returns and provide all needed supporting documentation if
this was not previously done by the aggrieved person. This may also
permit promptly amending the assessment to the satisfaction of both
parties.
F. Administrative review procedure: Upon receipt of a written request for
an administrative review (hereinafter referred to as “the review”), the
review will be scheduled within 30 days from the date such request is
received by the Tax Collector.
(1) The review may be recorded, at the option of the Tax Collector, and
the appellant may be required to provide verification that all
factual information presented, including oral statements, are true,
correct and complete to the best of his knowledge and belief. If a
record is made of the review, the appellant may obtain a copy of the
record by paying a fee equal to 50% of all costs incurred in the
preparation and transcription of the record.
(2) The purpose of the review shall include, but not be limited to, a
review of all documents, data and records produced by appellant
and an opportunity for appellant to explain his or her position and
be heard on issues directly relating to the filing of the tax return
and payment of taxes. The Tax Collector, or his authorized
representative, shall have ample opportunity to make such
inquiries of appellant as will enable the Tax Collector to fully
understand appellant’s information and documents and to make
other inquiries as may be appropriate in examining and
understanding appellant’s position.
(3) Appellant shall file with the Tax Collector the properly completed
and signed proposed tax returns for each tax year in question and
such returns, along with any supporting data and documents, shall
be reviewed. A reasonable effort shall be made to reach a fair and
equitable accommodation with the appellant. In the event this
cannot be done, the Tax Collector, after a review of all the data and
records submitted and of the record of the hearing, shall make such
determination as he believes in his opinion to be appropriate and
§ 334-17 § 334-17
334:770
§ 334-18. Collection of tax; payment under protest.
§ 334-18.1. Withheld taxes held in trust.
notify the appellant of his determination in writing, which shall be
sent to the appellant at appellant’s last known address by ordinary
mail and which shall then become appellant’s formal notice of
appellant’s tax liability as of the date of that determination.
A. Remittances shall be made payable to the Municipality of Monroeville.
B. The current Municipality of Monroeville fees will be levied if a check is
returned unpaid by the bank.
C. The Tax Collector shall collect, by suit or otherwise, all taxes, interest,
costs, fines and penalties due under this article and unpaid. If for any
reason any tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per year
on the amount of unpaid tax, and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% of
the amount of unpaid tax for each month or fraction of month during
which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Whenever
suit is brought for the recovery of unpaid tax, the taxpayer shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collections as well as for interest and
penalties. The Tax Collector may accept payment under protest of the
tax claimed by the Municipality in any case where any person disputes
the Municipality's claim for the tax.
D. A check endorsement shall not qualify as a refund claim. The words
“paid under protest,” handwritten, typed or otherwise placed on a
taxpayer’s check or money order or the check or money order of an
employer, shall not qualify as a refund claim as the words are not
sufficient to appraise the Tax Collector’s personnel of the taxpayer’s
intent to seek a refund or of the substance of his claim, or of facts
sufficient to permit the Tax Collector to undertake an investigation of
the person’s claim. If a court of competent jurisdiction thereafter
decides that there has been overpayment to the Tax Collector, the Tax
Collector shall refund the amount of the overpayment to the person who
paid under protest. Refunds shall be made only pursuant to approval of
the Monroeville Municipal Council.
A. Local taxes withheld from employee wages by an employer or business
entity or corporation are held in trust for the taxing authority and its
Tax Collector, even in the event of a bankruptcy; said funds withheld
shall not be the property of the bankrupt estate. Said withheld taxes
shall not be commingled in the employer’s general cash or other
accounts.
B. Liability imposed.
(1) Trustee ex maleficio. one who collects the tax as agent for the
taxing authority or the taxing authority’s Tax Collector and fails to
§ 334-17 TAXATION § 334-18.1
334:771
§ 334-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person or employer who fails to comply with the registration
requirement or makes any false or untrue statement on his registration
or tax return or who refuses to permit inspection of the books, records
or accounts of any business in his custody when the right to make such
inspection by the Tax Collector is requested and whoever fails or refuses to
pay same over to the appointed collector for the taxing authority is
a trustee ex maleficio.
(2) Businesses and corporations must act through individuals, and
where such individuals are the acting and controlling officers and
agents of the corporation or business and they fail to administer the
trust responsibilities, liabilities are imposed upon the individuals
who are responsible for the performance of the trust duty.
(3) Liabilities of corporations and officers. Where a corporation does
not remit the tax withheld from its employees and subsequently is
dissolved in bankruptcy, the corporate officers shall be held
personally liable, jointly or severally, for the payment of the tax
withheld.
C. The employer, the business, the corporation shall not characterize the
tax withheld simply as creating a debtor-creditor relationship between
the employer or business or corporation and the Municipality of
Monroeville as collector for the taxing authority; therefore the
employer is the conduit for its employees’ tax payments. Consequently,
these taxes are withheld in “express trust” or in “constructive trust” for
the taxing authority and its collector of these taxes.
D. Lowest intermediate balance test (L.I.B.T.): This is a judicial test which
the Tax Collector will apply to ease the burden of the beneficiary (the
Tax Collector) to trace the funds if or when a trustee commingles trust
funds due to the Municipality of Monroeville with other monies in a
single account. The L.I.B.T. allows trust beneficiaries to assume that
trust funds are withheld last from a commingled account. Therefore,
the lowest intermediate balance in an account represents trust funds
that have never been dissipated and which are reasonably identifiable.
The Municipality of Monroeville will take the position that the court will
keep in mind a broad policy against allowing a party unilaterally to
make a trust unenforceable by commingling assets. Also, in the event of
a bankruptcy, filing the L.I.B.T. is intended to provide a method for the
Tax Collector to demonstrate that amounts of withheld taxes were/are
still in the possession of the debtor at the commencement of the case.
E. Interlocking business entities: A company that maintains separate
payrolls for its employees on a separate checking account or general
ledger system and reported to the Tax Collector that it has withheld
payroll tax from its employees shall be liable for the tax, plus penalty,
plus interest, when the tax has not been remitted to the Tax Collector.
§ 334-18.1 § 334-19
334:772
file a return required by this article shall, upon conviction in any court of
competent jurisdiction, upon conviction thereof before a District Justice, be
subject to a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the Allegheny
County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. In the case of partnerships or
association, the fine and penalty may be imposed upon any of the partners
or members thereof, and in the case of corporations, upon any of the officers
thereof in lieu of the corporation itself. Each day on which any person
violates this article shall be considered as a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such as hereinbefore provided.
§ 334-20. Refunds and exceptions.
§ 334-21. Applicability.
The tax shall not apply to any subject of tax or person not within the taxing
power of the Municipality under the Constitution of the United States and
the laws and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 334-21.1. Effective date.
This article shall become effective January 1, 2007, and shall remain in
effect thereafter from year to year on a calendar basis. Questions may
be directed to the Monroeville Tax Office, 2700 Monroeville Boulevard,
Monroeville, Pennsylvania, 15146-2388. Tax office information, such as
hours, telephone numbers and forms can be obtained from the Municipal
Web site: www.monroeville.pa.us.
A. After the close of the tax year, any person whose total income from all
sources is less than $5,500 per annum shall be exempt from paying the
emergency and municipal services tax set forth herein. Any person
claiming exemption status must provide to the Tax Collector, in writing,
proof that total income from all sources is less than $5,500. This
provision shall not be construed to relieve an employer from the duty to
collect a tax imposed under this article because of a representation by
an employee that his earnings in any year would be less than $5,500.
Refunds shall be made only pursuant to approval of the Monroeville
Municipal Council.
B. Claims for refunds representing duplicate deductions made by two or
more separate employers on the same employee, which represents an
obvious overpayment of the limit of the tax, will be considered timely
and acted upon even though the tax year has not terminated, or refunds
of tax deductions made erroneously by an employer where there is
documentary evidence presented that the employee was not and will
not be employed within the Municipality during the tax year will also be
considered timely even though the year has not terminated. (Revenue
Ruling 1971-1 of July 23, 1971.)
C. If a taxpayer is subject to the occupational privilege tax in another
jurisdiction, this shall not offset or credit against the liability of the tax.
§ 334-19 TAXATION § 334-21.1
334:773

ARTICLE III
Business Tax
[Adopted 12-30-1974 by Ord. No. 899; amended in its entirety
3-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2329]
§ 334-22. Title.
This shall be known and may be cited as the "Business Tax Ordinance."
§ 334-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context indicates clearly a different
meaning, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth
below:
BUSINESS — Carrying on or exercising, whether for gain or profit or
otherwise, within the Municipality of Monroeville any trade or business,
including but not limited to financial business as hereinafter defined,
profession, vocation, service, the rental of personalty and/or realty,
construction, communication or commercial activity, making sales to
persons or rendering services from or attributable to a Monroeville office or
place of business.
BUSINESS PRIVILEGE TAX YEAR — The calendar year of 1979 and each
calendar year thereafter.
FINANCIAL BUSINESS — The services and transactions of banks and
bankers, trust, credit and investment companies, where not prohibited by
law, holding companies, dealers and brokers in money, credits, commercial
paper, bonds, notes, securities and stocks, monetary metals, factors and
commission merchants.
GROSS RECEIPTS —
Cash, credits or property of any kind or nature received in or allocable
or attributable to the Municipality of Monroeville from any business or
by reason of any sale made, including the resale of goods, wares or
merchandise taken by a dealer as a trade-in or as part of payment for
other goods, wares or merchandise or services rendered or commercial
or business transactions, and within the Municipality of Monroeville,
without deduction therefrom on account of the cost of property sold,
materials used, labor service or other cost, interest or discount paid or
any other expense.
A.
"Gross receipts" shall exclude:
The amount of any allowance made for goods, wares or
merchandise taken by a dealer as a trade-in or as part of payment
for other goods, wares and merchandise in the usual and ordinary
course of his business.
(1)
In the case of a financial business, the cost of securities and other
property sold, exchanged, paid at maturity or redeemed and
(2)
B.
§ 334-22 TAXATION § 334-23
334:775
MERCANTILE TAX YEAR — The calendar year of 1977 and each calendar
year thereafter.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville.
PERSON — Any natural person, individual, partnership, association or
corporation, nonprofit or otherwise. Whenever used in any provision
prescribing a fine or a penalty, the word "person," as applied to
partnerships, shall mean the partners thereof and, as applied to
corporations and unincorporated associations, shall mean the officers
thereof.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place indoors or outdoors where the
general public or a limited or selected number thereof may, upon payment
of an established price, attend or engage in any amusement, contest or
recreation, including, among other places, theaters, opera houses, motionpicture
houses, amusement parks, stadiums, arenas, baseball or football
parks or fields, skating rinks, circus or carnival tents or grounds,
fairgrounds, bowling alleys, billiard or pool rooms, nine- or ten-pin alleys,
riding academies, golf courses, bathing and swimming places, dance halls,
tennis courts, archery, rifle or shotgun ranges and other like places. The
term does not include any exhibition, amusement, performance or contest
conducted by a nonprofit corporation or association organized for religious,
charitable or educational purposes.
moneys or credits received in repayment of advances, credits and
loans, but not to exceed the principal amount of such advances,
credits and loans, and shall also exclude deposits.
In the case of a broker, any commissions paid by him to another
broker on account of a purchase or sales contract initiated,
executed or cleared in conjunction with such other broker.
(3)
Receipts by dealers from sales to other dealers in the same line
where the dealer transfers title or possession at the same price for
which he acquired the goods, wares or merchandise, as long as said
dealers are not the parent or subsidiary organization of the vendor
or have no other affiliation or cooperative arrangement with the
vendor.
(4)
Receipts or that portion thereof attributable to interstate or foreign
commerce or to an office or place of business regularly maintained
by the taxpayer outside the limits of the Municipality of
Monroeville and not for the purpose of evading payment of this tax
and those receipts which the Municipality is prohibited from taxing
by law. Such receipts shall be segregated as set forth in § 334-25F
of this article.
(5)
GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS ("GROSS RECEIPTS") — — Includes
both cash and credit transactions.
C.
§ 334-23 § 334-23
334:776
RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL VENDOR — Any person who is a dealer or
vendor of goods, wares and merchandise who is not a wholesale dealer or
vendor.
TAX COLLECTOR — The Monroeville Municipal Manager or such other
person appointed by the Manager for the collection of the taxes imposed
under this article.
TAX YEAR — The twelve-month period from January 1 to December 31.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business that
is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive days.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who sells
to dealers in, or vendors of, goods, wares and merchandise and to no other
persons.
§ 334-24. Tax imposed; applicability; rate of business privilege tax;
rate of mercantile tax.
A. Every person engaging in any business in the Municipality beginning
with the tax year 1985 and annually thereafter, shall pay an annual tax
at the rate of four mills on each dollar of volume of the gross annual
receipts thereof not subject to the mercantile tax rate.
B. For the tax year 1977 and annually thereafter, the Municipality hereby
imposes an annual mercantile tax in the manner and at the rates
hereinafter set forth. Every person engaged in any of the following
occupations or businesses in the Municipality shall pay an annual
mercantile tax for each tax year at the rate set forth:
(1) Wholesale vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise:
1 1/2 mills on each dollar of the volume of the annual gross
business transacted by him.
(2) Retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise, all
persons engaged in conducting restaurants or other places where
food, drink or refreshment are sold, whether or not the same is
incidental to some other business or occupation, and all persons
conducting places of amusement, whether or not the same are
incidental to some other business or occupation: 1 3/4 mills on each
dollar of the volume of the annual gross business transacted by
him.
(3) Wholesale and retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and
merchandise: 1 1/2 mills on each dollar of the annual gross
wholesale business transacted by him; and 1 3/4 mills on each
dollar of the volume of the annual gross retail business transacted
by him.
C. The rates herein set forth are in addition to any mercantile tax or
license which may be imposed by Gateway School District, and no
§ 334-23 TAXATION § 334-24
334:777
§ 334-25. Computation of gross annual receipts or gross volume of
business; filing returns.
credit will be given against the tax herein levied for taxes levied by or
paid to Gateway School District.
A. Every return shall include the same contents as prescribed on the form
available from the Tax Collector. Every person making a return shall
certify the correctness thereof by affidavit.
B. Every person who has commenced his business at least one full year
prior to the beginning of any tax year shall compute his annual gross
receipts or gross volume of business upon the actual receipts or gross
amount of business received by him during the preceding calendar year.
On or before the 15th day of April, every person shall file with the Tax
Collector a return setting forth his name, his business and business
address and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at
the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during the
preceding calendar year and the amount of the tax due.
C. For a business that started operations in the year preceding the current
tax year the business shall pay its tax in the current year based on the
gross receipts or gross volume of business upon the actual calendar
year receipts or gross amount of business received by him during the
preceding calendar year pro rated to 12 months. The tax shall be paid in
full on or before April 15 of the current tax year.
D. For businesses that started in the current tax year, the tax shall be
based on the gross volume of business transacted on the first full month
of operation multiplied by the number of full months that the business
shall be in operation for the tax year. The business must file and pay the
tax by the last day of the month following the first full month of
operation. At the end of the year every business that started that year
shall submit an amended return to reconcile the estimated tax payment
to the tax based upon the calendar year figure of the gross receipts or
volume. If the amount of the tax paid is less than the amended amount
due, the business shall remit payment to the Municipality of
Monroeville with the adjusted return on or before April 15 of the year
following the first tax year started by the business. If the estimated
amount paid is more than the calendar year figure, the business owner
shall file an amended return with the Municipality of Monroeville for an
adjustment to credit another tax year or request a refund.
E. Every person when engaged in a business temporary, seasonal or
itinerant by its nature shall compute his annual gross receipts or gross
volume of business upon the actual gross receipts or gross volume of
business received by him during such tax year. Every person shall,
within seven days from the day he completes such business, file a
return with the Tax Collector setting forth his name, his business and
business address and such information as may be necessary in arriving
§ 334-24 § 334-25
334:778
§ 334-26. Business registration.
at the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during such
period and the amount of tax due.
F. Where a receipt in its entirety cannot be subjected to the tax imposed
by this article by reason of the provisions of the Constitution of the
United States or any other provisions of law, including exemptions
within this article, the Tax Collector shall establish rules and
regulations and methods of allocation and evaluation so that only that
part of such receipts which is properly attributable and allocable to the
doing of business in the Municipality of Monroeville shall be taxed
hereunder. The Tax Collector may make such allocation with due regard
to the nature of the business concerned on the basis of millage division
of the receipt according to the number of jurisdictions in which it may
be taxed, the ratio of the value of the property or assets of the taxpayer
owned and situated in the Municipality of Monroeville to the total
property or assets of the taxpayer wherever owned and situated and
any other method or methods of calculation other than the foregoing
calculated to effect a fair and proper allocation. Every person who
ceases to carry on a business during any tax year shall be permitted to
apportion his tax for such tax year and shall pay for such tax year an
amount to be computed by multiplying his gross receipts from the
preceding full calendar year by a fraction whose numerator shall be the
number of months such person was in business during the tax year and
whose denominator shall be 12.
A. Within 30 days of commencing business in Monroeville, every person
shall forthwith register with the Tax Collector and set forth his name,
address, business address, tax identification number, and the nature of
the business activity in which he is engaged. Every person making a
business registration shall certify the correctness thereof by affidavit.
Such registration shall be made by the completion of an application
furnished by the Tax Collector and the payment of a registration fee to
be established by the Municipality. If an individual or business entity
conducts business under a fictitious name, such individual or entity
shall apply for registration in both the true and fictitious names of the
individual and entity and shall list the fictitious name first on the
application. Each separate individual or business entity shall apply for a
separate registration.
B. Each person in the Municipality who leases property, products or
services used by a business, as defined in this article, shall file a form
with the Municipality on or before January 15 of each tax year that sets
forth the names and present addresses of each of the lessees in the
Municipality during both the preceding tax year and the current tax
year. Any person who owns or leases any facility or property used for
the purpose of conducting an itinerant business shall supply the Tax
Collector with the name and address of every itinerant merchant or
promoter leasing or using such property or facility, together with such
§ 334-25 TAXATION § 334-26
334:779
§ 334-27. Payment at time of filing return.
The person making the return shall at the time of filing the return pay the
amount of tax shown as due thereon to the Tax Collector.
§ 334-28. Powers and duties of Tax Collector.
other information as the Tax Collector may request to establish the
nature of the goods or services to be displayed or sold, and the duration
of the show. Such information must be provided to the Tax Collector, in
writing, 30 days prior to the opening of a show.
A. It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to collect and receive the taxes,
fines, interest, and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his
duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him from each
person paying the tax and the date of each receipt.
B. The Tax Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article and is hereby empowered
to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement
of this article, including provisions for the reexamination and correction
of returns and payments alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which
an overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Collector shall have the right to
appeal to a court or courts of competent jurisdiction as in other cases
provided.
C. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to compel the production of
books, papers and records and the attendance of all persons before
him, whether as parties or witnesses, whom he believes to have
knowledge of such receipts and to otherwise administrate and enforce
this article as provided in the document entitled "Business Privilege Tax
Ordinance Rules and Regulations Pertaining to Enforcement and
Administration," which document is attached hereto, made a part
hereof as it may be amended and is marked Exhibit A.235
D. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers
and records of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to verify the
accuracy of any return made or, if no return was made, to ascertain the
tax due. Every such taxpayer, or supposed taxpayer, is hereby directed
and required to give to the Tax Collector the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are hereby
authorized.
E. The Tax Collector is further authorized to delegate any of his authority
herein established or contained to other employees of the Municipality
of Monroeville or to accountants, auditors or collectors retained by the
Municipality of Monroeville for the purpose of assisting in the
235. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the office of the Municipal Manager.
§ 334-26 § 334-28
334:780
§ 334-29. Confidential nature of returns.
Any information gained by the Tax Collector or any other officer, official,
agent or employee of the Municipality as a result of any returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this
article shall be confidential, except in accordance with proper judicial order
or as otherwise provided by law, and divulgence of any information so
gained is hereby declared to be a violation of this article, which may be
punished by dismissal from office or employment.
§ 334-30. Suit for recovery of taxes; interest and penalties.
§ 334-31. Violations and penalties.
Whoever fails to comply with the provisions of this article including but
not limited to the registration requirement or makes any false or untrue
statement on his registration or tax return or who refuses to permit
inspection of the books, records or accounts of any business in his custody
when the right to make such inspection by the Tax Collector is requested
and whoever fails or refuses to file a return required by this article shall,
upon conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution for each offense and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs, be imprisoned in Allegheny
County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days for each offense. Where the
taxpayer is a firm or association, the fine or penalty may be imposed upon
any of the partners or members thereof and, in the case of corporations,
upon any of the officers thereof. Each day on which any person violates this
article shall be considered as a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such as hereinbefore provided.
administration of this article and the enforcement and collection of the
taxes imposed hereunder and of the auditing of the accounts of the
taxpayers and persons hereunder.
F. The Tax Collector shall not receive any additional compensation for
acting as such under the provisions of this article, but all expenses for
the administration of this article, the enforcement and collection of the
taxes imposed hereunder and the auditing of accounts shall be borne by
the Municipality of Monroeville.
A. The Tax Collector may sue for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid
under this article and may enter such suit in the name of the
Municipality of Monroeville.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due in each year, interest at
the rate of 6% per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional
penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month, or
fraction thereof, during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added
and collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax,
the person liable therefore shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of
collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed.
§ 334-28 TAXATION § 334-32
334:781
§ 334-32. Construal of provisions: severability.
§ 334-32.1. Payment under protest; refunds.
§ 334-32.2. Effective date; continuation.
This article shall become effective April 15, 2005, and shall remain in effect
thereafter from year to year on a calendar basis.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Municipality of Monroeville to levy and collect the taxes hereby
imposed on any person or any business or any portion of any business
not within the taxing power of the Municipality of Monroeville under
the Constitution of the United States and the laws and Constitution of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax, or any portion thereof, imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this article shall be held by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the decision of the court shall
not affect or impair the right to impose the taxes of the validity of the
taxes so imposed upon other persons as herein provided.
C. If a final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction holds any
provision of this article, or the application of any provision to any
circumstances, to be illegal or unconstitutional, the other provisions of
this article, or the application of such provision to other circumstances,
shall remain in full force and effect. The intention of the Council is that
the provision of this article shall be severable and that this article would
have been adopted if any such illegal or unconstitutional provisions had
not been included.
A. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest
of the amount of mercantile tax or business privilege tax claimed by the
Municipality in any case where the taxpayer disputes the validity or
amount of the Municipality's claim for the tax. If it is thereafter
judicially determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that the
Municipality has been overpaid, the amount of the overpayment shall
be refunded to the taxpayer. The provisions of this section shall be
applicable to cases in which the facts are similar to those in a case
litigated in a court of competent jurisdiction.
B. Claims for refunds of taxes erroneously withheld or paid may be filed
with the Tax Collector. A claim for refund must be filed within three
years of the due date of the return or one year of payment of the tax,
whichever is later, which allegedly was filed in error. A claim must be
prepared in a manner to be designated by the Tax Collector and must be
accompanied by a true copy of the claimant's federal income tax return.
The burden of proof of earning is on the taxpayer and must be
submitted to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector.
§ 334-32 § 334-32.2
334:782
ARTICLE IV
(RESERVED)236
[Adopted 6-20-1977 by Ord. No. 1076]
§ 334-33. (Reserved)
§ 334-34. (Reserved)
§ 334-35. (Reserved)
§ 334-36. (Reserved)
§ 334-37. (Reserved)
§ 334-38. (Reserved)
§ 334-39. (Reserved)
§ 334-40. (Reserved)
§ 334-41. (Reserved)
§ 334-42. (Reserved)
§ 334-43. (Reserved)
§ 334-44. (Reserved)
236. Editor's Note: Former Art. IV, Mercantile License Tax, adopted 11-14-1963, as amended in
its entirety 6-20-1977 by Ord. No. 1076 and as subsequently amended, was superseded
3-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2329. See now Art. III, Business Tax, of this chapter. See also Ch.
256, Mercantile Licenses.
§ 334-33 TAXATION § 334-44
334:783

ARTICLE V
Interest Rates for Liened Delinquent Real Estate Taxes
[Adopted 1-8-1985 by Ord. No. 1451]
§ 334-45. Interest rate established.
Interest shall accrue on all delinquent taxes from the date of filing as a lien
at the rate of 10% per annum.
§ 334-45 TAXATION § 334-45
334:785

ARTICLE VI
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 11-11-1986 by Ord. No. 1550]
§ 334-46. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust or
banking institution which is organized under the laws of the United States,
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years or instruments which solely
grant, vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also
include a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording
in accordance with Act 77 of 1986237 or any amendments or reenactments
thereof.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate 90% or
Any lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Municipality of
Monroeville, including, without limitation, buildings, structures,
fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without
upper or lower boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables
or interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance or
land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in
an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
237. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq.
§ 334-46 TAXATION § 334-46
334:787
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TAX COLLECTOR — The Tax Collector of the Municipality.
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings, exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years by
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arms length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the
contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift or sale by execution upon a judgment or upon
the foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, an exchange of properties or the real estate of
an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate,
which shall not be less than the assessment of such property made
B.
§ 334-46 § 334-46
334:788
§ 334-47. Tax imposed.
Under and by virtue of authority contained in the Local Tax Enabling Act,
Act 511 of the 1965 (53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.), and Act 77 of 1986,238 a tax is
hereby imposed on the transfer of real estate situate within the Municipality
of Monroeville, regardless of where the instruments making the transfer
are made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements on such
transfers take place. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts
or presents for recording any document, or in whose behalf any document
is made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay a tax of 1 1/2% of the value of the real estate represented
by such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of such
document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
§ 334-48. Exempt parties.
The United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any of their
instrumentalities or agencies, including the Municipality, shall be exempt
from payment of the tax imposed by this article. The exemption of such
governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a
transaction from liability for the tax.
§ 334-49. Excluded transactions.
by the Allegheny County Board of Property Assessment, Appeals and
Review;
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor or a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
A. The tax imposed by § 334-47 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the
Municipality or any of their instrumentalities or agencies by gift,
dedication or deed in lieu of condemnation proceedings or a
reconveyance by the condemning body of the property condemned
to the owner of record at the time of condemnation, which
reconveyance may include property line adjustments, provided that
238. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq.
§ 334-46 TAXATION § 334-49
334:789
said reconveyance is made within one year from the date of
condemnation.
(2) A document which the Municipality is prohibited from taxing under
the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(3) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded but which does not extend
or limit existing record title or interest.
(4) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
or property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(5) A transfer between husband and wife or between persons who
were previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child and between a grandparent
and grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
(6) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer were made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(10) A transfer:
(a) For no or nominal actual consideration between principal and
agent or straw party; or
(b) From or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or straw
party were his principal, no tax would be imposed under this
article.
§ 334-49 § 334-49
334:790
Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee
or statement of value fails to set forth that the property was
acquired by the grantee from or for the benefit of his
principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property
is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(11) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in association
in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real
estate being conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or
the interest in the association has been held by the grantee for
more than two years.
(12) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(13) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchased directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(14) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(15) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(16) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose the preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(17) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
§ 334-49 TAXATION § 334-49
334:791
§ 334-50. Documents relating to associations or corporations.
Except as otherwise provided in § 334-49, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 334-51. Acquired companies.
A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however, erected, if the change:
§ 334-52. Evidence of payment of tax.
§ 334-53. Statement of value.
Where the document does not set forth the true, full and complete value
thereof, the value shall be set forth in the statement of value accompanying
the document prepared for the purposes of calculating the real estate
transfer tax payable to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in accordance
with the Act of December 21, 1951, P.L. 1742, and Act 77 of 1986,239 or any
amendments or reenactments thereof.
(18) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of
value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document is
not subject to tax under this article.
A. Does not affect the continuity of the company; and
B. Of itself or together with prior changes has the effect of transferring,
directly or indirectly, 90% or more of the total ownership interest in the
company within a period of three years.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall be paid to the Tax Collector. The
payment of taxes shall be evidenced by the affixing of a documentary
stamp or stamps or a receipt of every document by the person making,
executing, delivering or presenting for recording such document. The
stamps or the receipt shall be affixed in such a manner that its removal
will require the continued application of steam or water. The stamp or
receipt affixed to the document shall be canceled before the document
is recorded.
B. The use of documentary license meter impressions or similar indicia of
payment in lieu of stamps as required by this article may be permitted
in the discretion of the Municipal Manager.
§ 334-49 § 334-54
334:792
§ 334-54. Enforcement; rules and regulations.
The Municipal Manager is hereby charged with enforcement of this article
and is authorized and empowered to adopt rules and regulations relating to
any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including but not limited to the method used in evidencing payment of the
tax.
§ 334-55. Suit for collection.
The Municipality may sue for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under
this article.
§ 334-56. Interest and penalties.
If for any reason the tax is not paid under due, interest at the rate of 6%
per year on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1%
of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit
is brought for the recovery of the tax, the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties
herein imposed.
§ 334-57. Payment under protest; refunds.
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest of
the amount of tax claimed by the Municipality in any case where a person
disputes the validity or amount of the Municipality's claim for the tax. If
it is thereafter judicially determined by a court of competent jurisdiction
that there has been an overpayment to the Tax Collector, the amount of the
overpayment shall be refunded to the person who paid under protest.
§ 334-58. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Make, execute, deliver, present for recording or cause to be made,
executed, delivered or presented for recording any document without
the full amount of the tax thereon begin duly paid.
B. Fraudulently cut, tear or remove from a document any documentary
stamp, receipt or other evidence of payment.
C. Fraudulently affix to any document upon which a tax is imposed by this
article any:
(1) Documentary stamp, receipt or other evidence of payment which
has been cut, torn or removed from any other document upon
which a tax is imposed by this article.
239. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq.
§ 334-54 TAXATION § 334-58
334:793
§ 334-59. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be subject
to a fine in an amount not exceeding the sum of $600, together with
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days. The penalties imposed
under this section shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any
other section of this article.
§ 334-60. Legislative authority.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Council of the Municipality
that if any word, words, part, parts, provisions, section, sentence, clause or
exception of this article and its regulations shall be illegal or invalid under
the Local Tax Enabling Act or Act 77 of 1986,240 the article shall be deemed
enacted pursuant to the Home Rule Charter and Options Plans Law, Act of
April 13, 1972, No. 62, as amended.241
(2) Documentary stamp of insufficient value.
(3) Forged or counterfeited stamp or receipt.
(4) Impression of any forged or counterfeited stamp, receipt, die, plate
or other article.
D. Willfully remove or alter the cancellation marks of any documentary
stamp or receipt or restore any such documentary stamp or receipt with
intent to use or cause the same to be used after it has already been used
or knowingly buy, sell, offer for sale or give away any such altered or
restored stamp or receipt to any person for use or knowingly use the
same.
E. Knowingly have in his possession any altered or restored documentary
stamp or receipt which has been removed from any document upon
which a tax is imposed by this article, provided that the possession of
such stamp or receipt shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to
violate the provisions of this subsection.
F. Knowingly or willfully prepare, keep, sell, offer for sale or have in his
possession any forged or counterfeited documentary stamps or
receipts.
G. Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate the rules and
regulations adopted by the Municipal Manager.
240. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 and 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., respectively.
241. Editor's Note: Act 62, the Home Rule Charter and Optional Plans Law, was previously
codified as 53 P.S. § 1-101 et seq., which was repealed 12-19-1996 by P.L. 1158, No. 177.
See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2901 et seq.
§ 334-58 § 334-60
334:794
ARTICLE VII
Property Tax Relief242
[Adopted 9-8-1992 by Ord. No. 1804]
§ 334-61. Exemptions from property tax increases for longtime
owner or occupant.
A. A longtime owner-occupant of property within the Municipality of
Monroeville shall be exempt from the payment of property tax to the
Municipality of Monroeville for that portion of an increase in assessed
valuation which is attributed to an increase in the market value of a
property which exceeds 5% from the previously established market
value as a result of the refurbishing or renovating of other residences or
the construction of new residences in the Municipality of Monroeville.
An increase in assessed valuation as a result of the physical
improvement of the subject property shall be excluded from
consideration for an exemption hereunder.
B. An exemption of payment of an increase in real property taxes granted
pursuant to this article shall be limited to real property which meets all
of the following conditions:
(1) The property is owned and occupied by a longtime owner-occupant.
(2) The property is the principal residence and domicile of the
longtime owner-occupant.
(3) A longtime owner-occupant is any person who for at least 10
continuous years has owned and has occupied the same dwelling
place as a principal residence and domicile, or any person who for
at least five years has owned and occupied the same dwelling as a
principal residence and domicile if that person received assistance
in the acquisition of the property as part of a government or
nonprofit housing program.
(4) A principal residence is the dwelling place of a person, including
the principal house and lot, and such lots as are used in connection
therewith which contribute to its enjoyment, comfort and
convenience. For purposes of this article, the term may also include
a building with a maximum of one commercial establishment and a
maximum of three residential units of which one residential unit
must be the principal residence of the longtime owner-occupant.
(5) A person is any natural person, excluding a corporation,
partnership, condominium association or cooperative.
(6) The owner-occupant has been granted tax gentrification approval
by the County of Allegheny.
242. Editor's Note: Former Article VII, Landfill Business Tax, adopted 1-12-1988 by Ord. No.
1610 and amended 9-13-1988 by Ord. No. 1641, was repealed 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
1810.
§ 334-61 TAXATION § 334-61
334:795
§ 334-61.1. Conditions. [Added 12-12-2000 by Ord. No. 2170;
amended 4-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2183; 1-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2288]
C. After November 30, 1993, any person seeking an exemption hereunder
shall submit to the Municipality of Monroeville's Tax Collector the tax
gentrification approval form as issued by the Board of Assessment of
Allegheny County within 30 days of receipt of the Assessment Board's
approval. [Amended 8-10-1993 by Ord. No. 1845]
D. The term of the exemption shall be for one tax year and subsequent
years; however, if the market value is increased by more than 5% in
subsequent years, the property owner will be required to reapply.
E. The Tax Collector shall promptly process the application and shall
notify the applicant of its decision. The Tax Collector may also require
the applicant to supply such other documentation as may be required to
properly consider the application.
A. Ordinance Nos. 1845 of 1993, 2170 of 2000, and 2183 of 2001 are
hereby affirmed to the extent they are consistent with the terms and
conditions of this amendment to this section.
B. The qualifying age on the adoption of this amendment to this section
shall be at age 60.
C. The income level for those qualifying shall be $30,000, of which 50% of
the same can be social security income.
D. The applicant must own one or more primary residences for the past 10
years.
E. A flat thirty-percent abatement across-the-board tax reduction is
hereby authorized.
F. The additional discount shall be available, if paid in full of the year the
tax is due; the face amount is due on April 30 of the taxable year.
G. There shall be a one-time filing, and once approved, the applicant
qualifies as long as the applicant owns the property.
H. The filing deadline for qualification is June 30 of each tax year.
I. The administration of Act 77243 shall henceforth be within the custody,
control and responsibility of the County Treasurer.
J. This amended section shall be effective January 23, 2004.
243. Editor's Note: See 16 P.S. § 6101-B et seq., the Allegheny Regional Asset District Law.
§ 334-61 § 334-61.1
334:796
ARTICLE VIII
Tax Assessment Limitation Program
[Adopted 12-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1916244]
§ 334-62. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 77 — The Act of December 22, 1993, Public Law 529, No. 77, codified
as the Allegheny Regional Asset District Law, 16 P.S. § 6101-B et seq.
ALLEGHENY REGIONAL ASSET DISTRICT LAW — See the definition of
"Act 77" above.
ASSESSMENT — The fair market value of property as determined by the
Board of Property Assessment, Appeals and Review of Allegheny County.
COUNCIL — The Municipal Council of the Municipality of Monroeville.
DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY ASSESSMENT — The Department of
Property Assessment, Appeals, Review and Registry of Allegheny County.
ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLD INCOME — All income received by an eligible
taxpayer while residing in his or her principal residence during a calendar
year, limited to not more than $25,000 per year.[Amended 3-9-1999 by
Ord. No. 2107]
ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER — A longtime owner/occupant of a principal residence
in Monroeville who is a single person aged 62 or older during a calendar
year in which county real estate property taxes are due and assessed; or
married persons if either spouse is 62 or older during a calendar year
in which Monroeville real estate property taxes are due and
assessed.[Amended 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 2107]
INCOME — All income, from whatever source derived, including but not
limited to salaries, wages, bonuses, commissions, income from selfemployment,
alimony, support money, cash public assistance and relief, the
gross amount of any pensions or annuities including railroad retirement
benefits, all benefits received under the Federal Social Security Act (except
Medicare benefits), all benefits received under state unemployment
insurance laws and veterans' disability payments, all interest received from
the federal or any state government or any instrumentality or political
subdivision hereof, realized capital gains, rentals, workmen's compensation
and the gross amount of loss of time insurance benefits, life insurance
benefits and proceeds (except the first $5,000 of the total of death benefits
payments) and gifts of cash or property (other than transfers by gift
between members of a household) in excess of a total value of $300,
but shall not include surplus food or other relief in kind supplied by a
governmental agency or property tax or rent rebate or inflation dividend.
244. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-1995.
§ 334-62 TAXATION § 334-62
334:797
LONGTIME OWNER/OCCUPANT — Any person who for at least 10
continuous years has owned or has occupied the same dwelling place as a
principal residence and domicile or any person who for at least five years
has owned and occupied the same dwelling as a principal residence and
domicile if that person received assistance in the acquisition of the property
as part of a government or nonprofit housing program.
MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Monroeville.
PERSON — A natural person.
PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE — The dwelling place of a person, including the
principal house and lot and such lots as are used in connection therewith
which contribute to its enjoyment, comfort and convenience, or a building
with a maximum of one commercial establishment and a maximum of three
residential units of which one residential unit must be a principal residence
of the longtime owner/occupant.245
§ 334-63. Limitation of assessment for eligible taxpayers.
All eligible taxpayers in Monroeville who are longtime owner/occupants
shall be entitled to have the assessment on his or her principal residence
maintained at or limited to the amount determined by the Department of
Property Assessment for the calendar year 1993 if the eligible taxpayer
meets the household income limits for qualification for any amount of
property tax rebate under the Senior Citizens Rebate and Assistance Act.246
§ 334-64. Conditions for participation in program.
Any person paying property taxes in the Municipality of Monroeville may
apply to participate in the assessment limitation program authorized under
this article. In order to be eligible to participate in the program, the person
must meet the following conditions:
A. The person must be a single person aged 62 or older; or be married
persons with either spouse being 62 years of age or older. [Amended
3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 2107]
B. The person must be a longtime owner/occupant.
C. The property owned by the person must be the principal residence and
domicile of the resident.
D. The person's eligible household income is limited during a calendar
year to not more than $25,000 per year. [Amended 3-9-1999 by Ord.
No. 2107]
245. Editor's Note: The former definition of "Senior Citizens Rebate and Assistance Act," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 2107.
246. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4751-1 et seq.
§ 334-62 § 334-65
334:798
§ 334-65. Rules and regulations for administration. [Amended
3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 2107]
The Department of Property Assessment and the Municipal Manager shall
have the authority to issue rules and regulations with respect to the
administration of the tax assessment program established under this article.
Such rules and regulations shall include, but not be limited to, reasonable
proof of household income, proof of residence and any other reasonable
requirements and conditions as may be necessary to operate the tax
assessment limitation program. Qualification for Act 77 tax relief as granted
by the Board of Property Assessment Appeals and Review shall be deemed
qualified for the Municipality of Monroeville Tax Relief Program.
§ 334-65 TAXATION § 334-65
334:799

ARTICLE IX
Improvements to Real Estate
[Adopted 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 2053]
§ 334-66. Assessment; tax duplicate revisions.
Pursuant to Borough Code 53 P.S. § 46306 of the County Assessment Codes,
whenever there is any construction of or major improvement to a building
or buildings which is not exempt from taxation and such building is not
included in the tax duplicate of the Municipality, the Council may request
the authority responsible for assessments in Allegheny County to inspect
and assess, subject to the right of appeal and adjustment as provided in the
General County Assessment Law, all taxable property in the Municipality
of Monroeville to which major improvements have been made, whereupon
such property shall then be added to the duplicate and shall be taxable for
municipal purposes at the same rate as all other taxable property in the
Municipality of Monroeville as the assessed valuation for the proportionate
part of the fiscal year of the Municipality of Monroeville remaining after the
property was improved.
§ 334-67. Interim assessment.
When such improvements are made during a month, the interim assessment
shall be computed as having been made on the first of the next succeeding
month.
§ 334-68. Payment; tax discount; penalty.
A 2% discount is granted on taxes paid by the end of the month following the
month during which the interim assessment was made. Taxes paid after the
end of the second month but before the fourth month following the month
during which the interim assessment was made shall be paid at face amount
thereof. All payments made subsequent to the fourth month following the
month during which the interim assessment was made shall be subject to a
penalty of 10% of the face amount thereof.
§ 334-69. Authority of Manager.
The Manager of the Municipality of Monroeville is authorized by the Council
to take such action as is necessary under 53 P.S. § 46306 of the Borough
Code to implement this resolution.
§ 334-66 TAXATION § 334-69
334:801

ARTICLE X
Taxpayer Bill of Rights
[Adopted 12-23-1998 by Ord. No. 2096]
§ 334-70. Adoption.
With the foregoing recitals deemed an essential part hereof,247 the
Municipality of Monroeville hereby adopts the following Local Taxpayer Bill
of Rights and all exhibits referenced therein:
§ 334-71. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the Local Taxpayer Bill of Rights as
well as exhibits attached hereto:
ASSESSMENT — The determination by the local taxing authority of the
amount of underpayment by a taxpayer.
ELIGIBLE TAXES — Includes all taxes levied under the Local Tax Enabling
Act (Act 511),248 as well as any per capita, occupation, occupation
assessment, occupational privilege, income, gross receipts, privilege,
amusement, admissions, earned income or net profits tax. This policy does
not apply to real property taxes.
OVERPAYMENT — Any payment of eligible tax which is determined in the
manner provided by law not to be legally due.
TAXING AUTHORITY — The Municipality, as well as any officer, agent,
clerk, income tax officer, collector, employee or other person to whom
the Municipality has assigned responsibility for the audit, assessment,
determination or administration of an eligible tax.
TAXPAYER — An individual, corporation, partnership or any other entity
subject to or claiming exemption from any eligible tax.
UNDERPAYMENT — The amount or portion of any eligible tax determined
to be legally due in the manner provided by law for which payment or
remittance has not been made.
§ 334-72. Disclosure statement; confidentiality; time limits;
appeals.
A. Local Taxpayer Bill of Rights disclosure statement. The Municipality
hereby adopts the disclosure statement attached hereto as Exhibit A.249
247. Editor's Note: Said recitals read as follows: "WHEREAS, the local Tax Enabling Act (Act
511 of 1965) authorizes certain political subdivisions to levy certain eligible local taxes
upon taxpayers, as eligible taxes are more specifically defined below; and "WHEREAS, Act
50 of 1998 requires Municipalities to adopt a Local Taxpayer Bill of Rights and to
establish an administrative process to receive and determine taxpayer petitions related to
assessments, audit, determination, review or collection of eligible taxes; and "WHEREAS,
the purpose of this Ordinance is to meet the January 1, 1999 compliance deadline under
Act 50."
248. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
249. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the office of the Municipal Manager and may be
examined there during regular office hours.
§ 334-70 TAXATION § 334-72
334:803
§ 334-73. Administrative process.
In order to make the determinations on petitions from taxpayers relating
to an assessment or refund of an eligible tax, the Municipality adopts the
following administrative process: Hearing and decision by a hearing officer
appointed by the Municipality; the Municipal Manager is hereby appointed
hearing officer for all hearings conducted under this article.
Any taxpayer contacted regarding an assessment, audit, determination,
review or collection of an eligible tax receiving an assessment notice
for an eligible tax shall simultaneously receive a notice of availability
of Local Taxpayer Bill of Rights. The requisite notice of availability
is attached hereto as Exhibit B.250 If a taxpayer requests the Local
Taxpayer Bill of Rights Disclosure Statement, a copy shall be mailed to
the taxpayer at the Municipality's expense.
B. Confidentiality of information. Any information obtained by the
Municipality as a result of an audit, return, report, investigation,
hearing or verification shall be confidential, except as otherwise
provided by law or for official purposes. If an officer, employee or agent
of the Municipality divulges in any manner confidential information
gained as a result of the foregoing, she/he shall be subject to dismissal
from office or discharge from employment.
C. Time limits for response to information requests. A taxpayer shall have
at least 30 days to respond to a request for information from the
Municipality. When the Municipality requests information from a
taxpayer, it shall simultaneously provide the taxpayer with an
information request time extension procedure notice. The form for such
notice is attached hereto as Exhibit C.251 If the taxpayer requests a
reasonable extension of time to respond to an information request and
states good cause, the request will be granted. The Municipality will not
take any action against a taxpayer for the tax year in question until the
expiration of the applicable response period, including extensions.
D. Tax Appeals. Act 50 requires the Municipality to adopt regulations
concerning the form and content of petitions, as well as practice and
procedure for tax appeal petitions. The required regulations as adopted
by the Municipality are attached hereto as Exhibit D.252
250. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the office of the Municipal Manager and may be
examined there during regular office hours.
251. Editor's Note: Exhibit C is on file in the office of the Municipal Manager and may be
examined there during regular office hours.
252. Editor's Note: Exhibit D is on file in the office of the Municipal Manager and may be
examined there during regular office hours.
§ 334-72 § 334-73
334:804
ARTICLE XI
Collection of Taxes by Tax Collector
[Adopted 12-11-2001 by Ord. No. 2204]
§ 334-74. Tax Collector to collect all taxes.
The Elected Tax Collector shall be collector of all county, municipal and
school institutional district and other taxes levied by the Municipality of
Monroeville, together with authorities empowered to the Elected Tax
Collector to collect, receive, account for and deposit into the Municipal
Treasury all other taxes, fees, assessments or charges that are levied or
established by the Municipality of Monroeville for general or special
purposes, including but not limited to all Act 511 taxes, pursuant to Section
1202 of the Home Rule Charter designated as "Powers and duties of the Tax
Collector."253
253. Editor's Note: See Charter, § C-67.
§ 334-74 TAXATION § 334-74
334:805

ARTICLE XII
Earned Income Tax Refunds
[Adopted 9-10-2002 by Ord. No. 2232]
§ 334-75. Refunds less than $10.
Earned income tax (EIT) refunds of an amount less than $10 shall be
credited to the taxpayer's account unless otherwise specified and requested
by the taxpayer in writing.
§ 334-76. Refunds greater than $10.
All EIT refunds of greater than $10 shall be refunded by check, as
established by past practice.
§ 334-75 TAXATION § 334-76
334:807

ARTICLE XIII
Voluntary Contributions From Earned Income Tax Refunds
[Adopted 10-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2310]
§ 334-77. Program established.
The Municipality of Monroeville establishes a voluntary earned income tax
refund contribution program for 2004 earned income tax refunds and for
subsequent years.
§ 334-78. Community projects eligible for contributions.
Earned income taxpayers due refund may choose to voluntarily contribute
their refunds to the following community projects:
§ 334-79. Notification; accounting.
The Monroeville Tax Collector is authorized to include voluntary
contribution notification on tax forms and further to provide a separate
accounting for voluntary refunds provided for each project.
A. Monroeville Community Park.
B. Monroeville Senior Citizens Center expansion.
C. Monroeville Public Safety Training Center.
§ 334-77 TAXATION § 334-79
334:809

ARTICLE XIV
Homestead Property Exclusion Program
[Adopted 12-28-2004 by Ord. No. 2320]
§ 334-80. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HOMESTEAD — A dwelling, including the parcel of land on which the
dwelling is located and the other improvements located on the parcel for
which any of the following apply:
HOMESTEAD PROPERTY — A homestead for which an application has been
submitted and approved under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8584.
§ 334-81. Grant of exclusion.
It is hereby created and established in accordance with Act 50 of 1998, 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 8581 et seq., that a homestead exclusion is applicable for all
properties who qualify pursuant to the aforementioned definitions located
within the Municipality of Monroeville. The initial $15,000 of the assessed
value of any homestead property in the Municipality of Monroeville shall be
excluded from Municipality of Monroeville real property taxation.
The dwelling is primarily used as the domicile of an owner who is a
natural person. The homestead for real property qualifying under this
subsection shall not include the land on which the dwelling is located if
the land is not owned by a person who owns the dwelling.
A.
The dwelling is a unit in a condominium as the term is defined in 68
Pa.C.S.A. § 3103 and the unit is primarily used as the domicile of a
natural person who is an owner of the unit; or the dwelling is a unit
in a cooperative as the term is defined in 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 4103 and the
unit is primarily used as the domicile of a natural person who is an
owner of the unit. The homestead for a unit in a condominium or a
cooperative shall be limited to the assessed value of the unit, which
shall be determined in a manner consistent with the assessment of real
property taxes on those units under Chapter 68 of Pa.C.S.A. (relating to
real and personal property) or as otherwise provided by law. If the unit
is not separately assessed for real property taxes, the homestead shall
be a pro rata share of the real property.
B.
The dwelling does not qualify under Subsection A or B and a portion
of the dwelling is used as the domicile of an owner who is a natural
person. The homestead for real property qualifying under this
subsection shall be the portion of the real property that is equal to the
portion of the dwelling that is used as the domicile of an owner.
C.
§ 334-80 TAXATION § 334-82
334:811
§ 334-82. Assessment procedures.
The commissioned or appointed Tax Collector shall assess the homestead
exclusion in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in
Act 50 of 1998, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8581 et seq.
§ 334-82 § 334-82
334:812
Chapter 338
TENANT REGISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 334.
§ 338-1. Submission of names and addresses to Manager.
All owners/landlords, rental agents and real estate brokers, including but
not limited to those involving apartments, office buildings, hotels, motels,
merchandise marts and convention centers, collecting rentals and/or fees
from tenants for all use, including temporary use, of commercial and/
or residential space within the Municipality of Monroeville shall, as of
September 1, 1990, notify the Municipal Manager of the Municipality of
Monroeville by submitting the names and addresses of all tenants.
§ 338-2. Information required on vacating and new tenants; time
limit.
All owners/landlords, rental agents and real estate brokers, including but
not limited to those involving apartments, office buildings, hotels, motels,
merchandise marts and convention centers, collecting rentals and/or fees
from tenants for all use, including temporary use, of commercial and/
or residential space within the Municipality of Monroeville shall, as of
September 1, 1990, notify the Municipal Manager of the Municipality of
Monroeville by submitting the names and addresses of all tenants vacating
the premises and also the new names and addresses of tenants moving into
the premises within 30 days of either the vacating of the premises or the
new rental of a premises.
§ 338-3. Violations and penalties.
Any owner/landlord, rental agent or real estate broker, including but not
limited to those involving apartments, office buildings, hotels, motels,
merchandise marts and convention centers, failing to comply with the
requirements of this chapter shall, for such failure, be subject to a fine
of $300 for each name and address that he or she fails to file with the
Municipal Manager of the Municipality of Monroeville. Each offense shall be
considered a separate offense and shall be subject to a separate fine. Each
separate offense shall be a continuous offense only for the month in which
the landlord, rental agent or real estate broker fails to report the change
in tenancy; however, an offense which continues for more than one month
shall be considered a separate offense for each month that the landlord
continues to fail to report the names and addresses as required herein to
the Municipal Manager of the Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 334-82 TENANT REGISTRATION § 338-3
338:813
Chapter 342
TRADE SHOWS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Flea markets — See Ch. 210.
Mercantile licenses — See Ch. 256.
Transient retail or wholesale
businesses — See Ch. 346.
§ 342-1. License required.
No person shall conduct a trade show within the Municipality of Monroeville
without first obtaining a license from the License Officer designated by the
Monroeville Municipal Manager.
§ 342-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRADE SHOW — Any exhibition, sale or display where goods, merchandise
or services are sold and having at least 10 persons participate who deal in
the type of goods, merchandise or service exhibited, sold or traded.
§ 342-3. Applicant qualifications.
The applicant shall either be the owner or lessee of the premises upon
which the trade show is being held.
§ 342-4. License application.
An application shall be filed prior to the opening of the trade show. The
application shall state the names, addresses and businesses of all persons
who are to participate in the trade show, the site and any other pertinent
information requested by the License Officer.
§ 342-5. License fee. [Amended 9-8-1981 by Ord. No. 1281;
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042; 6-12-2001 by Ord. No. 2189]
Effective January 1, 2002, the license fee shall be as provided in Chapter
194, Fees. Payment shall be made at the time of the license application or
may be made on a quarterly basis by the owner or lessee of the premises
upon which the trade show is being conducted.
§ 342-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall,
upon summary conviction thereof before any Magistrate having jurisdiction,
§ 338-3 § 342-6
342:814
pay a fine in an amount not exceeding the sum of $600 together with
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 346
TRANSIENT RETAIL OR WHOLESALE BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Flea markets — See Ch. 210.
Mercantile licenses — See Ch. 256.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 282.
Business tax — See Ch. 334, Art. III.
Trade shows — See Ch. 342.
Zoning — See Ch. 359.
§ 346-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 346-2. License required.
From and after the adoption of this chapter, it shall be unlawful and
prohibited for any person, firm or corporation to engage in, commence,
carry on, do, conduct or maintain any transient retail or wholesale business
of any kind for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise within the
Municipality until or unless he shall first have applied for and obtained a
license from the Municipality as is required by this chapter. Every transient
retail or wholesale business, as herein defined, shall be subject to the
regulations of, and shall obtain a license as provided under, this chapter.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any natural person or firm, association, partners or
partnership, corporation or other form of business enterprise.
TEMPORARY NATURE OR PERIOD OF TIME — Such a business as
shall be operated, conducted, engaged in or maintained for a period of
less than one year.
TRANSIENT BUSINESS — Any retail or wholesale business being
operated, engaged in, maintained or conducted for the sale of goods,
wares or merchandise or services within the Municipality in or under
any tent or cover, building or structure of any kind or in a vacant
lot or field not under cover, which business is of a temporary or
nonpermanent nature or for a temporary period of time.[Amended
12-13-1960 by Ord. No. 243]
B. The use of the singular herein shall also mean and include the plural,
and the use of the male pronoun shall also mean and include the female
and the neuter.
§ 342-6 TRANSIENT RETAIL OR WHOLESALE § 346-3
346:815
§ 346-3. License application.
Every person, firm or corporation desiring or intending to engage in,
commence, carry on, do, conduct or maintain such a transient retail or
wholesale business and every person, firm or corporation presently engaged
in conducting, doing or maintaining such a transient retail or wholesale
business for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise within the
Municipality and desiring or intending to continue the same shall, after the
adoption of this chapter, make application to the Municipal Council, through
the Municipal Secretary, for a transient retail or wholesale business license.
The application for such a license shall state and set forth the applicant's
name, address, place or location where the proposed business is or shall
be conducted; the nature, purpose or kind of goods and merchandise of the
business, which business shall not be of an unlawful or illegal nature; the
kind of building or structure in or under which the business is or shall be
conducted; the term or period for which the business shall be conducted;
and the nature of the leasehold or right under which the premises is held
upon which the business is or shall be conducted, and a copy of which
written lease or right must be attached to and accompany said application.
The application must be signed by the applicant or his duly authorized agent
responsible for said business operation or management.
§ 346-4. Additional application requirements. [Added 12-13-1960 by
Ord. No. 243]
Every applicant for a transient license permit shall submit a letter from the
owner or lessee of an establishment in the vicinity of the premises from
which the transient business will be conducted stating that all persons who
will be engaged in the transient business will be permitted to use sanitary
facilities of that establishment. Such letter will not be necessary in those
cases where adequate sanitary facilities exist on those premises from which
the transient's business will be conducted. In either case, a certification of
the Building Inspector must be obtained to ensure that such proper sanitary
facilities either exist or are available to all persons engaged in the transient
business.
§ 346-5. License fee. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
From and after the adoption of this chapter, every transient retail or
wholesale business for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise within
the Municipality shall be subject and pay to the Municipality a license fee
as provided in Chapter 194, Fees, for each month or fraction thereof that
said business shall be engaged in, conducted, carried on or maintained.
Said fee shall be payable on or before the first day of each month, in
advance, without a grace period. Said license fee shall be for the use of the
Municipality to provide ample and reasonable supervisory and inspection
service for the proper enforcement of the regulations of this chapter.
§ 346-3 § 346-6
346:816
§ 346-6. Occupancy permit; fee. [Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2042]
From and after the adoption of this chapter, and within 60 days therefrom,
every business, commercial and industrial enterprise being commenced,
engaged in, carried on, conducted and maintained, whether permanent or
transient, owned or leased, shall apply for and obtain an occupancy permit
for the use and occupancy of the ground or building or premises where or
upon which such business is conducted or operated. Such occupancy permit
shall be similar to that provided for in Chapter 359, Zoning. The application
for such permit shall contain information similar to that set forth in § 346-3
hereof. No fee shall be chargeable for such occupancy permit.
§ 346-7. Certification from Tax Collector required. [Added
12-13-1960 by Ord. No. 243]
The applicant for a transient business license shall be required to obtain
certification of the Tax Collector that a mercantile license tax license has
been issued to him.
§ 346-8. Inspections.
The Municipality by its duly authorized agent, shall have the right, power
and authority to make periodic and necessary inspections at reasonable
times during business hours to determine conditions regarding matters of
health, sanitation, firesafety and the protection of persons and property
and for such purposes is authorized and directed to enter upon any such
business premises without liability of trespassing upon said property while
engaged in and acting within the course and scope of his duties.
§ 346-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-13-1960 by Ord. No.
243; 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2042]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction in summary proceedings before any
District Justice, be subject to pay a fine not exceeding $600, together with
costs of prosecution, and, in default of the payment of said fine and costs,
shall be committed to the Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceeding
30 days. Each and every day that such a violation shall be continued or
persisted in after notice given of such violation shall be deemed a separate
and new offense, subject to a separate and additional charge and subject to
the penalties, cumulatively, as herein provided.
§ 346-10. Exceptions.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to apply to:
A. Farmers selling their own produce.
§ 346-6 TRANSIENT RETAIL OR WHOLESALE § 346-10
346:817
Chapter 352
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 202.
Parades and motorcades — See Ch. 270.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 320.
Pedalcycles, skateboards, etc. — See Ch. 320,
Art. V.
Chapter 355
WARRANTLESS ARRESTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 278.
§ 355-1. Adoption of guidelines.
The Municipality of Monroeville hereby adopts guidelines for effectuating
warrantless arrests for disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, obstructing
highways and other public passages, purchasing, consuming, possessing or
transportation of liquor or malt beverages as follows: Warrantless Arrest
Guidelines for the following four offenses pursuant to 18 Pa.C.S.A. as
follows: § 5503, disorderly conduct: § 5505, public drunkenness, § 5507,
obstructing highways and other public passages; § 6308, purchase,
consumption, possession or transportation or liquor of malt or brewed
beverages.
§ 355-2. Policy or purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide officers with guidelines for
effectuating warrantless arrests relating to disorderly conduct, public
drunkenness, obstructing highways and other passageways, purchase,
consumption, possession or transportation of liquor or malt or brewed
B. The sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose.
C. Any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery products,
meat and meat products or milk and milk products.
D. Those persons or businesses as are exempted by the Borough Code of
1947, P.L. 1621, § 89, 53 P.S. § 15141 et seq.254
254. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 15141 et seq. was repealed by Act of 9-29-1961, P.L. 1745. State
licensing of auctioneers is now covered by 53 P.S. § 734.1 et seq.
§ 346-10 § 355-2
352:818
beverages pursuant to 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902. 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902 increases
the enforcement and authority of the Municipality of Monroeville and other
municipalities who employ police officers by empowering municipalities
to not only issue citations for disorderly conduct, public drunkenness,
obstructing highways and other passageways, the purchase, consumption,
possession or transportation of liquor or malt or brewed beverages, but,
upon view by an officer, to effectuate warrantless arrests for disorderly
conduct, public drunkenness, obstructing highways or other passageways,
purchase, consumption, possession or transportation of liquor or malt or
brewed beverages.
§ 355-3. Scope.
A police officer shall have the right to arrest without warrant when an
officer views ongoing conduct, as it relates to disorderly conduct, public
drunkenness, obstructing highways or other passageways, or the purchase,
consumption, possession or transportation of liquor or malt or brewed
beverages, in a public place when such conduct imperils the personal
security of any person or endangers public or private property.
§ 355-4. Procedure for effectuating warrantless arrests.
A. The within policy applies exclusively to 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902. All officers
are required to adhere to all other policies pertaining to 18 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 5503, relating to summary offense citations for disorderly conduct; 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 5505, relating to summary offense citations for public
drunkenness; 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5507 relating to summary offense citations
for obstructing highways and other public passageways; and 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 6308, relating to summary offense citations for purchase,
consumption, possession or transportation of liquor or malt or brewed
beverages.
B. Warrantless arrests under 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902 shall also follow those
procedures set forth in Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, in
particular Rule 71.
C. With warrantless arrests under 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902, a citation shall be
issued to the defendant at the time of his release and thereafter the
case shall proceed in accordance with Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, Rules 55, 56, 57, 58 and 59 as if the proceedings have been
instituted by issuing a citation to the defendant.
D. This Council recognizes and understands that 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902 and
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure Rule 55, 56, 57 and 59 and
71 may be amended from time to time. It is the intention of this Council
that the police officers follow the terms of said rules or statutes that are
currently in effect as of the date of any arrests, whether or not these
guidelines have been formally amended to comply with any
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania statute changes or Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure changes.
§ 355-2 WARRANTLESS ARRESTS § 355-4
355:819
§ 355-5. When effective.
The effective date of this ordinance will be upon declaration of the Chief of
Police that appropriate officer training, guidelines and department protocol
have been met.
Chapter 359
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Department and Planning
Commission — See Ch. 101.
Building construction — See Ch. 162.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 176.
Fees — See Ch. 194.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 202.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 206.
Land disturbance — See Ch. 243.
Landfills — See Ch. 245.
Noise control — See Ch. 264.
Pornography — See Ch. 286.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 290.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 319.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 320.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 324.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 328.
E. Further, this chapter shall not modify, restrict, or otherwise prohibit a
Municipality of Monroeville police officer from making any other
warrantless arrests or arrests for other summary offenses where such
arrests have otherwise expressly been authorized by any other statute.
§ 355-4 § 355-5
359:820
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 359-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Monroeville Zoning Ordinance."
§ 359-2. Terminology.
Words used in a special sense in this chapter are defined in Article VI.
§ 359-3. Community development objectives.
A. The community development objectives which are the basis for the
provisions of this chapter are set forth in the Comprehensive Plan as
adopted and amended by the governing body. In addition to the
Comprehensive Plan, the following is a supplementary statement of the
purpose and intent of the Zoning Ordinance. The objectives are adopted
as a statement of legislative findings and may be used in evaluating any
proposed additions or deletions to the Zoning Ordinance.
B. The general objective for the development of Monroeville is to provide a
pleasant, attractive, healthy, safe and convenient environment for
living, working, education, shopping and recreation. This objective shall
be pursued by the creation and implementation of land use plans to:
(1) Preserve and improve the natural environment.
(2) Increase property values, employment opportunities and the
economic base of the community.
(3) Provide safe, adequate and attractive housing.
(4) Provide the necessary infrastructure of utilities and vehicular and
pedestrian transportation arteries.
(5) Provide recreational and community facilities.
C. The preservation and improvement of the environment shall be pursued
by:
(1) The elimination of visual and physical blight, such as overhead
utility lines, concentrations of signs of excessive size and proximity,
large expanses of unbroken pavement and dilapidated structures.
(2) The preservation of natural topography and wooded slopelands,
including the limiting of hillside development beyond a reasonable
gradient and the control of floodplains and watersheds.
(3) The reclamation of derelict land.
(4) The municipal acquisition of and the promotion of dedication of
natural open space and wooded slopeland in order to link the
existing and proposed park sites and neighborhoods and to prevent
§ 359-1 ZONING § 359-3
359:821
ecological problems resulting from extensive cut and fill necessary
to develop wooded slopelands.
D. The increase of property values, employment opportunities and the
economic base of the community shall be pursued by:
(1) The promotion of balanced economic growth and employment
opportunities.
(2) The concentration of commercial and industrial uses in the areas
where streets and utilities can provide the necessary services and
where conflicts with other uses can be minimized through site
design and transitional provisions.
(3) The implementation of the other objectives set forth herein.
E. The provision of safe, adequate and attractive housing for the entire
population of the community shall be pursued by:
(1) The provision of a wide range of housing density alternatives and a
mix of housing types, correlating residential density and housing
type with topography, environmental conditions and the capacity of
and distance from existing and proposed utilities, streets and
community facilities.
(2) The removal of dilapidated housing, the rehabilitation of
deteriorating housing, the maintenance of sound housing and the
development of new housing.
(3) The promotion of an attractive residential environment through the
implementation of the other objectives set forth herein.
F. The prevention of loss of life, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection
and relief and the related impairment of the tax base shall be pursued
by:
(1) Regulation of uses and development in floodplains which, acting
alone or in combination with other uses and development, may
cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities and
frequencies.
(2) Restricting and prohibiting certain uses, activities and
development from locating within areas subject to flooding.
(3) Requiring all those uses, activities and developments that occur in
floodplains to be protected and floodproofed against flooding and
flood damage.
(4) Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are
unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.
G. The provision of the necessary infrastructure of utilities and
transportation arteries shall be pursued by:
§ 359-3 § 359-3
359:822
§ 359-4. Zoning Map.
A map entitled "Monroeville Zoning District Map" is hereby adopted as a
part of this chapter. The Zoning Map shall be kept on file for examination
in the offices of the Department of Community Development in the
Monroeville Municipal Building.
(1) The extension of the municipal improvements of waterlines, storm
and sanitary sewers and roads and their improvement where
economically feasible to guide and promote development.
(2) The encouragement of public utilities to improve and extend
services consistent with the objectives set forth herein.
(3) Traffic planning and control which will provide safe, rapid and
convenient movement of people and goods within and through the
Municipality, with a separation of through and local traffic,
provision for pedestrians and minimal disruption of existing and
proposed development patterns and community integrity.
H. The provision of recreational and community facilities shall be pursued
by:
(1) The creation of outdoor and indoor recreational facilities to
accommodate the existing and future population.
(2) The promotion of schools and parks in close proximity to decrease
duplication of services and to provide the greatest value for public
expenditures.
(3) The promotion of acquisition or dedication of natural open space
for park and recreational purposes.
(4) The provision of residential areas with adequate commercial,
governmental, recreational and educational facilities.
(5) The preservation of historical landmarks.
I. The creation and implementation of land use plans shall seek to achieve
the foregoing objectives and to:
(1) Achieve the purpose for which each zoning district is intended, as
stated in each Article of this chapter.
(2) Avoid incompatible land use if possible and protect against the
detrimental effect of incompatible land uses through planting, open
space and natural breaks in topography.
(3) Concentrate development where possible to prevent sprawl,
conserve open space and make full use of utilities and services.
(4) Provide site plan control.
§ 359-3 ZONING § 359-5
359:823
§ 359-5. Compliance.
No structure shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved,
altered, converted or enlarged, nor shall any structure or land be altered
or used, except in full compliance with all the provisions of this chapter
and after the lawful issuance of all permits and certificates required by this
chapter.
§ 359-6. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the protection of the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
Monroeville.
§ 359-7. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable
engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions.
Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice
jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply
that areas outside the floodplain districts or that land uses permitted within
such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall
not create liability on the part of the Municipality of Monroeville or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 359-5 § 359-7
359:824
ARTICLE II
District Regulations
§ 359-8. Zoning districts.
The municipality is divided into the districts stated in Schedules A and B255
as shown by the district boundaries on the Zoning Map.
§ 359-9. District boundaries.
District boundaries shown on the lines of roads, streams and transportation
rights-of-way shall be deemed to follow their center lines. Neither the
vacation of roads nor the change of streambeds shall affect the location
of such district boundaries. When the Zoning Officer cannot definitely
determine the location of a district boundary by such center lines, by
the scale of dimensions stated on the Zoning Map or by the fact that it
clearly coincides with a property line, he shall refuse action, and the Zoning
Hearing Board, upon appeal, shall interpret the location of the district
boundary with reference to the scale of the Zoning Map and the purposes
set forth in all relevant provisions of this chapter.
§ 359-10. Permitted uses.
§ 359-11. Conditional uses.
A. The permitted uses for each district are shown in Schedule A.256
B. A permitted use shall be reviewed and approved as if it were a
conditional use if the Zoning Officer determines that such use is:
(1) Adjacent to any natural or artificial body of water;
(2) Within 200 feet of the intersection of any arterial or collector road;
(3) To be developed on a site having land exceeding a slope of 25% or
having other recognized hazardous geologic condition;
(4) Within the landing approach area of an aircraft or helicopter
landing facility;
(5) Within a floodplain; or
(6) Of unique historic significance.
A. The governing body may authorize conditional uses as specified in
Schedule A257 if all conditions and provisions of Article IV are met.
255. Editor's Note: See now Table 201 Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area
Requirements, included at the end of this chapter, which replaces former Schedule A,
Permitted and Conditional Uses, and Schedule B, Yard and Area Requirements.
256. Editor's Note: See now Table 201 Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area
Requirements, included at the end of this chapter, which replaces former Schedule A,
Permitted and Conditional Uses, and Schedule B, Yard and Area Requirements.
§ 359-8 ZONING § 359-11
359:825
§ 359-12. Prohibited uses.
§ 359-13. Height regulations.
No structure shall exceed the maximum height above basic grade specified
in Schedule B,259 provided that:
B. Uses in the following categories shall be considered as and may be
approved only as conditional uses. Any permitted use or structure:
(1) At an intersection or interchange of a major thoroughfare or
transportation artery;
(2) At a natural or artificial body of water;
(3) At a place of relatively steep slope or grade or other area of
hazardous geological or topographic feature;
(4) At a place of historical or patriotic interest or value;
(5) At a floodplain area; or
(6) At other places having a special character or use affecting and
affected by their surroundings.
A. Uses not specifically listed as permitted or conditional uses shall be
prohibited.258
A. No accessory structure shall exceed a height of 15 feet.
B. No residential use, except townhouses where permitted or an
apartment structure in the R-4 or R-5 District, may exceed a height of
30 feet or three stories.
C. A structure for any permitted or conditional use in C-2 Business
Commercial, L Special Use, M-1 Planned Industrial and M-2 Industrial
Zoning Districts may exceed the maximum permitted height, provided
that every required front, side and rear yard is increased by one foot for
each additional foot of height but shall not exceed 20 feet above the
maximum building height for that zoning district; and that the permit
for such structure be reviewed and authorized as a conditional use as
regulated by Article IV. [Amended 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 2002]
257. Editor's Note: See now Table 201 Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area
Requirements, included at the end of this chapter, which replaces former Schedule A,
Permitted and Conditional Uses, and Schedule B, Yard and Area Requirements.
258. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B regarding stores and theaters selling adult literature
or showing adult movies and videos, added 8-12-1986 by Ord. No. 1537, which subsection
immediately followed Subsection A, was superseded 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898. See now
Art. VII, Sexually Oriented Businesses.
259. Editor's Note: See now Table 201 Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area
Requirements, included at the end of this chapter, which replaces former Schedule A,
Permitted and Conditional Uses, and Schedule B, Yard and Area Requirements.
§ 359-11 § 359-13
359:826
§ 359-14. Lot and yard requirements.
The minimum lot area, minimum width of lot, minimum depth of front and
rear yards and minimum width of each side yard shall be as shown in
Schedule B.263
D. The height regulations of this chapter as outlined in Schedule B260 shall
not apply to church spires, belfries, monuments, tanks, water or fire
towers, ornamental towers, spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads and
smokestacks, provided that every required yard is increased by one foot
for each additional foot of height above the maximum height.
[Amended 8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 1952]
E. In determining the height of a structure in stories, a basement shall be
counted as a story when more than 60% of its aggregate wall surface,
measured between floor and ceiling, is or will be above grade as shown
on construction plans.
F. A commercial communication tower may exceed the maximum height
as outlined in Schedule B,261 provided that every required yard is
increased by one foot for each additional foot of height of the tower and
any related equipment. However, the maximum height of the
commercial communication tower shall not at any time exceed 200 feet.
No equipment mounted or attached to the commercial communication
tower shall exceed this two-hundred-foot maximum height. [Added
8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 1952]
G. Commercial communication antennas. [Added 10-8-1996 by Ord. No.
1995]
(1) A commercial communication antenna, freestanding and installed
as a principal structure, may exceed the maximum height as
outlined in Schedule B,262 provided that every required yard is
increased by one foot for each additional foot of height of the
antenna and any related equipment. However, the maximum height
of the commercial communication antenna shall not at any time
exceed 50 feet.
(2) A commercial communication antenna attached to the exterior of
any principal structure shall not at any time exceed 10 feet above
that structure.
260. Editor's Note: See now Table 201 Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area
Requirements, included at the end of this chapter, which replaces former Schedule A,
Permitted and Conditional Uses, and Schedule B, Yard and Area Requirements.
261. Editor's Note: See now Table 201 Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area
Requirements, included at the end of this chapter, which replaces former Schedule A,
Permitted and Conditional Uses, and Schedule B, Yard and Area Requirements.
262. Editor's Note: See now Table 201 Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area
Requirements, included at the end of this chapter, which replaces former Schedule A,
Permitted and Conditional Uses, and Schedule B, Yard and Area Requirements.
263. Editor's Note: See now Table 201 Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area
Requirements, included at the end of this chapter, which replaces former Schedule A,
Permitted and Conditional Uses, and Schedule B, Yard and Area Requirements.
§ 359-13 ZONING § 359-14
359:827
A. Lots which abut on more than one street shall provide the required
front yard along every street.
B. One and only one principal structure, together with permitted
accessory structures, may be located on any lot, except that two or
more principal structures may be permitted as a planned development
after approval and recording of the development plan as required by
this chapter.
C. No structure, whether attached to the principal structure or not and
whether open or enclosed, including porches, carports, balconies and
platforms above basic grade level, shall project into any minimum front,
side or rear yard, except as provided below:
(1) Structures accessory to single-family residences may extend into
required rear and side yards but not closer than 10 feet to rear and
side yard lot lines.
(2) Minor utility fixtures, unenclosed patios and articles of decoration
around a main building may be located in any required yard.
(3) A buttress, chimney, cornice, pier or pilaster extending no more
than 24 inches from the wall of the principal structure may be
located in any required yard.
(4) An unenclosed porch no more than one story or 15 feet in height
and 12 feet in depth may be erected in the front or rear yard of a
residential structure but may not extend into a required side yard.
(5) In an R District, an unenclosed porch or stoop no more than one
story of 15 feet in height and four feet in depth may extend into a
required side yard.
D. Trailers, including utility, commercial, mobile home or living trailers
and motorized recreational vehicles may not be stored in any required
front or side yard.
E. Nonresidential structures or uses in any district shall not be located or
conducted closer to any lot line of any lot in any R District than the
distance specified in the following schedule:
Minimum Side or Rear Yard
Abutting Any Lot in Any R or S
District
(feet) Use
15 Off-street parking spaces and
access drives for
nonresidential uses
30 Churches, schools and public
or semipublic structures
§ 359-14 § 359-14
359:828
§ 359-15. Density of development limits.
Minimum Side or Rear Yard
Abutting Any Lot in Any R or S
District
(feet) Use
50 Recreation facilities,
entertainment facilities,
motels, all business uses and
all industrial uses
F. The Zoning Officer may authorize the projection of a principal structure
into a required front yard on a lot located between two structures which
may be nonconforming with respect to the front yard, provided that the
resulting front yard shall not be less than the median front yard of the
two adjacent structures.
G. Any portion of a lot once counted as a yard or as lot area per family in
compliance with the area requirements of the district regulations of this
chapter shall not be counted again as required yard or lot area per
family for another building.
H. No required yard in any district shall be used for parking vehicles
except on a driveway. In single-family developments, not more than
25% of the front yard may be devoted to driveway access. In singlefamily
attached developments, not more than 50% of the front yard may
be devoted to driveway access. In multiple-family developments, not
more than 50% of the front yard may be devoted to driveway access. In
nonresidential districts, driveway access shall be as permitted by site
plan approval.
I. Nonconforming single-family residential structures located in any S or
R Zoning District which are not in compliance with this chapter solely
by reason of an inadequate rear or side yard dimension may be
expanded with the approval of the Zoning Officer, provided that the side
or rear yard distance of the proposed expansion to the structure is not
less than the side or rear yard distance of the existing nonconforming
structure and the new structure otherwise complies with the Articles
and provisions of this chapter. [Added 12-8-1992 by Ord. No. 1824]
A. The minimum lot area for each dwelling unit and the maximum floor
area ratio for residential uses shall be in conformance with the
following schedules:
§ 359-14 ZONING § 359-15
359:829
§ 359-16. Exterior wall surfaces. [Amended 6-9-1987 by Ord. No.
1571]
Minimum Lot Area Per Family
(square feet)
District
Type of
Dwelling S R-1 R-2 R-2-T R-3 R-4 R-5
1-family
house
20,000 10,000 7,500 7,500 7,500 7,500 7,500
2-family
house
— — — 4,375 4,375 4,375 4,375
Townhouse — — — 3,200 3,200 3,200 3,200
Garden
apartment
— — — — 2,400 2,400 2,000
Apartment — — — — — 1,800 1,200
Maximum Floor Area Ratio
(Ratio of Enclosed Floor Area to Lot Area)
District
Number of
Stories S R-1 R-2 R-2-T R-3 R-4 R-5
Under 4 0.20 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.33 0.40 0.50
4 — — — — 0.50 0.60
5 — — — — — 0.60 0.70
6 — — — — — 0.70 0.80
7 — — — — — — 0.90
8 — — — — — — 1.00
9 — — — — — — 1.10
10 or more — — — — — — 1.20
B. In calculating lot area for density purposes, any areas having a slope
greater than 40% shall be subtracted from the lot area, and 1/2 of any
areas having a slope of 25% or more, up to 40%, shall be subtracted
from the lot area. For such calculations, the slope shall be measured
between contours having vertical intervals no greater than 20 feet.
A. Exposed exterior walls of structures shall be composed of brick, stone,
stucco, fireproof precast stucco, glass, metal or marble with wood used
for trim only, except as provided herein.
B. Wood may be used for exposed, exterior walls for residential structures
of three stories or less.
§ 359-15 § 359-16
359:830
§ 359-17. Fences.
§ 359-18. Floodplain districts.
C. Concrete block may be used for exposed, rear exterior walls in M
Districts upon recommendation of the Planning Agency and approval of
the Council where there is a finding that such rear wall will not be
visible to passersby or to the general public.
D. Council may approve alternative materials if and only if such material is
determined to be equal or superior in quality and aesthetic character
compared to approved materials.
E. An addition to an existing structure which is nonconforming with
respect to this section may be constructed in conformance with the
materials of original construction of the existing portion of the
structure with approval by the Zoning Officer.264
A. A fence may be erected into any required side or rear yard if the fence
is no more than six feet in height for residential uses. A fence which is
at least 50% open as to construction and which is no more than four feet
high may be erected in any required residential front yard. [Amended
8-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1768]
B. A chain-link-type fence not more than 10 feet in height may be erected
in any required yard for schools, playgrounds or parks.
C. A fence of the chain link type no more than 10 feet high may be erected
in any required yard for industrial uses or commercial uses. A solid
fence no more than 10 feet high may be erected in any required
commercial or industrial yard with the approval of the Zoning Officer.
A. Floodplain districts identified as being subject to the one-hundred-year
flood in the Flood Insurance Study are established as the FW Floodway
District, the FF Flood-Fringe District and the FA Floodplain Hazard
District. Floodplain districts shall be overlays to zoning districts
established by this article, and provisions for floodplain districts are
supplemental requirements to the zoning districts.
B. Boundaries of floodplain districts are established as delineated by the
Flood Insurance Study, which includes Flood Boundary and Floodway
Maps and which is declared to be a part of this chapter.
C. Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the floodplain districts shall
be made by the Zoning Officer. Should a dispute arise concerning the
identification of any floodplain area, an initial determination shall be
made by Council, and any aggrieved party may appeal to the Board. The
264. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, added 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1663, which provided
that rigid PVC siding may be used for exposed, exterior wall surfaces for detached onefamily
dwellings of two stories or less and which immediately followed this subsection,
was repealed 5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 2187.
§ 359-16 ZONING § 359-18
359:831
§ 359-19. Floodplain provisions.
burden of proof shall be on the appellant, who may submit such
technical evidence as he desires.
D. Where specific one-hundred-year flood elevations cannot be determined
for this FA Floodplain General District using other sources of data,
including the United States Army Corps of Engineers Floodplain
Information Reports, United States Geological Survey Flood-Prone
Quadrangles or other pertinent studies, an applicant for any use or
development must determine this elevation in accordance with
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Such hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses shall be performed and certified by registered
professional engineers using currently accepted technical concepts.
Submitted data shall be sufficient in detail to allow a thorough technical
review.
E. Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any stream or
watercourse, a permit shall be obtained from the Department of
Environmental Resources, Dams Safety, Obstructions and Stormwater
Management, and notification of the proposal shall be given to all
affected adjacent municipalities. Copies of such notifications shall be
forwarded to both the Federal Insurance Administration and the
Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs.
A. No use or development shall be permitted within a floodplain district
except as a conditional use in accordance with the provisions of the
underlying zoning district and of § 359-33 and after approval of a site
plan as required by § 359-26.
B. The following uses are prohibited within any floodplain district: mobile
homes, mobile home parks, hospitals, nursing homes, jails, prisons and
detention centers and campgrounds for recreation vehicles.
C. No structure or use shall be permitted in any floodplain district which
produces or uses any hazardous material or stores or maintains a
supply of any hazardous material in an amount of 50 gallons or more or
which uses, produces or stores radioactive substances in any amount.
D. No use proposed in any floodplain district shall diminish the capacity of
the floodway of any drainage system.
E. No new or substantially improved residential structure shall be
permitted within any floodplain unless its lowest floor is at least one
foot above the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
F. No new or substantially improved nonresidential structure shall be
permitted within any floodplain unless its lowest floor is at least one
foot above the one-hundred-year flood elevation or it is so designed and
constructed that the space enclosed by such structure shall remain
either completely or essentially dry up to that height in accordance with
§ 359-18 § 359-19
359:832
§ 359-20. Floodplain design and construction standards.
The following standards shall apply to all development proposed in any
floodplain:
the standards contained in Flood-Proofing Regulation (United States
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972) for that type of construction.
G. No obstruction shall be placed in any floodplain, such as fences, signs
or other obstructions, which might impede, retard or change direction
of the flow of water or that will catch or collect waterborne debris or
that might be carried downstream by floodwaters to damage
downstream property.
H. No part of an on-site sewage disposal system shall be permitted in any
floodplain.
I. In the FW Floodway District, no development shall be permitted except
where the effect of such development on flood heights is fully offset by
accompanying improvements which have been approved by all
appropriate authorities.
J. No existing structure or use located in any floodway district shall be
expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed expansion or
enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying
improvements.
K. Enclosed space. [Added 7-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1988]
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor is prohibited.
(2) Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor which will be used
solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental
storage in an area other than a basement, and shall include
crawlspace area, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. Designs for meeting
this requirement must be certified by either a registered engineer
or architect and meet the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices provided that permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill shall extend at least 15 feet laterally beyond all points of a building;
shall be comprised only of soil or small rock materials and shall not
include organic waste; shall be compacted to provide the necessary
§ 359-19 ZONING § 359-20
359:833
permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring or settling; shall have
a slope no greater than 50%; and shall not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Storm drainage facilities shall be provided to convey the flow of
stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner which shall ensure
proper drainage along streets and provide positive drainage away from
buildings. The system shall be designed to prevent the discharge of
excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities shall be comprised of all new or
replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities, and systems shall be
located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
D. Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the
discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters. No part of any on-site
sewage system shall be located within any floodplain except in strict
compliance with all state and local regulations for such systems. If any
such system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment
to it, or contamination from it, during a flood.
E. All other utilities, such as gas lines and electrical and telephone
systems, shall be located, elevated where possible and constructed to
minimize the chance of hazard or impairment during a flood.
F. Streets shall have a finished elevation of not more than one foot below
the regulatory flood elevation.
G. Placement of buildings and structures shall be such as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of floodwaters and to have the
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwaters.
H. Anchoring of all buildings and structures shall be required in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. All ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and
other similar objects or components located below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be securely anchored and affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural damage
to the building.
J. Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a
marine or water-resistant quality.
K. Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will
withstand inundation.
L. Windows, doors and other components at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.
§ 359-20 § 359-20
359:834
M. Paints or other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be of a marine or water-resistant quality.
N. Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a
marine or water-resistant quality.
O. Doors, trim, cabinets and other wooden components shall be painted
with a marine or water-resistant finish.
P. Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the onehundred-
year flood elevation. Separate electrical circuits shall serve
lower levels and shall be dropped from above.
Q. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units and
other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not
be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
R. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the
system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the
drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration
occurs.
§ 359-20 ZONING § 359-20
359:835

ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 359-21. Nonconforming uses.
The following provisions shall apply to all nonconforming uses:
§ 359-22. Nonconforming structures.
A. A zoning certificate must be obtained by the owner of any
nonconforming use as evidence that the use lawfully existed prior to the
adoption of the provision which made the use nonconforming.
B. A nonconforming use may be continued; however, it shall not be
extended, expanded or changed unless to a conforming use, except
when permitted as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the following:
(1) The new use will more closely correspond to the uses permitted in
the district.
(2) The changed use will be in keeping with the character of the
neighborhood in which it is located.
C. In the event that a nonconforming use, conducted in a structure or
otherwise, ceases, for whatever reason, for a period of one year or is
abandoned for any period, such nonconforming use shall not be
resumed.
A. A nonconforming single-family residential structure which is not in
compliance with this chapter solely by reason of an inadequate rear or
side yard dimension, and provided that the nonconforming structure is
used or occupied by a permitted use and located in an S or R Zoning
District, may be enlarged or expanded with the approval of the Zoning
Officer, provided that the side or rear yard distance of the proposed
expansion to the structure is not less than the side or rear yard distance
of the existing nonconforming structure used or occupied by a
permitted use and located in any S or R Zoning District, and may be
enlarged or expanded when permitted as a variance by the Zoning
Hearing Board if the expansion, considered independently of the
original structure, complies with the off-street parking requirements of
this article and such expansion otherwise conforms to all requirements
of this chapter. [Amended 12-8-1992 by Ord. No. 1824]
B. Any nonconforming structure or a structure housing a nonconforming
use damaged by fire, flood, explosion or other casualty to an extent of
no more than 50% of its replacement value at the time of such casualty
may be reconstructed and used as before when permitted as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board if such reconstruction is
performed within 12 months of such casualty and if the restored
structure has no greater coverage and contains no greater cubic
content than before such casualty.
§ 359-21 ZONING § 359-22
359:837
§ 359-23. Nonconforming lots of record.
Any nonconforming lot of record existing on the effective date of this
chapter and then held in separate ownership different from the ownership
of adjoining lots shall be exempt from the minimum lot area, depth and
width requirements provided that it is used in accordance with minimum
yard requirements, and that uses other than a one-family house conform
to minimum lot area per family and floor area ratio requirements of this
chapter.
§ 359-24. Special exceptions.
C. Where a nonconforming use is conducted inside a structure, the floor
area of the structure and the nonconforming use within it may be
enlarged to an extent not greater than 50% of the floor area existing at
the time of adoption of this chapter, when permitted as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
following:
(1) There shall be no increase in noncompliance, if any, with lot and
yard requirements.
(2) Off-street parking, as required by § 359-28, shall be provided as to
the enlarged portion.
D. Any nonconforming permanent sign legally existing on the effective
date of this chapter may continue to exist, provided that signs which are
structurally deteriorated to the extent that the cost of restoration would
exceed 50% of the cost of replacing the structure shall be removed.
Signs which are nonconforming because of flashing lights or
intermittent illumination shall be brought into compliance within 30
days of the effective date of this chapter.
E. When any nonconforming use or structure located in a floodplain is
expanded, reconstructed or otherwise modified to an extent amounting
to 50% or less of its market value, it shall be floodproofed and elevated
to the greatest extent practicable.
F. No nonconforming use or structure located in a floodplain shall be
expanded, reconstructed or otherwise modified to an extent amounting
to more than 50% of its market value except in full compliance with the
floodproofing standards of this chapter.
G. No nonconforming structure located in a floodway district shall be
expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed expansion or
enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying
improvements.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board may permit the following special exceptions
in accordance with the standards stated and in compliance with Article
IV of this chapter. The Zoning Hearing Board may also attach such
§ 359-22 § 359-24
359:838
§ 359-25. Accessory uses and structures.
The following provisions shall apply to accessory uses and structures:
conditions as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this
chapter.
(1) Living quarters in an accessory structure as an accessory use to a
one-family house to accommodate domestic employees of the
residents of the principal structure.
(2) The accommodation of not more than two nontransient roomers as
an accessory use to a one-family dwelling, provided that no sign is
displayed.
(3) Outside storage areas in commercial and industrial districts,
provided that such storage areas shall be buffered by fencing,
planting or topography so as to obviate adverse effect on
neighboring property and that no waste material shall be stored in
such area, and such area will not eliminate the requirement for a
waste handling facility as required in § 359-26F(10).
B. The pursuit of vocational or avocational interests by a resident shall be
deemed an accessory use to a dwelling, provided that:
(1) Such activity is clearly subordinate to the dwelling, does not
occupy more than 25% of the floor area of one floor, does not entail
internal or external alterations or construction features not
customary in dwellings and there shall be no external evidence of
any nonresidential activity.
(2) In connection with which there is no person employed, no display
or sign other than a nameplate, no mechanical equipment used
other than normal domestic or household equipment, no facilities
which are dangerous or incompatible with the residential
environment and no selling of a commodity or nonprofessional
service on the premises.
(3) In connection with a home office, not more than one assistant is
employed and no colleagues or associates use such office.
(4) one additional off-street parking space shall be provided for each
200 square feet of floor area devoted to such activity.
(5) Reasonable safeguards are established against detrimental
emission of smoke, fumes, odors, dust, noise, vibration, glaring
light or visual blight or pollution of any kind.
A. A zoning occupancy permit shall be required for every accessory use or
structure. A review of the proposed site plan as required in § 359-26
shall be required for uses or structures accessory to any principal uses
other than one-family houses, townhouses and two-family houses,
§ 359-24 ZONING § 359-25
359:839
§ 359-26. Site plan review.
except where, in the judgment of the Zoning Officer, the accessory use
or structure does not affect or alter the site in any significant way.
B. Temporary structures and trailers used in conjunction with
construction work may be permitted only during the period that the
construction work is in progress. Permits for other temporary
structures may be issued for sixty-day periods, but such permits shall
not be renewed except as a special exception when approved by the
Board.
A. No zoning permit or occupancy permit shall be issued for any use upon
any lot except a one-family home until a site development plan has been
submitted, reviewed and approved in accordance with the following
provisions; provided, however, that existing structures where the
occupancy is being changed without any change in use category, new
construction or addition to structures and without change in the site
are exempt from the site plan review requirement. [Amended
2-14-1989 by Ord. No. 1658; 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 1787]
B. The application for approval of a proposed site development plan shall
be submitted in the office of the Zoning Officer and shall be
accompanied by a fee established by resolution of Council to cover the
cost of review. The Zoning Officer shall set a reasonable time schedule
to be followed prior to the presentation of the application to the
Council.
C. The application shall consist of the application together with not fewer
than 20 prints of each drawing submitted as part of the proposed site
development plan. The proposed site development plan shall be drawn
by a licensed architect, engineer, planner, surveyor or landscape
architect in accordance with standard architectural and engineering
practices and shall be prepared on a standard sheet size of 24 inches
high by 36 inches wide to clearly indicate the following: [Amended
4-11-1995 by Ord. No. 1938; 3-14-2000 by Ord. No. 2141]
(1) Property lines and total acreage of parcel proposed for
development.
(2) All existing streets, rights-of-way, and easements related to the
development.
(3) The location of existing driveways on adjacent properties.
(4) The location of relevant natural features, including but not limited
to streams or other natural watercourses and adjacent lands which
are subject to flooding and significant stands of existing trees.
(5) The location of existing structures, including structures located on
abutting property if within 50 feet of the common property line.
§ 359-25 § 359-26
359:840
(6) Required front, side and rear yard lines and any required building
line.
(7) Contour lines at two-foot intervals where average slope is 10% or
less and five-foot intervals where average slope exceeds 10% and
twenty-foot intervals where average slope exceeds 25%.
(8) Location, dimensions, total square footage and ground floor
elevations of proposed structures, walkways, driveways, entrances,
parking facilities, loading spaces, landscaping, signs, lighting
facilities, fences or walls, fire hydrants and fire lanes and other site
improvements or amenities.
(9) Contours and sufficient elevations to show proposed gradings and
data to show gradient of access drives, parking facilities and
surface water runoff.
(10) Location and approximate size of utilities to serve the development.
(11) Schematic elevations at an appropriate architectural scale.
(12) Surface water runoff controls.
(13) Title block, giving the name of the development, property owner,
developer, North point, date and scale (minimum of one inch equals
50 feet) on a standard size of 24 inches high by 36 inches wide.
(14) Such other information as may be required by the Zoning Officer.
D. For proposals in floodplains, the application shall additionally include:
(1) Topographic contour lines at an interval of two feet.
(2) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplains and information pertaining to the floodway
and the flow of water, including direction and velocities.
(3) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based
upon National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.
(4) The elevation of the one-hundred-year flood and information
concerning flood depths, pressures, impact and uplift forces and
other factors associated with a one-hundred-year flood.
(5) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures.
(6) A document, certified by a registered professional surveyor,
engineer or architect, which states that the proposed construction
or development has been adequately designed to withstand the
one-hundred-year flood elevations, pressures, velocities and impact
and uplift forces associated with the one-hundred-year flood. Such
statement shall include a description of the type and extent of
§ 359-26 ZONING § 359-26
359:841
floodproofing measures which have been incorporated into the
design of the structure or development.
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources to implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation
control.
E. Action shall be taken by the Council, either approving or disapproving,
within 90 days from the date of the regular Planning Commission
meeting at which the site plan first appears as an agenda item. Failure
of the Council to so act shall be considered approval of the plan as
submitted. Council may attach such conditions as it deems appropriate
to approval. Approval may be conditioned upon the grant of a variance
or of a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, where such
variance or special exception is required, but such conditional approval
by Council shall not be binding on the Zoning Hearing Board, and the
conditional approval shall be canceled if the requested variance or
special exception is denied by the Board. [Amended 12-8-1992 by
Ord. No. 1823]
(1) Site plan approval shall not be official until and unless the site plan
as approved by Council and including all conditions of approval by
Council is filed with the Zoning Officer within 90 days of action by
Council.
(2) Site plan approval shall be valid for a period of one year following
Council action. If the proposed improvements are not under
construction within one year or completed within two years,
Council approval shall be void.
F. Council shall not approve a site development plan unless the following
standards are met:
(1) Screening. A planted visual barrier or landscape screen shall be
provided and maintained on any property in a commercial or
industrial district which is contiguous to any residential district,
except where natural or physical barriers exist which are deemed
to provide an adequate buffer by the Planning Agency. This screen
shall be composed of plants and trees arranged to form both a lowlevel
and a high-level screen. The high-level screen shall consist of
trees planted with specimens no younger than three years in age
and planted at intervals of not more than 10 feet. The low-level
screen shall consist of shrubs or hedges planted at an initial height
of not less than two feet placed in alternating rows to produce a
dense visual barrier. Any plant not surviving three years after
planting shall be replaced.
(2) Storage. Any article or material stored temporarily outside an
enclosed building as an incidental part of the primary commercial
or industrial operation shall be so screened by opaque ornamental
§ 359-26 § 359-26
359:842
fencing, walls or evergreen planting that it cannot be seen from
adjoining public streets or adjacent lots when viewed by a person
standing on ground level.
(3) Landscaping. Any part or portion of the site which is not used for
buildings, other structures, loading or parking spaces and aisles,
sidewalks and designated storage areas shall be planted with an
all-season ground cover and shall be landscaped with trees and
shrubs in accordance with an overall landscape plan and shall be in
keeping with natural surroundings. Any off-street parking area with
five or more spaces shall provide a landscaped perimeter for the
parking area of not less than 5% of the parking area, which shall be
in addition to open area requirements of the district. At least one
tree per five parking spaces, or portion thereof, shall be provided.
(4) Lighting. All parking areas, driveways and loading areas,
entryways and pedestrian paths shall be provided with a lighting
system which shall furnish an average minimum of 0.5 footcandle
within such areas during hours of operation. All lighting shall be
completely shielded from traffic on any public right-of-way and
from any residential district.
(5) Interior circulation. The interior circulation of traffic in commercial
areas shall be designated so that no driveway or access lane
providing parking spaces shall be used as a through street. If
parking spaces are indicated by lines with angles other than 90°,
then traffic lanes shall be restricted to one-way, permitting head-in
parking. No driveway or street used for interior circulation shall
have traffic lanes less than 10 feet in width.
(6) Access. Areas provided for loading and unloading of delivery trucks
and other vehicles and for the servicing of shops by refuse
collection, fuel and other service vehicles shall be adequate in size
and shall be so arranged that they may be used without blockage or
interference with the use of public streets or sidewalks, other
accessways or automobile parking facilities.
(7) Traffic control. No design shall be approved which is likely to
create substantial pedestrian or vehicular traffic hazards
endangering the public safety. Safety requirements which may be
imposed in such a review shall include traffic control devices,
acceleration or deceleration lanes, turning lanes, traffic and lane
markings, walkways and signs. The developer shall be responsible
for the construction of any such traffic control devices.
(8) Stormwater management. Adequate stormwater retention facilities
shall be provided to ensure that stormwater runoff after
development shall not be greater than the runoff which would
occur from the site in its natural state during a storm with a twentyfive-
year probability.
(9) Signs. Every existing nonconforming sign shall be removed.
§ 359-26 ZONING § 359-26
359:843
(10)Waste handling. All rubbish shall be stored in airtight, verminproof,
easily cleanable, damage-resistant containers on the same lot as
the principal use, with sufficient capacity for storing the maximum
volume of garbage, rubbish and other waste material which may be
generated on the site. For one-family attached or detached homes,
such containers shall be on the same lot as the principal structure.
For all other uses, such containers shall be stored on the same lot
as the principal structure in a suitably buffered and landscaped
area with concrete pads constructed with aprons below the frost
line for vector control and having ready access for refuse trucks.
Bulk refuse containers for food facilities shall be placed on
concrete pads equipped with drains that permit frequent cleaning
and disposal of wastewater to a sanitary sewer. Storage may also
be in a separate room within the principal structure or a totally
enclosed area attached to the principal structure, sprinklered and
having a concrete floor designed for and capable of storing the
maximum volume of garbage, rubbish and other waste material
which may be generated on the site.
(11) Street traffic control devices. [Added 8-13-1991 by Ord. No.
1765]
(a) All street name signs, traffic control signs and other traffic
control devices as deemed necessary by the Municipality shall
be provided and erected by the applicant.
(b) All street name signs shall conform to and be erected as per
the Municipality of Monroeville's specifications for street name
signs.
(c) All traffic control signs shall be Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation approved, conform to applicable regulations
and be placed using heavy-duty breakaway channel posts (or
equal as approved by the Municipality).
(d) All other traffic control devices shall be municipal approved
and conform to Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as
well as all other applicable regulations, including any federal
or county regulations promulgated for specific projects.
(e) All traffic signals shall have preemptive equipment provided
and erected by the applicant.
G. Site plan review for landfills. No zoning permit or zoning occupancy
permit shall be issued for a landfill until a site development plan has
been submitted, reviewed and approved by the Municipality of
Monroeville in accordance with the following provisions: [Added
7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1843265; amended 4-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2142]
265. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided penalties for violation of its provisions. See
§ 359-33BB.
§ 359-26 § 359-26
359:844
(1) The application for approval of a proposed site development plan
shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the
Council to cover the costs of review. The Zoning Officer shall set
forth a reasonable time schedule to be followed prior to the
presentation of the application to the Council.
(2) The application shall consist of not fewer than 20 copies of the
letter of application, together with not fewer than 20 copies of the
drawings submitted as part of the site development plan. The
proposed site development plan, a topographic plan, prepared by a
professional engineer registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, to a scale no greater than one inch equals 200 feet,
on a standard sheet size of 24 inches high by 36 inches wide shall
include the following:
(a) Title block, giving the name of the development, property
owner, developer, North point, key location map, registration
stamp, date and scale on a standard sheet size of 24 inches
high by 36 inches wide, with Index.
(b) Property lines, total acreage of parcel proposed for
development and any existing landfill areas adjacent to the
proposed municipal waste landfill.
(c) All existing streets, rights-of-way and easements related to the
development.
(d) Owners of adjacent properties, including the location of any
existing structures and driveway locations.
(e) The location of natural features on site, including but not
limited to streams or other natural watercourses and adjacent
areas which are subject to flooding, significant stands of
existing trees and the natural elevations, both the high and low
points.
(f) The location of natural features abutting properties within 300
feet, including but not limited to streams or other natural
watercourses and adjacent areas which are subject to flooding
and significant stands of existing trees.
(g) The location of existing structures and accessory uses on site.
(h) The location of structures and utilities on abutting property
within 300 feet of common property lines.
(i) Municipal waste landfill areas within the landfill site, including
the staging of the proposed municipal waste landfill
development and the location of proposed access roads and
proposed haul roads.
(j) Cross sections, at a true scale that is equal both horizontally
and vertically, showing the existing grades and the proposed
§ 359-26 ZONING § 359-26
359:845
grades upon completion and closure of the proposed municipal
waste landfill.
(k) Surface water runoff and sediment controls.
(l) Location, dimensions, total square footage and ground floor
elevations of proposed structures, walkways, driveways,
entrances, parking areas, loading spaces, landscaping, signs,
lighting facilities, fire hydrants and fire lanes and other site
improvements and amenities.
(m) Location and approximate size of utilities to serve the proposed
development.
(n) Location of proposed equipment cleaning and tire cleaning
areas.
(o) Location of proposed weighing scales.
(p) Location of proposed fire-fighting equipment and other
emergency and/or safety equipment.
(q) Location of any proposed fencing.
(r) Location of any proposed screening or buffer areas, including a
planting plan and schedule for the buffer area utilizing trees,
shrubs, bushes, fences and/or berms.
(s) A traffic impact study.
(t) An environmental impact statement, which shall include the
following:
[1] A description of existing conditions in the area.
[2] A land use history of the property.
[3] A description of the proposed municipal waste landfill and
associated facilities.
[4] An assessment of the proposed municipal waste landfill on
the natural environment, including summary descriptions,
technical data, maps and diagrams, that specifically
examines geology, topography, soils, slopes, hydrology,
vegetation, wildlife and air quality.
[5] A needs assessment showing how this proposed municipal
waste landfill complies with the Allegheny County Solid
Waste Plan and justifying the need for this additional
landfill space.
[6] The relationship of the proposed municipal waste landfill
to the surrounding community, including the impact on
land use plans, policies and controls.
§ 359-26 § 359-26
359:846
[7] An inventory of private properties served by private water
supplies within 3,000 feet of the permit area.
[8] An historical record of previous landfill operations.
[9] A description of existing conditions, including, if a landfill
exists, the construction details of that existing landfill and
the effects of that landfill on the proposed development.
[10] An historical record of mining and quarrying in the area,
both surface and deep mining operations.
[11] A chronological summary of methane gas and other gases
in the area and methods for monitoring and controlling.
(u) A description and schedule of the postclosure plan and future
plans for the proposed municipal waste landfill.
(3) Site plan approval shall:
(a) Not be official until and unless the site plan as approved by
Council and including all conditions of approval by Council is
filed with the Zoning Officer within 90 days of action by
Council.
(b) Not be official until required approvals are received from
county, state and federal agencies. All approved plans and any
amendments and/or any substantial changes must be
submitted to the Municipality within 90 days from receiving
permits from requisite county, state and federal agencies.
(c) Be valid for a period of one year following the applicant
receiving permits from requisite county, state and federal
agencies. If the proposed improvements are not under
construction within one year of receiving requisite county,
state and federal approvals, Council approval shall be void.
(4) Once a year, during the anniversary month of site plan approval,
the Planning Commission will review site compliance and
performance. Recommendations will be forwarded to Council as to
whether the zoning permit should be extended for another year.
H. Temporary signs. [Amended 7-9-1991 by Ord. No. 1760]
(1) A temporary sign not exceeding 225 square feet in area may be
permitted by the Zoning Officer for a period of four weeks or less,
provided that the sign is safely installed and is consistent with the
area in which it is to be located. A temporary sign may be installed
for a period longer than four weeks upon approval as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board of the Municipality of
Monroeville pursuant to § 359-25B.
§ 359-26 ZONING § 359-26
359:847
(2) Any Municipality of Monroeville civic or community organization
may erect a temporary sign within the Municipality; however, said
organization must file an application with the Municipality, except
that said organization shall be exempt from the payment of the
temporary sign fee.
I. Temporary real estate and political signs. [Amended 7-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 1760]
(1) One temporary real estate sign is permitted on any property being
sold, leased or developed if it is not illuminated, not less than 10
feet from the curb and is no larger in surface area than 16 square
feet in any residential district or 25 square feet in any commercial
or manufacturing district. Such sign shall be limited to advertising
the sale or lease of the premises on which it is located or to
providing pertinent information regarding the developers, builders,
contractors, architects, engineers and other agents responsible for
the development. Such sign shall be promptly removed when the
sale, lease or development of the property has been completed.
(2) Political signs shall be permitted upon any private or public
property, with the consent of the owner of said property, in any
zoning district of the Municipality of Monroeville. No temporary
political sign may be constructed prior to 20 days prior to any
primary, general or special election to be held. Said temporary
political sign must be removed within five days after the primary,
general or special election has been held.
J. Temporary real estate directional signs. A temporary real estate
directional sign to direct potential buyers to residential properties in
Monroeville being offered for sale may be permitted on Sundays and on
special showing days, but not during rush hours, if it is not illuminated,
no larger in surface area than six square feet and does not conflict with
or confuse traffic flow. Where such sign is in conflict with any of these
requirements, it shall be confiscated by the Municipality. [Added
6-9-1987 by Ord. No. 1571]
K. Business signs. Signs on the premises occupied by any legal business or
industry shall be permitted if the following requirements are met:
(1) No sign shall contain any information or advertising for any
product not sold on the premises.
(2) Business signs shall have an aggregate surface area, including all
faces, not greater than two square feet for each foot of width of the
zoning lot measured along the right-of-way, and no sign shall in any
case exceed an area of 225 square feet.
(3) No sign shall project over any public sidewalk or right-of-way.
(4) A sign located on a roof shall not extend more than 15 feet above
the roof level and shall not be so placed as to interfere with
§ 359-26 § 359-26
359:848
openings in the roof or to prevent free access from one part of the
roof to any other part.
(5) Any sign attached permanently against a wall shall be not less than
eight feet above the sidewalk or ground if it is not illuminated and
not less than 12 feet if illuminated. Any such sign shall not project
above the wall to which it is attached, shall not cover in part or in
whole any wall opening and shall not protrude more than 12 inches
from the wall to which it is attached.
L. Additional business sign. The Planning Agency may authorize additional
business signs if:
(1) The business fronts on more than one thoroughfare.
(2) More than one business is located in one structure. In such
instance, the combined total surface area of the business signs
shall not exceed two square feet for each foot of the right-of-way,
and no sign shall in any case exceed an area of 225 square feet.
(3) The maximum permitted sign area may be divided between a
maximum of two signs, provided that such signs are no less than
100 feet apart.
M. Logo sign. In addition to a business sign, one single- or double-faced
freestanding sign may be erected on a site occupied by any legal
business or industry which has a lot area greater than 1/2 acre and on
which all structures are set back 40 feet or more from the property lines
if:
(1) The sign displays nothing other than the logo type, trademark or
name of the company or commercial center on the premises.
(2) The sign has a height no greater than 24 feet above basic grade and
is no closer than 10 feet to any property line.
(3) The sign shall have an aggregate area, including all faces, no
greater than one square foot for every linear foot of property
frontage on a public right-of-way; but shall not in any case exceed
an area of 225 square feet. The maximum permitted sign area may
be divided between a maximum of two logo signs provided that
such signs are not less than 100 feet apart.
(4) Where a property fronts on more than one public right-of-way, a
logo sign or signs may be installed on each right-of-way.
(5) An electronic message center will be considered as a secondary
sign. It shall have a black background/face with amber toned
changeable copy. Any changeable copy sign shall not exceed a
maximum size of 24 square feet per side and must be calculated
into the maximum permitted sign area as calculated in Subsection
M(3). Additionally, the character height shall not exceed 18 inches
in height, with no more than three lines of copy per electronic
§ 359-26 ZONING § 359-26
359:849
signboard, and all copy or other images that physically change or
give the appearance of change shall be displayed at intervals of
not less than 15 seconds. Running, flashing or other distracting
movement of the changeable copy is prohibited. [Added
1-11-2005 by Ord. No. 2325]
N. Directional signs. A sign directing traffic to a major shopping center or
industrial facility may be located at or near the intersection of public
streets as a special exception approved by the Zoning Hearing Board if:
(1) Such sign shall be limited to those businesses having 50 or more
on-site employees or groups of 10 or more businesses having a
common identification, such as a shopping center or industrial
park.
(2) Such sign shall be four feet in width by eight inches in height and
shall have white letters on a blue background.
(3) No more than one set of posts shall be installed on any approach to
an intersection, and no more than six directional signs shall be
attached to each set of posts.
(4) The signs shall be placed in the public right-of-way in such a
manner that they do not obstruct the safety and vision of traffic or
otherwise constitute a hazard to traffic. Appropriate permits from
the appropriate authority having jurisdiction must first be
obtained.
(5) Such signs shall be owned by the Municipality of Monroeville, and
Council shall have the right to maintain or remove such signs
without compensation to the beneficial user of such sign.
O. Billboards and outdoor advertising signs. No billboard, freestanding or
overhanging outdoor advertising shall be permitted in any zoning
district of the Municipality of Monroeville, except as provided for in the
zoning districts designated on Exhibit A which is attached hereto and
incorporated herein.266 Billboards and/or outdoor advertising signs may
be permitted as a conditional use when approved by Council, after
submission and review by the Planning Commission, and provided that
all of the following requirements are met: [Added 8-13-1994 by Ord.
No. 1764]
(1) Location. Billboards and/or outdoor advertising signs may not be
erected within an R Zoning District or within 500 feet of the
boundary line of an R District or within 750 feet of the line of any
public or private school property, park, library, church or other
house of worship. The required spacing shall be measured from a
point perpendicular to the centermost point of the billboard and/or
outdoor advertising structure along the front line parallel to the
266. Editor's Note: Exhibit A, which is the Zoning Map, is on file in the offices of the
Department of Community Development in the Monroeville Municipal Building.
§ 359-26 § 359-26
359:850
center line of the roadway to which the billboard and/or outdoor
advertising sign is oriented.
(a) The minimum front, side and rear yard requirements applying
to a principal use as set forth within a zoning district in which
the billboard and/or outdoor advertising sign is to be located
shall apply to each billboard and/or outdoor advertising
structure.
(b) The maximum lot coverage as specified in § 359-15 of this
chapter shall apply to any lot upon which a billboard and/or
outdoor advertising structure is located and shall be
cumulative, including any other structures and buildings on
the same lot therewith.
(c) No billboard and/or outdoor advertising structure shall be
erected in such a manner as to block the view from the road,
street or driveway of any existing business sign, logo sign or
residential or nonresidential structure or limit or reduce the
light and ventilation requirements under the Municipal
Building Code.267
(d) No billboard and/or outdoor advertising structure shall be
constructed within the clear-sight triangle of a public street,
road or roadway on which it is situated, nor shall it in any case
obstruct or impede traffic safety.
(e) All billboards and/or outdoor advertising signs shall maintain a
lateral minimum spacing of 750 feet between billboards and/or
outdoor advertising structures. Required spacing shall be
measured from a point perpendicular to the centermost point
of the billboard and/or outdoor advertising structure to the
front line parallel to the center line of the roadway to which the
billboard and/or outdoor advertising structure is oriented.
(f) No billboard and/or outdoor advertising sign may be mounted
or painted on a roof, wall or other part of a building or any
other structure.
(2) Size and height. A billboard and/or outdoor advertising structure
shall have a maximum allowable gross surface area of 150 square
feet per sign face. A billboard and/or outdoor advertising structure
may have a minimum of two sign faces per structure. However, the
gross surface area of each sign face shall not exceed 150 square
feet.
(a) The billboard and/or sign faces shall be placed back-to-back or
in a V-shaped configuration on a single pole.
267. Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Building Construction; and Ch. 176, Construction Codes,
Uniform.
§ 359-26 ZONING § 359-26
359:851
(b) The billboard and/or outdoor advertising sign's maximum
dimension shall not exceed 10 feet in height and 15 feet in
width. Said total height and total length will be measured from
the outside dimensions of the billboard and/or outdoor
advertising sign.
(c) A billboard and/or outdoor advertising structure shall have a
maximum height above the curb of the roadway from which it
is intended to be viewed of 24 feet above the curb of the closest
street to which it faces. However, the height of a billboard and/
or outdoor advertising structure shall be measured from the
base of grade to the top of the structure.
(3) Construction methods. Billboards and/or outdoor advertising
structures shall be constructed in accordance with applicable
provisions of the Monroeville Municipality Building Code268 and
shall be designed by a professional/civil engineer licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and shall include the submission of
calculations on the structure and foundation. In addition:
(a) Any billboard and/or outdoor advertising structure shall have a
maximum of one vertical support which shall be a maximum of
three feet in diameter, or width, and without bracing or vertical
support.
(b) A billboard and/or outdoor advertising sign face shall be
independently supported and have vertical supports of metal
which are galvanized or otherwise treated to prevent rust and
corrosion.
(c) The one vertical support shall be capable of enabling the entire
side face to be able to withstand a minimum wind load of 60
miles per hour.
(d) The entire base of the structure (i.e., sign face) shall be
permanently landscaped with suitable shrubbery and/or
shrubs of a minimum height of three feet placed in such
manner as to screen the foundation of the structure.
(e) Landscaping shall be maintained by the sign owner in an
attractive and healthy manner in accordance with accepted
conservation practices and municipal ordinances.
(f) Permanent landscaping shall form a base and/or backdrop to
the billboard and/or outdoor advertising sign when practical in
the opinion of the Zoning Officer.
(g) All curbs and grading shall be in accordance with Municipal
Ordinance No. 1535.269
268. Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Building Construction; and Ch. 176, Construction Codes,
Uniform.
§ 359-26 § 359-26
359:852
(h) No bare cuts are permitted on a hillside.
(i) All cuts or fills are to be permanently seeded or planted and
maintained in accordance with the municipal codes and
ordinances.
(j) Any billboard and/or outdoor advertising structure with display
lighting shall be constructed so that it does not glare upon
adjoining property and shall not exceed a maximum of 1.5
footcandles upon the adjoining property.
(k) Display lighting shall not operate between 12:00 midnight and
6:00 a.m. prevailing local time.
(l) No billboard and/or outdoor advertising structure, sign face or
display lighting shall move, flash or emit noise. No display
lighting shall cause distraction, confusion, nuisance or hazard
to traffic, aircraft or other properties.
(m) The use of colored lighting is not permitted.
(4) Maintenance.
(a) Any billboard and/or outdoor advertising structure shall be
entirely painted every three years.
(b) Any billboard and/or outdoor advertising structure shall be
constructed with noncombustible material and be maintained
in a good condition.
(c) Every 10 years the owner of the billboard and/or outdoor
advertising structure shall have a structural inspection made
of the billboard by a qualified Pennsylvania registered civil
engineer and shall provide to the Municipality a certificate
from the engineer certifying that the billboard is structurally
sound.
(d) Annual inspections of the billboard and/or outdoor advertising
structure shall be conducted by the Municipality to determine
compliance, and upon failure of compliance with the
regulations set forth in this section the billboard and/or
outdoor advertising structure may be removed within 30 days
upon notification to the owner by the Municipality.
(e) Any billboard and/or outdoor advertising structure found to be
in violation of this section shall be brought into compliance or
removed within 30 days upon proper notification by the
Municipality to the owner.
269. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1535, regarding grading and sediment control, adopted
7-8-1986 and as subsequently amended, was repealed 3-14-1995 by Ord. No. 1936. For
current provisions, see Ch. 243, Land Disturbance.
§ 359-26 ZONING § 359-26
359:853
§ 359-27. Signs.
No sign shall be permitted in any district except as an accessory use as
herein provided.
(f) Any billboard and/or outdoor advertising structure using
removable paper or other materials shall be maintained in such
condition as to eliminate loose or frayed material protruding or
hanging or falling from the structure.
(5) Permits. Prior to submission of an application for a building permit,
the applicant for a billboard and/or outdoor advertising structure
shall obtain and submit an application along with approvals from
the County of Allegheny and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and, when applicable, the United States Federal Aviation
Administration or any other federal agency.
(6) Application fees. Said application shall be accompanied by an
application fee in an amount equal to that set by resolution of
Council.
A. Permit. No sign, except a nameplate or temporary real estate sign as
specified herein, shall hereafter be erected or altered in any way unless
a sign permit has been issued by the Zoning Officer. Applications for
sign permits shall include detailed drawings of the construction and
design of the sign and shall be accompanied by such fee as may be
required by resolution of Council. Such sign permit shall not obviate
compliance with building permit requirements as required by the
Monroeville Building Code.270
B. Conformance. No new sign shall be permitted on any property unless
every sign on the property shall be in conformance with this section. A
sign which is not expressly permitted is prohibited.
C. Animation. No sign shall move, flash or emit noise.
D. Traffic hazard. No sign shall be constructed, located or illuminated in
any manner which causes undue glare, distraction, confusion, nuisance
or hazard to traffic or other properties or which obstructs fee and clear
vision of traffic flow.
E. Nameplate sign. One nameplate sign not exceeding 1 1/2 square feet in
surface area and not internally illuminated is permitted which
announces the name, address or professional activity of the occupant of
the premises or the name of the building.
F. Multifamily nameplate sign. one nameplate sign for a multifamily
structure not exceeding 12 square feet in surface area is permitted
which identifies the name of the structure for a multiple-family
270. Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Building Construction; and Ch. 176, Construction Codes,
Uniform.
§ 359-26 § 359-27
359:854
§ 359-27.1. Political signs. [Added 7-13-1999 by Ord. No. 2116]
dwelling, sanitarium or tourist home. For any multiple-family dwelling
over four stories in height, a nameplate sign which is permanently
attached to a wall of the structure and identifies only the name of the
development is permitted, but the surface area shall not exceed 1/3
(33 1/3%) of the total area of the exposed wall surface of one story of
the side of the structure to which the sign is affixed, and in no case shall
the sign exceed 225 square feet.
G. Bulletin boards. one bulletin board, not illuminated except by indirect
light and not exceeding 30 square feet in surface area, is permitted in
connection with any church, school, country club or similar public
structure.
A. Political signs prohibited on public property.
(1) In the consideration of the public safety concerns heretofore cited
in the recital and to preserve the order and cleanliness of the
municipal rights-of-way and public property and to avoid the
appearance of clutter; to protect property values; to avoid litter and
growth of weeds around signs; to reduce traffic hazards caused by
distraction to motorists and the impairment of sight lines; to ensure
that the Municipality remains an attractive place to live and work;
to reduce administrative burden and to reduce the necessity of
expending public funds to remove political candidate signs and to
protect the health, safety and welfare, morals, convenience and
comfort of the public, all political candidate signs or political signs
are prohibited from being affixed, placed or erected on public
property or within the public rights-of-way, or on medial barriers,
telephone poles or pillars and trees located within the public rightsof-
way, anywhere within the territorial limits of the Municipality of
Monroeville.
(2) No person, firm, corporation, association, their employees or
agents shall nail, tack, glue, hang or otherwise affix or locate any
political signs, poster, banner, bumper sticker within or on public
property or within public rights-of-way of the Municipality.
B. Removal. Any person, firm, corporation, association, candidate or its
employees or agents who affixed or placed any political signs, posters,
banner or bumper stickers on public property or within the public
rights-of-way shall remove the same within a period of 24 hours of being
notified by the Municipality of Monroeville to remove the aforesaid
signs, posters, banners or bumper stickers. The municipality reserves
the right to remove and may remove any and all such political or
candidate signs, posters, banners or bumper stickers at any time from
the public property and the public rights-of-way without notice. The
reasonable cost of removal of the same by the Municipality may be
billed and assessed to the political candidate, person, firm, corporation,
§ 359-27 ZONING § 359-27.1
359:855
§ 359-27.2. Signs on public property. [Added 6-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2145]
association or candidate's name who is affixed to said political sign,
poster, banner or bumper sticker.
C. Nonpayment for removal. If after three days' notice, said person, firm,
corporation, association or candidate does not reimburse the
Municipality for the expenses of the removal of said political signs,
posters, banners or bumper stickers, after demand for payment by the
Municipality, then the Solicitor of the Municipality of Monroeville is
hereby authorized to initiate suit in the name of the Municipality of
Monroeville to collect said cost in the manner provided by law.
D. Penalties. Any person, firm, employee, corporation, association,
committee to elect or to re-elect, supporter or political candidate who
or which shall violate or shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any
provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $600, plus costs, and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days;
provided, however, that each sign and each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
E. Affirmation and repealer. Ordinance Nos. 1443, 1760 and 1893 are
affirmed by this section to the extent they do not conflict with the terms
and conditions of this section. Any ordinance or part of any ordinance in
conflict herewith is repealed.
A. General prohibition.
(1) In the consideration of the public safety concerns heretofore cited
in the recital and to preserve the order and cleanliness of the
municipal rights-of-way and public property; and to avoid the
appearance of clutter; to protect property values; to avoid litter and
growth of weeds around signs; to reduce traffic hazards caused by
distraction to motorists and the impairment of sight lines; to ensure
that the Municipality remains an attractive place to live and work;
the Municipality hereby prohibits all signs in the public right-ofway
or on medical barriers, telephone poles or pillars and trees, or
any other structure located within the public rights-of-way
anywhere within the territorial limits of the Municipality of
Monroeville;
(2) No person, firm, corporation, association, their employees or
agents shall nail, tack, glue, hang or otherwise affix or locate any
sign, poster, and/or banner within or on public property or within
public rights-of-way in the Municipality of Monroeville.
B. Exceptions. The following signs shall be excepted from the prohibition
as set forth in Subsection A, General prohibition, hereinabove:
§ 359-27.1 § 359-27.2
359:856
(1) Directional or warning signs and official signs or notices, danger
and precautionary signs that relate to the premises; and signs
where notices of a railroad, other transportation or communication
company that are necessary for the direction, information or safety
of the public.
(2) Signs advertising the sale or lease of the real property on which
they are located.
(3) Signs advertising activities conducted on the premises.
(4) Signs that the state or other agency of the state has approved for
presentation on school bus waiting shelters.
(5) Signs directing people to local towns, historical sites or attractions.
C. Removal. Any person, firm, corporation, association or its employees or
agents who affixed or placed a banned sign on public property or within
the public rights-of-way shall remove the same within a period of 24
hours of being notified by the Municipality of Monroeville. The
municipality reserves the right to remove and may remove any and all
such signs, posters, banners or bumper stickers at any time from the
public property and the public rights-of-way without notice. The
reasonable cost of removal of the same by the Municipality may be
billed and assessed to the person, firm, corporation, association who
affixed or otherwise located said sign, poster, banner or bumper sticker
within the public property or public rights-of-way.
D. Nonpayment for removal. If, after three days' notice, said person, firm,
corporation or association does not reimburse the Municipality for the
expenses of the removal of said signs, posters, banners or bumper
stickers, after demand for payment by the Municipality, then the
Solicitor of the Municipality of Monroeville is hereby authorized to
initiate suit in the name of the Municipality of Monroeville to collect
said cost in the manner provided by law.
E. Penalties. Any person, firm, employee, corporation or association who
shall violate or shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision
of this section, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $600, plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days; provided,
however, that each sign and each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
F. Severability. In the event that there is a successful challenge to the
constitutionality of this section, it is the intent of the Municipality that
the offending words be separated from the constitutional portions of the
section. The municipality understands that in separating the
unconstitutional provisions from the constitutional provisions, the
Court will be further restricting the placement of signs, and it is the
Municipality of Monroeville's specific preference that the Court take
such steps to sever the offending provisions.
§ 359-27.2 ZONING § 359-27.2
359:857
§ 359-28. Off-street parking.
G. Affirmation and repealer. Ordinance Nos. 1443, 1760, 1893 and 2116
are affirmed by this section to the extent they do not conflict with the
terms and conditions of this section. Any ordinance or part of any
ordinance in conflict herewith is repealed.
A. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
specifications in this section whenever any new use is established or
existing use is enlarged in every district.
Use Parking Spaces Required
1-family dwelling 2 for each dwelling unit
Duplex or townhouse 2 for each dwelling unit
Apartment 1 1/2 for each dwelling unit
Dormitory or group housing 1 for every 3 beds
Elderly housing 1 for every 2 units
Church or school
[Amended 8-10-1999 by Ord.
No. 2118]
1 for every 4 seats in the largest
meeting room
Theater
[Added 8-10-1999 by Ord. No.
2118]
1 for every 3 seats in a theater(s)
plus 1 per each employee in the
peak employment shift
Theater, located as part of a group
unit development
[Added 8-10-1999 by Ord. No.
2118]
Determined by the governing body
after a parking analysis
Tennis or squash court 3 for every court
Retail stores and shops or offices 1 for every 175 square feet of
gross floor area
Funeral home 8 for each reposing room, 24
minimum
Restaurant 1 for every 80 square feet of gross
floor area
Business services 1 for every 250 square feet of
gross floor area
Bowling alley 6 for each alley
Hospital 1 for every 800 square feet of
gross floor area
Hotel or motel 1 for every rental unit
Vehicle sales or repair 1 for every 500 square feet of
gross floor area
§ 359-27.2 § 359-28
359:858
Use Parking Spaces Required
Gas station 1 for every 200 square feet of
gross floor area, 8 minimum
Helicopter pad 1 for every 1,000 square feet of
operational area, including
taxiways, landing pads and
storage areas
Manufacturing plant or warehouse 1 for 3 employees; 1 for every
2,000 square feet of gross floor
area, at a minimum
Golf course
[Added 2-9-1993 by Ord. No.
1829]
6 for each golf hole
Municipal waste landfill
[Added 7-21-1993 by Ord. No.
1843271]
Minimum of 30, or 1 per each
employee plus 30% of the total
number of employees
Nursing home
[Added 5-11-1994 by Ord. No.
1886]
1 for every 3 beds
Personal care home
[Added 5-11-1994 by Ord. No.
1886]
1 for every 3 beds
Commercial communication tower
Added 8-8-1995 by Ord. No.
1952]
2; at facilities which require onsite
personnel, 1 additional space
for each employee shall be
provided at the site
Public use
[Added 5-12-1998 by Ord. No.
2081]
Office and other areas used by
the public
1 per 300 square feet of gross
floor area
Secure and public safety areas
not accessible to the public
1 per 500 square feet of gross
floor area
Mechanical and storage areas 1 per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
Vehicle repair and servicing
areas
1 per 500 square feet of gross
floor area
271. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided penalties for violation of its provisions. See
§ 359-33BB.
§ 359-28 ZONING § 359-28
359:859
Use Parking Spaces Required
Those public uses not identified Determined by the governing body
after a parking analysis
B. Alternate parking. Council may require or approve alternate design
standards for off-street parking in response to unusual conditions, such
as dead car storage, attendant parking, indoor parking, interaction
between different abutting uses in the same zoning district or a clearly
documented difference between expected parking load and required
parking spaces, provided that any reduction in the number of required
spaces so granted shall be offset by a reserved area for future
installation of a like number of spaces to be so improved at the
discretion of the Municipality.
C. Every off-street parking space shall have a rectangular area of not less
than nine feet by 18 feet. If parking spaces are indicated by lines other
than 90°, then traffic lanes shall be restricted to one-way, permitting
head-in parking only.
D. Every off-street parking lot shall be graded for proper drainage and
paved in accordance with municipal standards. Continuous six-inch
curbing shall be installed to assure safe and efficient flow of traffic,
prevent encroachment onto required yards and direct stormwater, and
such curbing shall be installed in compliance with an approved site
plan. Parking aisle separators, sidewalks and landscape plantings shall
be provided as required and approved by Council. Parking
perpendicular to the grade shall be permitted up to a grade of 5%;
parking parallel to the grade shall be permitted up to a grade of 7%; no
parking shall be permitted on a grade in excess of 7%.
E. Parking spaces suitable for the needs of the handicapped will be
provided as approved on the site plan, and signs, railings and ramps
will be provided as appropriate to the site.
F. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking lot shall be
arranged so as to reflect light away from adjoining premises in any R
District.
G. When determination of off-street parking results in a requirement of a
fractional space, any fraction shall be counted as one parking space.
H. Off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same zoning lot as the
principal use or on an adjacent lot in the same zoning district, except
that spaces for churches and public places of assembly may be located
on a different lot within 400 feet of the principal use after site plan
approval.
I. A multiple-family dwelling or multistory dwelling designed and
operated as housing for the elderly shall require a minimum of one
parking space on the same lot with the main structure or structures for
each two dwelling units.
§ 359-28 § 359-28
359:860
§ 359-29. Off-street loading.
one off-street berth of not less than 10 feet by 50 feet shall be provided for
every new business or industrial use with a floor area of more than 2,500
square feet, and one additional berth shall be required for each additional
20,000 square feet of floor area over the first 20,000 square feet of floor
area. Access and space to maneuver shall be sufficient so that no truck need
back onto any public street nor across any public sidewalk.
§ 359-30. Environmental protection requirements.
The following provisions shall apply to all uses of land in all districts unless
otherwise noted. Certain activities, such as highway construction and the
like, may be excepted from the following requirements, provided that such
activities are closely controlled by other governmental environment
protection agencies and that municipal reviewing agencies are satisfied
that the spirit and intent of this chapter are being met through the review
processes, bonding requirements and administrative activities of the
appropriate environmental protection agencies.
§ 359-31. Residential requirements.
The following provisions shall apply to all uses of land in all residential
districts:
J. In addition to the above-stated parking requirements, every apartment
structure, except those operated as housing for the elderly, shall
provide an open land area suitable for future conversion to off-street
parking which can add an additional 1/2 parking space per dwelling
unit. Such land banked for future parking need not be improved as
parking spaces until and unless a need for such additional spaces is
determined by Council to exist. Such determination shall be based upon
substantial evidence of such need.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation proposing to dump wastes or
hazardous materials on any land within Monroeville must first obtain
certificates from the United States Environmental Protection Agency
and appropriate Pennsylvania and Allegheny County agencies to certify
that such wastes and materials are not hazardous to the health, safety
and general welfare of the residents of Monroeville and the
surrounding region. Outdoor storage of garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse,
junk or discarded articles is prohibited in every zoning district unless
stored pursuant to § 359-26F(10).
B. Reasonable safeguards shall be established for all uses in every zone to
prevent possible detriment to neighboring properties through emission
of smoke, fumes, odor, dust, noise, vibration or glaring light.
C. All utilities, including electrical and telephone lines, shall be
underground except in floodplain districts. [Added 6-9-1987 by Ord.
No. 1571]
§ 359-28 ZONING § 359-31
359:861
§ 359-32. (Reserved)273
A. In every residential development, other than a development of less than
50 one-family detached houses, the developer shall provide recreational
facilities approved by the Planning Agency as appropriate to the
population to be housed in such development.
B. In any residential development, other than one-family, the developer
shall provide a pedestrian circulation system which, as a minimum,
shall be comprised of sidewalks not less than four feet in width located
along public streets. The pedestrian circulation system in a planned
development shall be a part of the development plan.
C. In any one-family attached or garden apartment development, differing
setbacks, rooflines and first floor elevations may be required in order to
best adapt to the specific topography of the site.
D. In every residential development, all required yards will be
permanently maintained in grass planting or in other acceptable
landscape planting.
E. The floor area for every dwelling unit shall not be less than 1,000
square feet for a one-family dwelling, a two-family dwelling or a onefamily
attached dwelling. In multiple-family structures other than onefamily
attached units, the floor area per dwelling unit shall not be less
than 750 square feet for a unit having three or more bedrooms; 600
square feet for a unit having two bedrooms; or 450 square feet for a unit
having one bedroom or for an efficiency apartment. The floor area shall
not be less than 800 square feet for a mobile home.272
272. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, regarding fencing for private swimming pools, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 8-10-2004 by Ord. No. 2305.
273. Editor's Note: Former § 359-32, Property Maintenance, added 6-9-1987 by Ord. No. 1571,
was repealed 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 2297.
§ 359-31 § 359-32
359:862
ARTICLE IV
Conditional Uses and Planned Developments
§ 359-33. Conditional uses.
Conditional uses as specified in Schedule A274 may be allowed or denied by
the Council after recommendation by the Planning Agency in accordance
with procedures set forth in this article. A conditional use shall be approved
if and only if it is found to meet the following criteria:
A. The proposed use shall conform to the district and conditional use
provisions and all general regulations of this chapter.
B. The proposed use shall meet all special standards which may be applied
to its class of conditional use as set forth in this article.
C. The proposed use shall not involve any element or cause any condition
that may be dangerous, injurious or noxious to any other property or
persons and shall comply with the performance standards of § 359-36.
D. The proposed use shall be sited, oriented and landscaped so that the
relationship of its building and grounds to adjacent buildings and
properties does not impair health, safety or comfort and does not
adversely affect values of adjacent property.
E. The proposed use shall produce a total environmental effect which is
consistent with, and not harmful to, the environment of the
neighborhood.
F. The proposed use shall organize vehicular access and parking to
minimize conflicting traffic movement on adjacent streets.
G. The proposed use shall promote the objectives of this chapter and shall
be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for Monroeville.
H. Major excavation shall comply with all pertinent sedimentation and
erosion control regulations and shall not endanger structures or other
improvements on any adjacent property. No extraction of oil, gas, coal
or other minerals shall be conducted within 1,000 feet of any existing
house or principal structure. Excavation of sand, rock, metal and other
natural resources shall be permitted as a conditional use only in the S
District.
I. Child-care centers shall be at least 2,000 feet apart from each other,
shall not be located on lots of less than 8,000 square feet and shall
provide outdoor recreational facilities suitable to the age groups being
served.
274. Editor's Note: See now Table 201 Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area
Requirements, included at the end of this chapter, which replaces former Schedule A,
Permitted and Conditional Uses, and Schedule B, Yard and Area Requirements.
§ 359-33 ZONING § 359-33
359:863
J. Community uses when located in or adjacent to a residential district
shall provide proper separation and protection for abutting residential
property.
K. Dependent dwellings shall be attached to the principal dwelling and
shall not be located on lots of less than 7,200 square feet.
L. Drive-in theaters shall provide storage space for waiting automobiles
between the ticket gate and the highway equal to 35% of the capacity of
the theater, shall have no structure within 50 feet of any property line,
shall provide individual car speakers and shall serve no persons other
than patrons from refreshment stands. The screen shall not be higher
than 100 feet nor be visible from any highway or abutting residential
district nor be closer than 100 feet to any property line.
M. Freight terminals shall not be located on lots of less than two acres,
shall have side yards of not less than 20 feet and shall not have any tank
for the storage of flammable or otherwise hazardous material closer
than 50 feet to any property line nor closer to any residential property
than 100 feet. The site shall be such that no truck will back off of or onto
a public right-of-way.
N. Gas stations shall not be located on lots of less than 18,000 square feet,
shall have side yards of not less than 15 feet and shall not have any tank
for the storage of flammable or otherwise hazardous material closer
than 50 feet to any property line.
O. Group dwellings shall be at least 2,000 feet apart from each other and
shall not be located on lots of less than 8,000 square feet nor on lots
having less than 400 square feet for every sleeping room or for every
two beds, whichever is greater. Such uses shall have side yards of not
less than 20 feet and shall not be approved unless plans prepared by an
architect or engineer are submitted which clearly indicate that
adequate light, ventilation and fireproofing are provided and that the
dwelling facility and its accommodations shall be functional and
convenient with regard to the specific needs of the group to be housed
in the facility. Group dwellings shall be approved only after Council has
found that plans and programs for management of the group dwelling
are adequate and appropriate to the population to be housed and that
adequate provisions have been made to assure the safety and welfare of
the residents of the facility and of the adjacent neighborhood.
Continued operation shall be subject to monitoring by such review
agency as may be established and appointed by Council.
P. No heliport or helicopter pad shall be located on lots of less area than
the minimum recommended by appropriate state and federal regulatory
agencies, and the landing area shall be not less than 300 feet from any
residential property nor less than 100 feet from any commercial or
industrial property or any public right-of-way.
Q. No hospital shall be located on a lot less than 10,000 square feet plus
300 square feet for each bed or in-patient facility.
§ 359-33 § 359-33
359:864
R. Hotels shall provide a lot area of not less than 1,000 square feet per
rental unit for a one-story structure and not less than 750 feet for
structures having two or more stories. Every rental unit shall have a
floor area of not less than 300 square feet and shall contain no more
than two bedrooms.
S. Public buildings, when located in or adjacent to a residential district,
shall provide proper separation and protection for abutting residential
property.
T. Public uses, when located in or adjacent to a residential district, shall
provide proper separation and protection for abutting residential
property.
U. Recreation clubs shall not be located on lots of less than 10,000 square
feet and shall have yards of not less than 25 feet.
V. Retail stores shall be approved only after review of a professionally
prepared market analysis has clearly indicated the need for such use
and where the retail use is such that no undue traffic congestion will
result from its operation.
W. Shopping centers shall be permitted in the C-3 Commercial District if
such shopping is intended to serve nearby neighborhoods and only
when the gross floor area of such community shopping center is no
greater than 30,000 square feet.
X. Utility substations shall provide proper separation and protection for
abutting property and shall not require routine trucking movements on
local residential or substandard streets.
Y. Vehicle sales areas shall not be located on lots of less than 1/2 acre,
shall have yards of not less than 15 feet, shall have a permanent
enclosed structure of not less than 2,500 square feet and shall not have
any tank for the storage of flammable or otherwise hazardous material
closer than 50 feet to any property line. The areas where vehicles are
displayed shall be paved and improved with curbs and bumper guards.
No strings of lights, flags, flashers or similar paraphernalia shall be
permitted. Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one space
for each 1,500 square feet of outdoor sales space in addition to the
spaces required for any interior sales area. There shall be no exterior
repair of vehicles nor exterior storage of damaged vehicles.
Z. Personal care homes and nursing homes shall not be located on lots less
than one acre in area nor on lots having less than 400 square feet for
every resident. Such uses shall have side yards of not less than 20 feet
and shall be in compliance with the Pennsylvania Department of Health,
Department of Public Welfare and Department of Mental Health
standards applicable at the time of issuance of the license and with the
latest revision of licensing requirements, and the establishment
sponsor shall file annually with the Zoning Office information that the
facility continues to satisfy the conditions of approval and/or any
§ 359-33 ZONING § 359-33
359:865
change in ownership. Any change in the conditions of original approval
shall constitute a new use, and the full procedure for obtaining approval
of the conditional use shall be required. [Added 6-9-1987 by Ord. No.
1571; amended 5-11-1994 by Ord. No. 1886]
AA. Golf courses. [Added 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 1829]
(1) The golf course clubhouse or other similar accessory structures
shall be located at a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines.
(2) Golf course maintenance buildings and/or sheds shall be located at
a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines.
(3) 25 feet of vegetative buffer shall be provided in areas abutting
properties under separate ownership.
(4) The playing areas and hitting fields shall be designed and set back
sufficiently to prevent golf balls from being hit onto property under
separate ownership, including but not limited to the following
requirements:
(a) Tees, fairways and greens shall be designed to encourage the
direction of play away from adjacent properties.
(b) Fence, netting and/or vegetative buffer shall be installed/
planted to protect public streets, private access roads, other
right-of-way areas and adjacent properties to ensure that golf
balls do not endanger and/or damage abutting properties,
occupants, occupant's guest and/or vehicles. The height of any
fence and/or netting shall be determined on a site-specific
basis and may exceed the requirements of § 359-17, Fences, of
this chapter.
(5) Access shall be provided for fire, emergency and other safety
vehicles.
(6) Lights shall be shielded and directed away from adjoining
properties.
BB. Municipal waste landfills. [Added 7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1843]
(1) The municipal waste landfill shall meet the definition of "municipal
waste landfill" as provided in Article VI of this chapter.
(2) The municipal waste landfill shall include provisions for
postclosure use consistent with Schedule A, District S-1 Special
Conservancy, included at the end of this chapter.275
(3) The maximum allowable additional topographic relief created by
the municipal waste landfill may not exceed 65% of the existing
275. Editor's Note: See now Table 201 Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area
Requirements, included at the end of this chapter, which replaces former Schedule A,
Permitted and Conditional Uses, and Schedule B, Yard and Area Requirements.
§ 359-33 § 359-33
359:866
natural topographic relief for the proposed disposal area. The
maximum allowable additional topographic relief at closure shall
not exceed 100 feet. The final slope contour at closure shall not
exceed three horizontal to one vertical.
Elevations and Relief Feet
Existing low natural elevation 500
Existing high natural elevation 600
Existing relief 100
Allowable additional relief 65
(4) The municipal waste landfill operator shall provide the plans as
submitted to the applicable federal, state and county agencies,
including anticipated construction, operation, closure and end use
milestones, within 90 days of receiving requisite county, state and
federal permits therefor and any amendments thereto. The
municipal waste landfill operator, by copying the Municipality in on
all regulatory correspondence to the regulatory bodies, shall
inform the Municipality of any substantial changes in such plans.
Copies of the application, amendments and/or any substantial
changes to that document, permit applications and approvals from
county, state and federal agencies shall be submitted by the
applicant on a timely basis and kept on file for public review at the
Monroeville Public Library.
(5) The operation of the municipal waste landfill shall provide for
minimal negative aesthetic impacts. The municipal waste landfill
shall also utilize an operating and staging sequence that provides a
protective berm between municipal waste landfill operations and
the surrounding neighborhoods.
(6) The municipal waste landfill shall maintain compliance with all
laws, regulations and/or ordinances of all relevant federal, state
and local governments.
(7) The municipal waste landfill operator shall provide a document,
certified by a Pennsylvania registered professional engineer, which
states that the facility has been designed to comply with
Monroeville Ordinance 1788, as amended.276 The document will
also certify that the facility has been designed to adequately
provide protection from erosion, sedimentation, slope instability
and mine subsidence.
(8) In the event of mine voids in the proximity of the municipal waste
landfill, the municipal waste landfill operator shall monitor said
voids for landfill gas and leachate that may escape the facility. The
results of said monitoring shall be provided to the Municipality
276. Editor's Note: See Ch. 319, Stormwater Management.
§ 359-33 ZONING § 359-33
359:867
quarterly, unless required otherwise. The applicant shall prepare a
site-specific monitoring program.
(9) Mine subsidence and slope instability monitoring shall be
performed by the municipal waste landfill operator. The results of
said monitoring shall be provided to the Municipality quarterly,
unless required otherwise. The applicant shall prepare a sitespecific
monitoring program.
(10) To the extent allowed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources (PADER), the municipal waste landfill
shall have sufficient final cover depth to accommodate vegetative
species native to the municipal waste landfill area, including woody
plants and shallow rooting trees, on the closed municipal waste
landfill.
(11) The municipal waste landfill operator shall provide unobstructed
access to municipal landfill inspectors on a twenty-four-hour basis,
and such access shall include but not be limited to the ability to
schedule any monitoring activity as defined in Subsection BB(8)
and (9) or otherwise, and said access shall also include access to
office and telephone facilities.
(12) The municipal waste landfill operator shall implement a procedure
for excluding the receipt of regulated hazardous waste as required
by any applicable federal or state law. Records of inspections shall
be made available to the municipal landfill inspector.
(13) The municipal waste landfill operator shall immediately report any
emergency to the Monroeville Emergency Communications Center
and the Monroeville Municipal Manager. For the purposes of this
subsection, the term "emergency" includes a fire, spill, landslide,
explosion, flood or other environmental event that threatens public
health and safety, public welfare or personal injury. An emergency
response plan shall be prepared and submitted for approval to the
Municipality and the Emergency Management Director and shall
be resubmitted annually for approval.
(14) The minimum size for a municipal waste landfill shall be 100 acres.
(15) The municipal waste landfill site shall have direct access to a
principal arterial highway. Any public roadway to the municipal
waste landfill shall not be used by municipal waste vehicles for
delivery of municipal waste to the facility between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., which prohibition shall include the
stacking of municipal waste vehicles on said public roadway.
(16) The municipal waste landfill shall be prohibited in the following
areas:
(a) In the one-hundred-year floodplain of waters.
§ 359-33 § 359-33
359:868
(b) In an important wetland as defined by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources.
(c) In coal-bearing areas underlain by recoverable or mineable
coals, unless the operator of the facility demonstrates and the
Department of Environmental Resources finds, in writing, that
the operator owns the underlying coal or has entered an
agreement with the owner of the coal to provide support.
(d) In a valley, ravine or head of hollow where the operation would
result in the elimination, pollution or destruction of a portion of
a perennial stream, except that rechanneling may be allowed
as provided by the Department of Environmental Resources.
(e) In areas underlain by limestone or carbonate formations where
the formations are greater than five feet thick and present at
the topmost geologic unit. These areas include areas mapped
by the Pennsylvania Geological Survey as underlain by these
formations, unless competent geological studies demonstrate
the absence of limestone and carbonate formations under the
site.
(17) The municipal waste landfill shall include buffer areas which shall
conform to the following:
(a) 300 feet from a one-hundred-year floodplain of waters as
defined in the Solid Waste Management Act, as amended.277
(b) 300 feet measured horizontally from an occupied dwelling to
the facility boundary of a municipal waste landfill.
(c) 300 feet from an important wetland as defined by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
(d) 500 feet measured horizontally from an occupied dwelling to
the disposal area of a municipal waste landfill.
(e) 100 feet from a perennial stream.
(f) 100 feet from a property line, unless actual disposal will not
occur within 100 feet of a property line.
(g) 10,000 feet or 3,048 meters from a runway that is or will be
used by turbine-powered aircraft at a Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) certified airport during the life of
disposal operations under the permit.
(h) 5,000 feet or 1,524 meters from a runway that is or will be used
by piston-type aircraft at a Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) certified airport during the life of disposal operations
under the permit.
277. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 359-33 ZONING § 359-33
359:869
(i) The conical area at 14 CFR 77, relating to objects affecting
navigable airspace, for runway flight paths that are or will be
used by turbine-powered or piston-type aircraft during the life
of disposal operations under the permit.
(j) 25 feet from a coal seam, coal outcrop or coal refuse.
(k) 1/4 mile upgradient and 300 feet downgradient from a public
or private water source.
(l) 300 yards from a building which is owned by a school district
or school and used for instructional purposes.
(m) 300 yards from a park.
(n) 300 yards from a playground.
(18) The municipal waste landfill site shall be properly fenced along the
interior boundary of the buffer zone to prevent blowing papers and
other refuse on adjoining properties. The fence shall be metal wire
mesh constructed of No. 9 gage wire woven in a two-inch mesh in
full conformance with the American Society for Testing and
Materials specifications. The surface height of the fence shall be 10
feet. The fence shall contain, at all entrances, gates which are
locked except during business hours. In addition, temporary litter
control fences shall be installed in such a manner as to prevent
litter from dispersing off of the municipal waste landfill site. The
municipal waste landfill site shall be adequately policed, and the
litter shall be collected daily and incorporated into the municipal
waste landfill.
(19) The emission of unpleasant gases and odors shall not be permitted
in such quantities as to be offensive outside the boundaries of the
municipal waste landfill site.
(20) Sound level.
(a) Sound-pressure level of any operation within the municipal
waste landfill site shall not exceed, at any point along the
municipal waste landfill site boundary, the following decibel
levels:
[1] Between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.: 68 dBA.
[2] Between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.: 58 dBA.
(b) The applicant shall provide a site-specific sound monitoring
program.
(c) The municipal waste landfill shall comply with Municipal
Ordinance No. 1417, Making Unlawful the Causing or
Continuing of Unusually Loud Noise.278
§ 359-33 § 359-33
359:870
(21) Violations and penalties. Any person, corporation and/or other
entity who or which is found to be in violation of any of the
provisions of this Subsection BB before any District Magistrate or
other court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to payment of
not more than $500 per violation, per day, and cost of prosecution,
and whoever fails to correct any violation of this Subsection BB
within 90 days from the date of said judicial decision shall be
subject to revocation of any and all applicable permits and
approvals issued by the governing body of the Municipality of
Monroeville.
(22) Severability; unenforceability. In the event that any of the terms or
provisions of this Subsection BB shall be found invalid or declared
unenforceable by reason of any federal or state statute or federal or
state directive, rule or regulation now in effect or hereinafter to
become effective or by reason of the decision of any federal or state
court, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect or impair
any other terms or provisions hereof, unless the other terms or
provisions are directly affected by the section declared invalid or
unenforceable. The parties thereupon may, within 30 days, meet to
discuss said invalidity or unenforceability.
CC. Sexually oriented businesses. [Added 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898;
amended 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2249]
(1) A sexually oriented business shall be located at a minimum of 3,000
feet from another sexually oriented business within the
Municipality. For purposes of this subsection, the distance between
any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each
business is located.
(2) A sexually oriented business shall be located at a minimum of 1,000
feet from any of the following, including: church; public or private
pre-elementary, elementary or secondary school; a public library; a
child-care facility or nursery school; and a public park adjacent to
any residential district within the Municipality. For the purpose of
this subsection, measurement shall be made in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted to the
nearest property line of the premises of a church, public or private
pre-elementary, elementary or secondary school, public library,
child-care facility or nursery school, or to the nearest boundary of
an affected public park.
278. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1417, adopted 4-11-1987, as amended, was superseded by
Ord. No. 2188, adopted 5-8-2001. See now Ch. 264, Noise Control.
§ 359-33 ZONING § 359-33
359:871
(3) A sexually oriented business shall secure a permit as outlined in
Article VII, regulating sexually oriented businesses, of this chapter.
DD. Commercial communication towers. [Added 8-8-1995 by Ord. No.
1952]
(1) Commercial communication towers shall be erected within the
minimum yard and building setback requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located. Any guy anchor must meet the
minimum yard and building setback requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located. one additional foot of setback shall be
required for every one foot of height over the maximum height as
provided in Schedule B279 and outlined further in § 359-13F.
(2) Certified documentation shall accompany any conditional use
application for a commercial communication tower, documenting
that the commercial communication equipment planned for the
proposed structure can not be accommodated on an existing or
approved commercial communication tower.
(3) The commercial communication tower shall be securely anchored
in a fixed location on the ground and plans submitted showing a
cross section of the proposed structure, structural compliance with
building codes documenting that the proposed structure meets or
exceeds those standards, and documentary evidence from a
professional engineer shall be provided that the proposed structure
will withstand wind, storm, ice, lightning and other natural forces.
Additionally, documentation shall be provided by a professional
engineer demonstrating that the commercial communication tower
is structurally capable of handling antennas, dishes and other
equipment mounted or attached to the commercial communication
tower and what the maximum load limits are for that structure.
(4) An annual inspection program performed by a professional
engineer and paid for by the owner of the commercial
communication tower shall be required for all commercial
communication towers. An annual inspection report shall be
submitted to the Municipality of Monroeville on June 1 of each
calendar year, documenting that an inspection of the commercial
communication tower has been performed within the previous 30
days and that the structure and surrounding site is in compliance
with the requirements of this chapter. Additionally, the annual
inspection report shall certify that the commercial communication
tower is securely anchored in a fixed location on the ground and
shall further certify that the structure will withstand wind, storm,
ice and other natural forces. It shall further guarantee that the
commercial communication tower is structurally capable of
279. Editor's Note: See now Table 201 Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area
Requirements, included at the end of this chapter, which replaces former Schedule A,
Permitted and Conditional Uses, and Schedule B, Yard and Area Requirements.
§ 359-33 § 359-33
359:872
handling antennas, dishes and other equipment mounted or
attached to the commercial communication tower.
(5) An environmental impact statement shall be submitted with any
conditional use application describing the effects that the proposed
commercial communication tower and related equipment will have
on the environment and surrounding area, including but not limited
to effects on human health, scenic views, air traffic or other
impacts as determined by the Zoning Officer.
(6) All commercial communication towers shall have a finish that
reduces the visibility of the structure. Commercial communication
towers shall not have strobe lights or any illumination unless
required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
(7) The commercial communication tower and all equipment shall be
enclosed by a chain link fence 10 feet high with three strands of
barb wire constructed on the top of the chain link fence. The
commercial communication tower shall be shielded or guarded
against being climbed by unauthorized personnel. Access to the
site shall be restricted, and the site shall remained locked.
Participation in the Monroeville Municipal Fire Department Knox
Lock Program is required to assure access by fire and emergency
personnel. Any structures related to the commercial
communication tower shall be equipped with a twenty-four-hour
security system.
(8) The commercial communication tower and related equipment shall
be promptly removed if the commercial communication tower is not
used for communication purposes for any continuous one-year
period.
EE. Commercial communication antennas. [Added 10-8-1996 by Ord. No.
1995]
(1) A commercial communication antenna shall be located within the
minimum yard and building setbacks requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located. Any guy anchor or other accessory
equipment must meet the minimum yard and building setback
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. one
additional foot of setback shall be required for every one foot of
height over the maximum height as provided in Schedule B,280 and
when a commercial communication antenna is attached to the
exterior of any structure, it shall not at any time exceed 10 feet
above that structure.
(2) Documentation shall accompany any conditional use application for
a commercial communication antenna attesting that the
280. Editor's Note: See now Table 201 Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area
Requirements, included at the end of this chapter, which replaces former Schedule A,
Permitted and Conditional Uses, and Schedule B, Yard and Area Requirements.
§ 359-33 ZONING § 359-33
359:873
commercial communication equipment planned cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved commercial
communication tower.
(3) The commercial communication antenna shall be securely
anchored in a fixed location on the ground, or on an existing
structure, and plans submitted showing a cross section of the
proposed commercial communication antenna, structural
compliance with building codes documenting that the proposed
commercial communication antenna meets or exceeds those
standards, and documentary evidence from a professional engineer
shall be provided that the proposed commercial communication
antenna will withstand wind, storm, ice, lightning and other natural
forces.
(4) An annual inspection program performed by a professional
engineer and paid for by the owner of the commercial
communication antenna shall be required for all commercial
communication antennas. An annual inspection report shall be
submitted to the Municipality of Monroeville on June 1 of each
calendar year, certifying that an inspection of the commercial
communication antenna has been performed within the previous 30
days and that the structure and surrounding site is in compliance
with the requirements of this chapter. Additionally, the annual
inspection report shall certify that the commercial communication
antenna is securely anchored in a fixed location on the ground, or
on an existing structure, and shall further certify that the structure
will withstand wind, storm, ice and other natural forces.
(5) An environmental impact statement shall be submitted with any
conditional use application describing the effects of the proposed
commercial communication antenna and related equipment will
have on the environment and surrounding area, including, but not
limited to, effects on human health, scenic views, air traffic or other
impacts as determined by the Zoning Officer.
(6) All commercial communication antennas shall have a finish that
reduces the visibility of the structure. Commercial communication
antennas shall not have strobe lights or any illumination unless
required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
(7) The commercial communication antenna and all associated
equipment shall be secured and documentation shall be provided
with the submission of a conditional use application documenting
how the commercial communication antenna shall be shielded or
guarded against any activity by unauthorized personnel. Access to
the commercial communication antenna shall be restricted and
remained locked. Participation in Monroeville Municipal Fire
Department Knox Lock Program is required to assure access to fire
and emergency personnel. Any structures related to the
§ 359-33 § 359-33
359:874
commercial communication antenna shall be equipped with a
twenty-four-hour security system.
(8) The commercial communication antenna and related equipment
shall be promptly removed if the commercial communication
antenna is not used for communication purposes for any continuous
one-year period.
FF. Commercial commuter lots. [Added 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2220]
(1) A commercial commuter lot shall be located on lots with a minimum
of five acres in size; shall have side and rear yards of not less than
20 feet when abutting nonresidential zoning districts, and 50 feet
when abutting any R or S Zoning District; landscaping shall be
provided at one tree per three off-street parking spaces, and shall
be designed at the perimeter to provide an impervious screen,
preventing direct view of parked vehicles from adjacent properties,
and avoiding spillover light, glare, noise, and exhaust fumes onto
adjacent properties, and designed interiorly to provide shade and
visual relief.
(2) Access.
(a) A commercial commuter lot shall be located within 1,000 feet
of an intersection of a principal arterial highway and a minor
arterial highway, and shall provide a loading area for transit
vehicles, either situated out of the road right-of-way or in the
parking area, so as not to delay street traffic nor further
congest area roadways. The commercial commuter lot shall be
designed to have maneuvering space for those vehicles that
utilize the commercial commuter lot, being able to travel the
aisleways, enter and exit the lot and individual spaces without
endangering themselves, other vehicles or pedestrians. No offstreet
parking space shall be located so that a vehicle will
maneuver within 15 feet of a vehicle entrance or exit to the
commercial commuter lot.
(b) A commercial commuter lot may have a controlled access
booth and gate for collection of fees and security. Any such
structure shall be constructed of brick, located so that it does
not conflict with the internal circulation of the parking lot nor
block any parking spaces and compatible with the character of
the surrounding neighborhood. Any driver of a vehicle utilizing
this commercial commuter lot must be able to readily identify
and distinguish queuing areas from other activities on site.
Queuing lanes shall be separate from internal circulation
drives. The controlled access booth must be set back to provide
sufficient queuing area as not to allow vehicles to obstruct the
public right-of-way area nor back into a public street. Any
controlled access booth and gate shall not impede fire or
emergency access.
§ 359-33 ZONING § 359-33
359:875
(3) Surfacing; layout.
(a) A commercial commuter lot shall be surfaced with a
permanent, all-weather surface, either bituminous or concrete,
with proper storm water detention facilities as required by
Chapter 319, Stormwater Management, as amended, with
continuous six-inch curbing. Parking perpendicular to the
grade shall be permitted up to a grade of 5%; parking parallel
to the grade shall be permitted up to a grade of 7%; no parking
shall be permitted on grade in excess of 7%.
(b) A commercial commuter lot shall have concrete bumper
guards or wheel stops installed at all parking spaces.
(c) A commercial commuter lot shall be divided into smaller
parking fields, providing landscaped strips, peninsulas or
grade separations at every 20 to 30 parking spaces, providing
area for visual breaks, shade trees, pedestrian walkways and
traffic circulation.
(4) Size specifications.
(a) A commercial commuter lot shall have off-street parking
spaces and aisle widths meeting the following minimum
specifications:
Parking
Angle
(in degrees) 90° 60° 45° 30° Parallel
Stall width 9 feet 9 feet 9 feet 9 feet 8 feet
Stall length 18 feet 20 feet 19 feet 18 feet 24 feet
Aisle width
One-way 22 feet 18 feet 12 feet 12 feet 12 feet
Two-way 24 feet 24 feet 24 feet 24 feet 24 feet
(b) The tandem parking of vehicles are prohibited within
commercial commuter lots. Dead-end aisles are prohibited
within commercial commuter lots.
(5) All commercial commuter lots shall clearly provide a separation
between vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Parking lot surface strips
of brick textured or colored paving and/or raised surface area shall
be utilized to define pedestrian areas. Pavement intended for
pedestrian traffic shall be stable, firm, skid-resistant and shall not
have an irregular surface that is uncomfortable or dangerous to
traverse.
(6) A common area shall be situated adjacent to any public
transportation transit stop, and shall include a passenger loading
area that is located and landscaped to take advantage of solar
§ 359-33 § 359-33
359:876
orientation, provide protection from prevailing wind and to afford
summer shade and winter sunshine. Additionally, benches or other
type of seating shall be furnished, and other amenities such as a
pay telephone, trash receptacles, drinking fountains, information
kiosks and directories, and shelters shall be included to encourage
the use of the commercial commuter lot by the commuting public.
A maximum of three vending machines may be situated in the
common area, and shall be placed within a sheltered or screened
structure.
(a) All commercial commuter lots shall be designed in compliance
with the Americans with Disabilities Act as administered by the
US Department of Justice, with accessible parking spaces for
cars being a minimum of 96 inches (eight feet) wide with an
access aisle of 60 inches (five feet) wide, and vans being 96
inches (eight feet) wide with an access aisle of 96 inches (eight
feet) wide. Two accessible parking spaces may share a
common access aisle as provided in Figure 1. Parked vehicle
overhangs shall not reduce the clear width of an accessible
route. Parking spaces and access aisles shall be level with
surface slopes not exceeding 1:50 (2%) in all directions.
Figure 1
Dimension of Parking Spaces
(b) Accessible parking space requirements.
[1] All Commercial Commuter Lots shall meet the following
accessible parking space ratio:
Total Number of Parking
Spaces
Required Number of
Accessible Parking
Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
§ 359-33 ZONING § 359-33
359:877
Total Number of Parking
Spaces
Required Number of
Accessible Parking
Spaces
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
1,001 and over 20 plus 1 for each 100 over
1,000
[2] One in every eight accessible spaces, but not less than one,
shall be served by an access aisle 96 inches wide minimum
and shall be designated van accessible.
(c) All accessible parking spaces shall be located with the shortest
accessible route of travel from a public transportation transit
stop; and any accessible route shall have a minimum clear
width of 36 inches (three feet) wide.
(d) All accessible parking spaces shall be designated as reserved
and marked with proper signage showing the symbol of
accessibility, including a symbol sign mounted on a pole and a
symbol painted on the parking surface. Additional signage
shall be provided notifying patrons of Municipal ordinances
establishing a fee for the violation of parking in accessible
parking areas.
(7) Lighting.
(a) A commercial commuter lot shall provide on-site lighting in all
parking areas, aisles, turnarounds and pedestrian walkways,
and shall be designed and arranged with a 0.5 minimum
footcandle and not to exceed a maximum of 1.0 footcandle at
the property lines bordering residential zoned properties.
(b) All light poles, standards and fixtures shall be of a low-profile
decorative variety and shall be compatible with the character
of the surrounding neighborhood. Additionally, those light
poles, standards and fixtures shall not exceed a height of 20
feet above grade level in areas abutting commercially zoned
areas, and 14 feet above grade level in commercial commuter
lots abutting R and S Zoning Districts.
(8) A commercial commuter lot shall provide specially designated
areas reserved for carpools/vanpools, and shall be located in
preferential areas of the commercial commuter lot, such as a close
walking distance to the loading and unloading area of the public
§ 359-33 § 359-33
359:878
§ 359-34. Planned developments.
transportation transit stop, tree-shaded areas and sidewalk or
plaza areas.
A. Planned group units and planned residential developments may be
allowed or denied by Council after recommendation by the Planning
Agency in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article V.
B. A development plan for a planned group unit or a planned residential
development shall be approved if and only if it is found to meet the
following criteria:
(1) The proposed development plan preserves the community
development objectives of this chapter and is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Where the proposed development plan departs from zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property, such departures must be shown to be in the public
interest and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
public.
(3) The proposals for the maintenance and conservation of any
proposed common open space are reliable and the amount and
extent of improvements of such open space are adequate with
respect to the purpose, use and type of development proposed.
(4) The physical design of the proposed development plan adequately
provides for public services, pedestrian and vehicle traffic facilities
and parking, light, air, recreation and visual enjoyment.
(5) The total environment of the proposed development plan is
harmonious and consistent with the neighborhood in which it is
located.
(6) The proposed development plan will afford a greater degree of
protection of natural watercourses, topsoil, trees and other
features of the natural environment and prevention of erosion,
landslides, siltation and flooding than if the subject property were
developed in accordance with the provisions of the zoning and
subdivision ordinances which otherwise apply.
(7) The proposed use shall not involve any element or cause any
condition that may be dangerous, injurious or noxious to any other
property or persons and shall comply with the performance
standards of § 359-38.
(8) In the case of a development plan which proposes development
over a period of years, the development plan will provide at each
stage of development a sufficient proportion of open space, planned
facilities and amenities and other improvements and conditions as
§ 359-33 ZONING § 359-34
359:879
§ 359-35. Planned group units.
Planned group units may be approved under provisions of this chapter if
and only if they comply with the following standards and provisions:
required in this article and as intended to protect the interests
of the public and of the residents of the planned residential
development in the integrity of the development plan.
A. Ownership. The entire site for the planned group units shall be owned
or controlled by the developer.
B. Minimum size. The site shall not be less than 10,000 square feet.
C. Frontage. The minimum frontage abutting on a public right-of-way shall
not be less than 100 feet.
D. Access. The site must provide for access from arterial streets indicated
in the Comprehensive Plan to assure convenient and safe access which
will not cause undue congestion or hazard on local streets.
E. Safety. The site shall be so developed as to avoid danger to health or
peril from fire, flood or other hazard. Land containing or providing
hazards to life, health and property, such as quarries, open ditches, land
subject to flooding, subsidence or underground fires, shall not be
developed for commercial purposes until such hazards have been
eliminated or adequate safeguards are provided under the development
plan.
F. Permitted uses. Permitted uses and conditional uses as specified in
Schedule A281 for the zoning district in which a proposed planned group
unit is to be located may be permitted in the planned group unit,
provided that their design, arrangement, landscaping, construction and
relationship to adjacent properties and uses meet all requirements set
forth in this chapter.
G. Yards and open spaces. The front, side and rear yards shall not be less
than the minimum requirements of the district in which the planned
group unit is located. Not less than 15% of the total site area shall be
set aside for open space, and such open space shall be landscaped in a
manner suitable for the uses intended for the development.
H. Building spacing. The requirements determining the spacing of
buildings shall be flexible so as to encourage imaginative site design.
The spaces between buildings shall guarantee adequate light, air and
emergency access. The minimum distance between the nearest points
of any exterior building walls shall be not less than 30 feet.
281. Editor's Note: See now Table 201 Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area
Requirements, included at the end of this chapter, which replaces former Schedule A,
Permitted and Conditional Uses, and Schedule B, Yard and Area Requirements.
§ 359-34 § 359-35
359:880
§ 359-36. Planned residential developments.
Planned residential developments may be approved under provisions of
this chapter if and only if they comply with the following standards and
provisions.
I. Building groupings. Structures shall be oriented so as to ensure
adequate light and air exposures for walls containing main window
exposures or main entrances. Each structure shall be arranged so as to
avoid undue exposure to concentrated loading or parking facilities.
J. Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking spaces shall be
provided at the minimum ratio of one space for every 200 square feet of
gross floor area for retail uses, office uses and amusement uses. All
other uses shall provide parking in accordance with § 359-28. five offstreet
loading berths shall be provided for the first 100,000 square feet
of gross floor area, and one additional berth shall be provided for each
additional 100,000 square feet.
A. Ownership. The entire site for the planned residential development
shall be owned or controlled by the developer.
B. Minimum size. The site shall not be less than five acres.
C. Frontage. The minimum frontage abutting on a public right-of-way shall
not be less than 200 feet.
D. Access. The site must provide for access from arterial streets indicated
in the Comprehensive Plan to assure convenient and safe access which
will not cause undue congestion or hazard on local streets.
E. Safety. The site shall be of such a character so as to avoid danger to
health or peril from fire, flood or other hazard. Land containing or
providing hazards to life, health and property, such as quarries, open
ditches, land subject to flooding, subsidence, landslide prone or
underground fires, shall not be subdivided for residential purposes until
such hazards have been eliminated or adequate safeguards are
provided under the development plan.
F. Permitted uses. The following uses may be permitted in a planned
residential development, provided that their design, arrangement,
landscaping, relationship to adjacent properties and uses and
construction meet the requirements set forth in this chapter:
(1) In the R-1 One-Family Residence District: one-family houses,
recreation facilities and accessory uses.
(2) In the R-2 One-Family Residence District: one-family houses,
recreation facilities and accessory uses.
(3) In the R-2-T One-Family Residence District: one-family houses,
townhouses, recreation facilities and accessory uses.
§ 359-35 ZONING § 359-36
359:881
(4) In the R-3 Multiple-Family Residence District: one-family detached
houses, one-family attached dwellings, garden apartments,
recreation facilities and accessory uses.
(5) In the R-4 Multiple-Family Residence District: one-family detached
houses, mobile homes, garden apartments, recreational facilities
and accessory uses.
(6) In the R-5 Multiple-Family Residence District: one-family detached
houses, one-family attached dwellings, garden apartments, highrise
apartments, recreational facilities and accessory uses.
G. Permitted density. The overall density shall not exceed the average lot
area per family, calculated exclusive of public or private streets and
exclusive of excessive slope areas as specified in § 359-14A, or 90% of
the minimum lot area per family as permitted in this chapter.
H. Open space requirements. Not less than 15% of the total site area shall
be set aside for open space, and not less than 50% of such open space
shall be developed to a degree commensurate with its location and
probable usage. The common open space shall be dedicated or
otherwise preserved and maintained so as to always remain open and
available for use by the occupants of the planned residential
development. The common open space, including all improvements and
facilities, shall be either:
(1) Dedicated for public use to a public body which agrees to operate
and maintain the dedicated land and facilities, but no public body is
obliged by this chapter to accept such dedication; or
(2) Deeded to an organization representing the property owners of the
development, which organization shall covenant to operate and
maintain land and facilities. Such organization may not be
dissolved nor dispose of the common open space unless the
maintenance of the common open space is otherwise guaranteed to
the Municipality's satisfaction.
I. Common open space maintenance.
(1) If the organization established to own and maintain common open
space, or any successor organization, fails to maintain such
common open space in reasonable order and condition in
accordance with the development plan, the Municipality may serve
written notice upon such organization or upon the residents of the
planned residential development setting forth the maintenance
deficiencies, requiring correction of deficiencies within 30 days and
stating the date and place of a hearing thereon, which shall be held
within 14 days of the notice. At such hearing, the Municipality may
modify the terms of the original notice as to the deficiencies and
may give an extension of time within which they shall be corrected.
If the deficiencies so set forth shall not be corrected within the
specified time limit, the Municipality, in order to preserve the
§ 359-36 § 359-36
359:882
taxable values of the properties within the planned residential
development and to prevent the common open space from
becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon and maintain the
common open space for one year. This maintenance shall not
constitute a taking nor vest in the public any rights to use the
common open space. Before the expiration of the year, the Council
shall set a public hearing where such organization or residents
of the planned residential development may show cause why
maintenance by the Municipality should not continue for another
year. If Council determines that such organization is ready and
able to maintain said common open space in reasonable condition,
the Municipality shall cease to maintain said common open space
at the end of said year. If the Council shall determine that such
organization is not ready and able to maintain said common open
space in a reasonable condition, the Municipality may, in its
discretion, continue to maintain said common open space during
the next succeeding year and, subject to a similar hearing and
determination, in each year thereafter.
(2) The cost of such maintenance by the Municipality shall be assessed
ratably against the properties within the planned residential
development that have a right of enjoyment of the common open
space and shall become a lien on said properties. The municipality,
at the time of entering upon said common open space for the
purpose of maintenance, shall file with the county a notice of lien
upon properties affected.
J. Minimum building setback. No structure shall be located closer to any
boundary of the site than 40 feet. Any structure exceeding 35 feet in
height shall be set back one additional foot for every two feet of height
exceeding 35 feet.
K. Building spacing. The requirements determining the spacing of
buildings shall be flexible so as to encourage imaginative site design.
The spaces between buildings shall guarantee adequate light, air and
emergency access. The minimum distance between the nearest points
of any exterior building walls shall be not less than 20 feet.
L. Maximum size of structure. No structure shall have a maximum
dimension greater than 250 feet. No townhouse shall have a height
greater than three stories or 35 feet. No garden apartment shall have a
height greater than three habitable stories or 35 feet. Chimneys, spires,
towers, tanks or similar projections may exceed the prescribed height
limitation by not more than 25%.
M. Building groupings. Structures used for dwelling units shall be oriented
so as to ensure adequate light and air exposures for walls containing
main window exposures or main entrances. Each structure shall be so
arranged so as to avoid undue exposure to concentrated loading or
parking facilities.
§ 359-36 ZONING § 359-36
359:883
§ 359-37. Required improvements.
The following improvements shall be completed in connection with every
planned group unit and planned residential development, and such
improvements will be in conformance with such standards as may be
specified and required in Chapter 324, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of
the Municipality of Monroeville or other municipal, county or state law.
N. Staging development.
(1) The density of development within various portions of the planned
residential development may vary, provided that at every point
during construction the completed portion of the development plan
will meet all requirements of this article.
(2) It is further required that programs for the construction of areas of
greater density concentration than permitted on the entire tract
will be offset by site improvements which, because of their size or
cost, are in proportion to the number of dwelling units to be
constructed in each stage. As an alternative to part or all of the site
improvements required to offset development densities in excess of
the overall permitted density, the Municipality may require the
reservation of open space by grant, easement or covenant in favor
of the Municipality in an amount and location necessary to balance
the excess development density of each stage.
A. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of § 359-28.
B. Areas should be provided for bus loading areas and bus shelters within
1/4 mile of each residential concentration. The bus loading area shall be
large enough for a bus to pull out of the flow of traffic.
C. Streetlights shall be provided by the developer throughout the planned
development. The streetlights shall be located to ensure adequate
illumination in order to protect the safety of the residents of the
planned development.
D. Proposed streets shall be related to street plans or parts thereof as have
been officially adopted by the Municipality. Proposed streets shall
conform to the requirements herein as well and as to any other plans,
statute, ordinance, law or regulation applicable thereto. Streets shall be
logically related to the topography in order that usable lots and
reasonable grades shall be produced. Minor streets shall be so laid out
as to discourage through traffic, but provisions will be required for
street connections into and from adjacent areas.
E. Where a planned development abuts or contains an existing or
proposed major traffic street, the governing body may require marginal
access streets, rear service alleys, reverse-frontage lots or such other
treatment as will provide protection for abutting properties, reduction
§ 359-36 § 359-37
359:884
§ 359-38. Performance standards.
All uses shall comply with the requirements of this section. In order to
determine whether a proposed use will conform to the requirements of this
chapter, the Council having jurisdiction may obtain a qualified consultant to
testify, whose cost for services shall be borne by the applicant.
in the number of intersections with major streets and separation of
local and through traffic.
F. Suitable drainage structures, culverts, storm sewers, ditches and
related installations shall be provided to ensure adequate drainage of
all points along the streets.
G. Concrete monuments shall be set at the intersection of all lines forming
angles in the boundary of the planned development. Iron or steel
markers shall be set at the beginning and ending of all curves along
street property lines, at all points where lot lines intersect curves,
either front or rear, and at all angles and property lines of lots and at all
other lot corners.
H. Pedestrian interior walks shall be required where necessary to assist
circulation or provide access to community facilities. Such interior
walks shall have a paved width of not less than four feet.
I. When topsoil has been removed from the surface on a slope where
erosion may cause a displacement of loose material, the area shall be
seeded or otherwise treated as soon as possible to prevent damage to
adjacent property or streets.
J. All utilities located within a planned development shall be located
underground.
K. Surety bonds, performance bonds, irrevocable letters of credit in the
form of a demand note, demand notes and cashier's checks established
to ensure satisfactory completion of required improvements and
maintenance, inspection procedures and acceptance of any public
rights-of-way shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 324,
Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the Municipality of Monroeville and
shall be subject to review and approval by the Municipal Solicitor and
Municipal Manager. [Amended 2-14-1989 by Ord. No. 1657]
A. Fire protection. Fire prevention and fire-fighting equipment acceptable
to the Municipal Fire Official shall be readily available when any
activity involving the handling or storage of flammable or explosive
materials is carried on.
B. Electrical disturbances. No activity shall cause electrical disturbance
adversely affecting radio or other equipment in the vicinity.
C. Noise. Noise which is determined to be objectionable because of
volume, frequency or beat shall be muffled or otherwise controlled. Fire
§ 359-37 ZONING § 359-38
359:885
sirens and related apparatus used solely for public purposes shall be
exempt from this requirement.
D. Vibrations. Vibrations detectable without instruments on neighboring
property in any district shall be prohibited.
E. Odors. No malodorous gas or matter shall be permitted which is
discernible on any adjoining lot or property.
F. Air pollution. No pollution of air by fly ash, dust, smoke, vapors or other
substance shall be permitted which is harmful to health, animals,
vegetation or other property.
G. Glare. Lighting devices which produce objectionable direct or reflected
glare on adjoining properties or thoroughfares shall not be permitted.
H. Erosion. No erosion by wind or water shall be permitted which will
carry objectionable substances onto neighboring properties.
I. Water pollution. No water pollution as defined by the standards
established by the state and federal governments shall be permitted.
§ 359-38 § 359-38
359:886
ARTICLE V
Administration and Enforcement
§ 359-39. Zoning Officer.
The Zoning Officer, who shall be appointed as required by the Monroeville
Home Rule Charter, shall:
§ 359-40. Zoning permits.
A zoning permit shall be obtained pursuant to provisions in Article III before
any person may:
A. Administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance
with its literal terms and shall not have the power to permit any
construction or any use or change of use which does not conform to this
chapter.
B. Issue zoning permits and zoning occupancy permits.
C. Maintain a permanent file with all zoning permits, occupancy permits
and applications as public records.
D. Identify and register all nonconforming uses and structures as required
by law. A zoning occupancy permit shall then be issued to the owner of
said use or structure.
A. Change the use of a structure or land to a different use;
B. Construct, reconstruct, move, alter or enlarge any structure or
building; or
C. Change a nonconforming use or structure. A zoning permit shall not be
issued to change a nonconforming use or structure without review and
approval by the Board.
D. Applications for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by a site plan
showing clearly and completely the location, dimensions and nature of
any structure involved and such other information as the Zoning Officer
may require for administration of this chapter, together with the filing
fee in accordance with the schedule annually affixed by resolution of
the Council.
E. Zoning permits shall become null and void one year from date of issue.
Prior to continuance of the activity or change for which the original
permit was issued, a new zoning permit must be obtained. The zoning
permit may be renewed by the Zoning Officer if there has been no
change in applicable zoning regulations and if such renewal is
requested within one month of the date of expiration of said zoning
permit. If applicable zoning regulations have been changed, the full
review and approval procedure required by this chapter shall apply. Any
zoning permit issued by authorization of the Board shall not be renewed
except by authority of the Board.
§ 359-39 ZONING § 359-40
359:887
§ 359-41. Zoning occupancy permits.
F. Within 60 days after the receipt of an application, the Zoning Officer
shall either approve or disapprove the application or submit the
application to appropriate review agencies in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter. All zoning permits shall be conditional upon
the commencement of work within one year and substantial completion
within 2 1/2 years. one copy of the plans shall be returned to the
applicant by the Zoning Officer after the Zoning Officer shall have
marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to
the same by his signature on such copy. one copy of plans, similarly
marked, shall be retained by the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer
shall issue a placard, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the
property in question, attesting to the fact that the use or alteration is in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
G. Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit for any use in a floodplain, the
Zoning Officer shall require the applicant to indicate compliance with
all applicable state and federal laws.
H. The Zoning Officer shall inspect the site during construction to
determine whether work is in compliance with the approved zoning
permit, and he may require certification by a qualified engineer or
surveyor that all structures are being built to the required elevations
and to other standards set forth by the zoning permit.
I. If the Zoning Officer finds that work does not comply with the
applicable standards or that there has been a misrepresentation by any
applicant, the Zoning Officer shall revoke the zoning permit.
J. If the Zoning Officer finds reasonable grounds to believe that there has
been a violation of any provisions of this chapter, he shall give notice of
such alleged violation. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
(3) Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the
performance of any act it requires.
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent in accordance with
law.
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Prior to occupancy of land or structure or to the change of tenants,
ownership or occupants of any structure, land or premises, or any
portion thereof, a zoning occupancy permit shall be obtained stating
that the premises are in full compliance with this chapter.
§ 359-40 § 359-41
359:888
§ 359-42. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which shall violate the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500. In default
of payment of the fine, such person, the members of such partnership or
the officers of such corporation shall be liable to imprisonment for not
more than 60 days. Each day that a violation is continued shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 359-43. Enforcement remedies.
In case any building, structure or land is, or is proposed to be, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in
violation of this chapter, Council may, in addition to other remedies,
institute in the name of the Municipality any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure or
land or to prevent in or about such premises any act, conduct, business or
use constituting a violation.
§ 359-44. Procedures for conditional uses.
B. A zoning occupancy permit shall be revocable where the Zoning Officer
determines that the occupant is not complying with every condition
required by the issuance of said permit.
A. Applications shall be filed with the Zoning Officer and shall be
accompanied by an application fee in an amount equal to that set by
resolution of Council and seven copies of a site plan prepared in
accordance with § 359-26.
B. Review. The Zoning Officer shall forward copies of the application to
Council and to the Planning Agency for review and approval.
C. The Planning Agency shall forward its recommendation within 30 days,
unless the petitioner agrees in writing to a time extension. Failure to act
within the allotted time shall be deemed to be a favorable
recommendation.
D. Council shall hold a public hearing within 60 days of the filing of an
application for a development plan and shall render its decision within
60 days of the conclusion of the hearing.
E. Council may attach such conditions as it deems necessary to the
approval of any development plan. All development, construction and
use shall be in accordance with the approved plan, unless a revised plan
is submitted, approved and recorded. Any development contrary to the
approved plan shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 359-41 ZONING § 359-45
359:889
§ 359-45. Procedures for planned developments.
Planned developments, including planned residential developments and
planned group units, shall require submission, review and approval of a
preliminary application and of a final application in accordance with the
following procedures and requirements.
A. The preliminary application shall include a location map, site map,
proposed development plan and engineering report. The application
shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer with not fewer than seven
copies and shall be accompanied by the fee.
B. The Zoning Officer shall forward one copy each of the preliminary
application to the Planning Agency, the Municipal Engineer, the Health
Department and the County Planning Commission. Council shall not
approve the preliminary application until reports from each of these
agencies have been received or until the expiration of 30 days from the
date the copies of the application for development were forwarded to
said agencies.
C. Council shall hold a public hearing within 60 days of the filing of such
preliminary application. Council may continue such hearing or refer the
application back to the Planning Agency but shall complete the hearing
within 60 days of the initial hearing. Council shall render its decision
not later than 60 days after the conclusion of the public hearing.
D. Council shall give tentative approval to a proposed development plan if
and only if it is found to meet the criteria set forth in Article IV.
E. The grant or denial of tentative approval shall include findings of fact
related to the proposed development plan as submitted for approval,
and the reasons for the decision shall be set forth with particularity in
what respect the proposed development plan would or would not be in
the public interest, including but not limited to each of the cited
criteria.
F. In the event that a development plan is granted tentative approval, with
or without conditions, Council may set forth in the official written
communication the time within which an application for final approval
of the development plan shall be filed or, in the case of a development
plan which provides for development over a period of years, the periods
of time within which applications for final approval of each part thereof
shall be filed.
G. The decision of Council shall be in writing and shall be given to the
developer personally or mailed to him at his last known address not
later than five working days following the decision.
H. Failure of Council to render decision and to communicate it to the
applicant in the time and in the manner required shall be deemed an
approval of the application and terms as presented, unless the applicant
has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in the
§ 359-45 § 359-45
359:890
§ 359-46. Guaranty of improvements.
prescribed manner of presentation or of communication of the decision,
in which case failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation and communication shall have like effect.
I. Council may:
(1) Grant tentative approval of the subject development plan as
submitted;
(2) Grant tentative approval subject to specific conditions not included
in the development plan as submitted; or
(3) Deny approval of the development plan.
J. If the developer chooses to reject any conditions attached to the grant
of tentative approval, he may void such tentative approval by notifying
Council within 30 days of the date of the decision.
K. The grant of tentative approval may be revoked by Council if it is
notified by the developer of his intention to abandon the proposed
development plan. The grant of tentative approval shall be deemed to
be revoked if the developer does not submit an application for final
approval within the time limits required by this article.
L. Application for final approval of each phase shall be filed with the
Zoning Officer not later than 12 months following the grant of tentative
approval, unless otherwise specified by Council. The application shall
comprise one reproducible copy and six prints of the development plan
for the phase, including a site plan and supplementary data, and a
certificate of completion of improvements or a guaranty of
improvements as required by this chapter.
M. Recording. Upon the approval of a final plat, the developer shall, within
90 days of such final approval, record such plat in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County.
A. Prior to granting final approval of any site plan, conditional use or other
approval required by this chapter wherein the developer is required or
has agreed as a condition of approval to provide and install specific
amenities, including but not limited to and prior to the installation of
trees, shrubbery and other plant materials, parking lots, storm sewers,
utilities, fire protection, installation of sidewalks, fences or other
landscape materials, the provision of driveways, pathways or other
related remedy to circulation or the demolition and removal of any
structure or nonconforming signs or any other specific amenity shown
on the site plan or as recommended by Council, the developer shall
provide a completion bond, performance bond, irrevocable letter of
credit in the form of a demand note, demand note or cashier's check
approved by the Municipal Solicitor and Municipal Manager as to form
and content. Said instrument shall be in the amount of 110% of the
§ 359-45 ZONING § 359-46
359:891
§ 359-47. Amendments.
The Council may amend this article as proposed by a member of the
Council, by the Planning Agency or by a petition of a person residing or
owning property within the Municipality in accordance with the following
provisions:
§ 359-48. Zoning Hearing Board.
estimated cost of such improvements. [Amended 2-14-1989 by Ord.
No. 1657]
B. The Council shall promptly release the developer from the improvement
bond if and only if the Zoning Officer certifies in writing that all
improvements have been completed in accordance with all agreements
set forth as a condition of the required zoning approval.
A. Petitions for amendment shall be filed with the Planning Agency, and
the petitioner, upon such filing, shall pay an advertising deposit and a
filing fee in accordance with a schedule annually affixed by resolution.
The Planning Agency shall review the proposed amendment and report
its findings and recommendations in writing to the Council and to the
petitioner. The proposed amendment shall be introduced before the
Council only if a member of the Council elects to do so. If an
amendment proposed by petition is not introduced, the advertising
deposit shall be refunded to the petitioner; otherwise, such deposit
shall be paid to the Municipality.
B. Any proposed amendment introduced by a member of the Council
without written findings and recommendations from the Planning
Agency shall be referred to the Planning Agency for review at least 30
days prior to public hearing by the Council.
C. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Council shall
hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to public notice. If, after any
public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed amendment is
revised or further revised to include land previously not affected by it,
the Council shall hold another public hearing pursuant to public notice
before proceeding to vote on the amendment.
D. The delineation of any of the floodplain districts may be amended as
specified above where natural or man-made changes have occurred or
where studies by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, River
Basin Commission, or other qualified person document the need for
such change. Prior to any such change, approval shall be obtained from
the Federal Insurance Administration.
A. In accordance with law, the Council shall appoint a Zoning Hearing
Board, which Board shall adopt rules to govern its procedures. The
Board shall hold meetings, keep minutes and, pursuant to notice, shall
conduct hearings, compel the attendance of witnesses, take testimony
§ 359-46 § 359-48
359:892
under oath and render decisions in writing, all as required by law. A
fee shall be charged in accordance with a schedule annually affixed by
resolution of Council for any appeal or proceeding filed with the Zoning
Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the functions,
powers and obligations specifically granted by law.
B. Membership; term. [Added 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1667]
(1) The membership of the Monroeville Zoning Hearing Board is
hereby increased from three to five members.
(2) The Council of the Municipality of Monroeville shall appoint two
members, one member to sit for one year and the second member
to sit for a two-year term. The new members appointed shall not be
from the same ward of the Municipality.
(3) The existing three-member Board shall be permitted to continue in
office until its term of office would expire.
(4) Upon the expiration of the terms of the existing three members, the
Council of the Municipality of Monroeville, in appointing new
members to the Zoning Hearing Board, shall not appoint more than
one resident from a ward to membership on the Zoning Hearing
Board.
C. Appeals from the Zoning Officer. The Board shall hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that the Zoning Officer has
failed to follow prescribed procedures or has misinterpreted or
misapplied any provision of this chapter or of the Zoning Map and any
valid rule or regulation governing the action of the Zoning Officer.
Appeals from decisions or interpretations of the Zoning Officer may be
made by landowners, developers or persons aggrieved and may relate
to such subject matter as to whether a zoning permit or zoning
occupancy permit should be issued or whether a stop-work order
should be issued.
D. Challenges to validity. The Board shall hear challenges to the validity of
this chapter or map raising substantive questions. Procedural questions
or an alleged defect in the process of enactment or adoption of any
ordinance or map shall be raised by an appeal taken directly from the
action of the governing body to the court. Challenges to the validity of
this chapter or map to the Board include challenges such as
exclusionary zoning or spot zoning.
E. Variances. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the property of the applicant. In granting any variance, the Board
may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter. The Board may
grant a variance, provided that the following findings are made where
relevant in a given case:
§ 359-48 ZONING § 359-48
359:893
(1) There are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape, or
exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to
the particular property and the unnecessary hardship is due to
such conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally
created by the provisions of this chapter in the district in which the
property is located.
(2) Because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity
with the provisions of this chapter and that the authorization of a
variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of
such property.
(3) Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
(4) The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of
the neighborhood or district in which the property is located nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property nor be detrimental to the public
welfare.
(5) The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification
possible of the regulation in issue.
F. Special exceptions. The Board shall hear and decide requests for
special exceptions enumerated in § 359-24. A special exception is
issued for an exceptional use which may be permitted within a
particular zoning district if the Board determines its availability. Such
uses are made available as a privilege, not as a right, assuming that the
requisite facts and conditions detailed in this chapter are found to exist.
In granting a special exception, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter.
G. In considering applications for special exceptions and variances in
floodplain districts, the Board shall give due consideration to the
danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities
caused by encroachment. No special exception or variance shall be
granted for any proposed use, development or activity within the
floodway that will cause any increase in flood levels during the onehundred-
year flood. The Board shall notify the applicant for such
special exception or variance, in writing, that the construction of a
structure below the one-hundred-year flood elevation increases risks to
life and property and will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance.
H. Stay of proceedings. Upon the filing of proceedings before the Board
appealing a determination of the Zoning Officer, challenging an
ordinance or requesting a variance or special exception and during the
pendency of such proceedings before the Board, all land development
§ 359-48 § 359-48
359:894
pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning
Officer or of any agency or body and all official action thereunder shall
be stayed, unless the Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or
body certifies to the Board facts indicating that such stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the development or
official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the Board or by the court having jurisdiction
over zoning appeals on petition after notice to the Zoning Officer or
other appropriate agency or body.
I. Hearings. The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Notice shall be given to the public, the applicant, the Zoning
Officer, such other persons as the governing body shall designate
by ordinance and to any person who has made timely request for
the same. Notices shall be given at such time and in such manner
as shall be prescribed by ordinance or, in absence of ordinance,
provision by rules of the Board.
(2) The hearing shall be conducted by the Board, or the Board may
appoint any member as a hearing officer.
(3) The parties to the hearing shall be the Municipality, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the Board and any other person, including civic or
community organizations permitted to appear by the Board.
(4) The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing
officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses
and documents requested by the parties.
(5) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(6) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(7) The Board or hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings, and a transcript of the
proceedings and copies of graphic or written material received in
evidence shall be made available to any party at cost.
(8) The Board or hearing officer shall not communicate directly or
indirectly with any party or his representative in connection with
any issue involved, except upon notice and opportunity for all
parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication,
report, staff memoranda or other materials unless parties are
§ 359-48 ZONING § 359-48
359:895
afforded an opportunity to contest the materials so noticed and
shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative
unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
(9) The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing
before the Board or hearing officer. Where the Board fails to render
the decision within 45 days after the last hearing before the Board
or hearing officer or fails to hold the required hearing on the
application within 60 days from the date of the applicant's request
for hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in
favor of the applicant, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to
an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of
the applicant because of the failure of the Board to meet or render
a decision as hereinabove provided, the Municipality shall give
public notice of said decision within 10 days in the same manner as
provided in Subsection I(1) of this section.
(10) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant and to all other persons
who have filed their name and address with the Board personally or
by mail not later than the day following its date.
§ 359-48 § 359-48
359:896
ARTICLE VI
Definitions
§ 359-49. Definitions and word usage.
A. Certain words used in this chapter are defined below. Words used in the
present tense shall include the future. The singular number shall
include the plural, and the plural the singular. The word "shall" is
mandatory and not permissive.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A subordinate structure, located on the
same lot as the main structure, or a portion of the main structure, the
use of which is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection
with the main structure or principal use of the land.
ACCESSORY USE — A subordinate use which is clearly incidental and
related to that of a main structure or main use of land.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically
or mechanically controlled still or motion-picture machines, projectors
or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting
or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.[Added 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898; amended 1-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 2249]
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE — [Added 8-9-1994 by
Ord. No. 1898; amended 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2249]
A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any
one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations which
depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or
(a)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for
use in connection with specified sexual activities.
(b)
(1)
A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of
material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an "adult
bookstore" or "adult video store." Such other business purposes
will not serve to exempt such commercial establishment from being
(2)
§ 359-49 ZONING § 359-49
359:897
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:[Added 8-9-1994 by Ord. No.
1898; amended 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2249]
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:[Added 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898; amended 1-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 2249]
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — Commercial establishments
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are
regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.[Added 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898; amended 1-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 2249]
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who
appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or
specified sexual activities.[Added 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898;
amended 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2249]
AGRICULTURE — Any use of land or structures for farming, dairying,
pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, arboriculture or
animal or poultry husbandry. Uses permitted in conjunction with an
categorized as an "adult bookstore" or "adult video store" so long
as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale
or rental for consideration the specified materials which depict or
describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(1) Persons who appear in the state of nudity;
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
(2)
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
(3)
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration
and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which
advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions; or
(1)
Offers any single sleeping room for rent four or more times in one
calendar day during five or more calendar days in any continuous
thirty-day period.
(2)
§ 359-49 § 359-49
359:898
agricultural use may include barns, stables, corn cribs, silos and any
other use or structure that is clearly related to an agricultural
operation.
AMUSEMENT USE — A stadium, arena, bowling alley or related facility
for the presentation of musical, theatrical or sporting events where the
number of spectators normally is greater than the number of players
and where such use is not accessory to a school or church.[Amended
8-10-1999 by Ord. No. 2118]
ANIMATION — Any sign or part of a sign that changes physical position
by any movement or rotation or that gives the visual impression of such
movement or rotation.[Added 1-11-2005 by Ord. No. 2325]
ANCILLARY CAFETERIA — A restaurant which is located within a
shopping center, industrial park, office center or apartment complex,
having a floor area of not more than 3,000 square feet, and intended
primarily to serve the employees, patrons or residents of the complex
within which it is located.
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit in a multiple-family residential
structure containing three or more dwelling units.
APPLICANT — A landowner or holder of an agreement to purchase
land, lessee or other person having a proprietary interest in land, or
the heirs, successors and/or assigns of such person, who has filed an
application for the use, improvement or development of any parcel or
structure under this chapter.
AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE — The dismantling or wrecking of used motor
vehicles, trucks, trailers, farm equipment or mobile homes or the
storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or partially dismantled, obsolete
or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BASEMENT — A story partly below ground and having 40% or more of
its height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
BASIC GRADE — A reference plane representing the average of the
finished ground level adjoining a structure at all its exterior walls.
BILLBOARD AND/OR OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign
displaying changeable advertising copy which pertains to a business,
organization, event, person, place, service or product not principally
located or sold on the premises upon which said sign is located.[Added
8-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1764]
BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of the Municipality of
Monroeville.
BUFFER AREA — The area within a municipal waste landfill property,
facility, disposal area or site, generally adjacent to and parallel with
a floodplain, wetland, occupied dwelling, perennial stream, property
line, airport runway, coal seam, coal outcrop, coal refuse, public or
private water source, school building, park and/or playground, for a
width as determined in § 359-33BB(17) of this chapter, consisting of
§ 359-49 ZONING § 359-49
359:899
undisturbed, natural, existing vegetation, unless otherwise determined
by Monroeville Council. In that event, the buffer is to be created by the
use of trees, shrubs, fences and/or other berms designed to limit the
view of and/or sound from the site to adjacent sites or properties. Upon
planting and/or installation, any trees, shrubs, fences and/or berms
shall be a minimum 10 feet in height and shall produce a year-round
screen.[Added 7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1843]
BUILDABLE AREA — That portion of a zoning lot bounded by the
required front, side and rear yards.
BUILDING SETBACK — The required minimum horizontal distance
between the front yard line and the front edge of a building.[Added
3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 2106]
BUSINESS SERVICES — A service shop or office providing services
and sales of office supplies and equipment where the repair and
maintenance of equipment is limited, and does not include
manufacturing or industrial operations.
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the interment
of human remains and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including
crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction
with and within the boundary of such cemetery.
CHANGEABLE COPY — Character height shall be no greater than 18
inches in height and no more than three lines of copy per electronic
signboard with the copy or other images that physically change or give
the appearance of change displayed at intervals of not less than 15
seconds.[Added 1-11-2005 by Ord. No. 2325]
CHILD-CARE CENTER — Any place, home or institution which cares
for four or more children under the age of 16 years apart from their
parents, guardians or custodians for regular periods of time for
compensation; provided, however, that the term "child-care center"
shall not include or apply to bona fide schools, custody fixed by a court,
children related by blood or marriage within the third degree of the
custodial person or churches and other religious or public institutions
caring for children within an institutional building.282
CLOSURE — The date on which a municipal waste processing or
disposal facility permanently ceases to accept waste and access is
limited to activities necessary for postclosure care, maintenance and
monitoring.[Added 7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1843]
CLUB — An organization comprised mainly of the residents of the
neighborhood in which it is located, the primary purpose of which is the
advancement of its members or of the community in education, cultural
or civic pursuits and activities.
282. Editor's Note: The definition of "child-oriented business," added 8-9-1994 by Ord. No.
1898, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 1-14-2003 by Ord. No.
2249.
§ 359-49 § 359-49
359:900
COMMERCIAL — An activity involving the sales of goods or services
carried out for profit.[Added 10-8-1996 by Ord. No. 1995]
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATION ANTENNA — A device, including,
but not limited to, panels, microwave dishes and single pole/whip,
which is used to collect or transmit television, radio, telephone
communications or other wireless signals, situated on a nonresidential
site either as a principal structure or external to or attached to the
exterior of any other structure.[Added 10-8-1996 by Ord. No. 1995]
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATION TOWER — A structure situated on
a nonresidential site that is intended for transmitting or receiving
television, radio or telephone communications and any related
accessory building and equipment.[Added 8-8-1995 by Ord. No.
1952]
COMMERCIAL COMMUTER LOT — An off-street parking lot, designed
and intended to provide for the storage, for limited periods of time,
of operable passenger automobiles, and available to the public for
compensation, or as an accommodation to clients or customers.[Added
3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2220]
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel of land integral to a planned
residential development and subject to provisions which assure the
continued availability and maintenance of such open space for the use
and benefit of the residents of the planned development.
COMMUNITY USE — A school, playground or related recreation
facility, public building or public maintenance facility.
COMMUTE — A trip from home-to-work or work-to-home.[Added
3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2220]
COMMUTER — One who travels regularly from home-to-work and then
work-to-home.[Added 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2220]
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry
during flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent
the passage of water and water vapor.
CONDITIONAL USE — A specific exception to the standard regulations
of this chapter which requires approval by the governing body under
terms and procedures and with conditions prescribed herein.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or
structure, including the placement of mobile homes.
CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION WASTE — Solid waste resulting from
the construction or demolition of buildings and other structures,
including but not limited to wood, plaster, metals, asphaltic substances,
bricks, block and unsegregated concrete. The term also includes
dredging waste. The term does not include the following if they are
separate from other waste and are used as clean fill:[Added 7-21-1993
by Ord. No. 1843]
§ 359-49 ZONING § 359-49
359:901
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — A commercial establishment storing or
offering for sale building supplies, steel supplies, coal, heavy
equipment, feed and grain and similar goods, but not including the
wrecking, salvaging, dismantling or storage of junked automobiles and
similar vehicles.
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES — The Department
of Environmental Resources of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and authorized representatives. Also referred to as "PADER" or
"DER."[Added 7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1843]
DEPENDENT DWELLING — An accessory dwelling unit attached to a
principal one-family house, installed and intended solely for the use of
elderly parents or other dependent, close relatives.
DEVELOPER — Any present or prospective landowner or agent of such
landowner who makes or causes to be made a development plan and an
application for a planned development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to the construction,
reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion or alteration of buildings
or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets
and other paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining;
dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and
the subdivision of land.[Amended 7-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1988]
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A graphic and written presentation of either
a planned residential development or a planned group unit, including
a plat of subdivision, and all provisions relating to use, location and
bulk of structures, intensity of development, streets, ways and parking
facilities, common open space and public facilities.
DISPOSAL AREA — The part of the site where disposal is occurring or
will occur.[Added 7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1843]
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — A fast-food restaurant characterized by a
limited menu and primarily catering to drive-in traffic.
DWELLING UNIT — one or more living or sleeping rooms with cooking
and sanitary facilities for one person or one family.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER — A secondary sign, with a black
background/face that includes provisions for changeable copy, amber
colored, advertising an on-site product/service/activity, public service
message, time and temperature sign.[Added 1-11-2005 by Ord. No.
2325]
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person or who agrees or offers to
Uncontaminated dredging waste, soil, rock, stone, gravel, unused
brick and block and concrete.
(1)
Waste from land clearing, grubbing and excavation, including
trees, brush, stumps and vegetative materials.
(2)
§ 359-49 § 359-49
359:902
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.[Added 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898; amended 1-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 2249]
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes,
offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.[Added
8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898; amended 1-14-2003 by Ord. No.
2249]
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage;
the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
FACILITY — Land, structures and other appurtenances or
improvements where municipal waste disposal or processing is
permitted or takes place.[Added 7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1843]
FAMILY — Either an individual or two or more persons related by blood
or marriage or adoption or a group of not more than five persons not
so related (not counting servants) occupying a premises and living as
a single housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a
boardinghouse, lodging house, club, fraternity or hotel.
FINAL CLOSURE — The date after which no further treatment,
maintenance or other action is or will be necessary at a municipal
waste processing or disposal facility to ensure compliance with the
Solid Waste Management Act283 and Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources regulations.[Added 7-21-1993 by Ord. No.
1843]
FLOOD-FRINGE DISTRICT — That area of the one-hundred-year
floodplain not included in the floodway district. The basis for the
outermost boundary of this district shall be the one-hundred-year flood
elevations contained in the flood profiles of the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — A study prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency for the National Flood Insurance
Program dated October 4, 1995, which includes Flood Insurance Rate
Maps.[Amended 7-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1988]
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
inundation from the rapid accumulation of surface waters, including
floodway districts, flood-fringe districts and general floodplain districts.
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT — A floodplain area for which no detailed
flood profiles or elevations are provided but where a one-hundred-year
floodplain boundary has been approximated. Such areas are shown on
the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map of the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
283. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 359-49 ZONING § 359-49
359:903
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry
and discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of
this chapter, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of
the one-hundred-year magnitude.[Added 7-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1988]
FLOODWAY DISTRICT — That portion of a floodplain delineated for
regulation by this chapter which must be reserved to discharge the
waters of the one-hundred-year flood without causing more than a
one-foot rise in flood heights. The areas included in this district are
specifically defined on Tables 1 through 6 of the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOR AREA — [Amended 4-11-1995 by Ord. No. 1938]
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio obtained when the gross floor area
minus unoccupied basement area is divided by the total lot area.
FRONT YARD DEPTH — The prescribed minimum open space
extending across the entire width of the lot between the front line of
the building and the street right-of-way.
FRONT YARD LINE — The lot line separating a lot from a street rightof-
way.[Added 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 2106]
GARDEN APARTMENT — A multiple-family residential structure
containing three or more dwelling units having a height no greater than
three stories.
GAS STATION — A premises providing fuel and minor accessories
and services to automobiles, but not including major overhaul, spray
painting, recapping of tires or auto wrecking.
GOLF COURSE — A recreational facility, public or private, whose
primary purpose is the sport of golf, and may include within that facility
such associated accessory uses as driving ranges, putting courses,
clubhouse, pro shop, swimming pools, tennis court and
restaurant.[Added 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. 1829]
GOVERNING BODY — The Council, Municipality of Monroeville,
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the horizontal area of all floors
of a structure and its accessory buildings, as measured between the
exterior faces of walls.[Added 4-11-1995 by Ord. No. 1938]
In a dwelling, the sum of the horizontal areas of all rooms used
for habitation but not including cellars, attics, unheated rooms or
rooms without either a skylight or window.
(1)
In a store, shop, restaurant, club or funeral home, the sum of the
horizontal areas of all space to which the customer has access and
excluding storage, office and other preparation or administrative
spaces.
(2)
§ 359-49 § 359-49
359:904
GROSS SURFACE AREA — The entire area within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation,
emblem or figure or similar character, together with any frame or other
material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed,
excluding necessary supports or uprights upon which such sign is
placed. For signs utilizing individual letters or figures or characters
mounted directly on the wall or face of a structure, the "gross surface
area" shall be the entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of the writing, representation or other
communication material.[Added 8-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1764]
GROUP DWELLING A — A dwelling facility operated for not more than
eight persons, including staff, living together as a single housekeeping
unit.
GROUP DWELLING B — A dwelling facility operated for not more than
15 persons, plus staff, living together as a single family or as a single
housekeeping unit.
GROUP DWELLING C — More than two and fewer than eight
supervised apartments in one multiple-family structure, each housing
not more than four persons, inclusive of an apartment occupied by staff
persons to assist and supervise the group of apartments so supervised.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any of the following materials or
substances: acetone, ammonia, benzene, calcium carbide, carbon
disulfide, celluloid, chlorine, hydrochloric acid, hydrocyanic acid,
magnesium, nitric acid, nitric oxides, petroleum products, phosphorus,
potassium, sodium, sulphur, sulphur products, pesticides, insecticides,
fungicides and all poisons, flammable gases and radioactive
substances.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — [Added 7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1843]
Garbage, refuse or sludge from an industrial or other wastewater
treatment plant; sludge from a water supply treatment plant or air
pollution control facility; and other discarded material, including
solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting
from municipal, commercial, industrial, institutional, mining or
agricultural operations and from community activities, or
combination of the above, which because of its quantity,
concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics
may do one of the following:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality
or increase in morbidity in either an individual or total
population.
(a)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
(b)
(1)
§ 359-49 ZONING § 359-49
359:905
HEIGHT — The vertical distance from basic grade at the front wall of a
structure to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck
line of a mansard roof or to the mean height level between eaves and
ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs.
HOTEL — A structure or structures designed for occupancy primarily
as the temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with
or without meals, including auto courts, motels, motor hotels, motor
lodges, tourist courts and the like, in which structure or group of
structures:[Amended 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 2082]
HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY — A multiple-family apartment structure
designed for and operated for occupancy by elderly families and
individuals, 60 years of age or older, and conforming to all requirements
of federal, state or local laws and regulations pertaining to housing for
the elderly.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — The processing and fabrication of certain
materials and products where no process involved will produce noise,
vibration, air pollution, fire hazard or noxious emission which will
disturb or endanger neighboring properties. "Light manufacturing"
includes the production of the following goods: home appliances;
electrical instruments; office machines; precision instruments;
electronic devices; timepieces; jewelry; optical goods; musical
instruments; novelties; wood products; printed material; lithographic
plates; type composition; machine tools; dies and gauges; ceramics;
apparel; lightweight nonferrous metal castings; film processing; light
sheet metal products; plastic goods; pharmaceutical goods; and food
products, but not animal slaughtering, curing or rendering of fats.
LIMITED OFFICE — Offices located within a structure having a floor
area of less than 4,000 square feet.
The term does not include coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse
Disposal Control Act (52 P.S. §§ 30.51 to 30.101). The term does
not include treatment sludges from coal mine drainage treatment
plants, disposal of which is being carried on under and in
compliance with a valid permit issued under the Clean Streams
Law (35 P.S. §§ 691.1 to 691.1001). The term does not include
solid or dissolved material in irrigation return flows or industrial
discharges which are point sources subject to permits under
Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.A.
§ 1341) or source, special nuclear or by product material as defined
by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C.A. §§ 2011 to 2284).
(2)
(1) There are more than six living or sleeping room units.
The major portion of the floor area is devoted to living quarters, but
incidental business may be conducted.
(2)
There may be meeting rooms, common dining facilities, swimming
pools, tennis courts and similarly ancillary recreational uses as
accessory uses or structures incidental to the hotel operation.
(3)
§ 359-49 § 359-49
359:906
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with
a building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary
parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials.
LOCAL RESTAURANT — A restaurant other than a drive-in restaurant
having a floor area not greater than 3,000 square feet.
LOCAL RETAIL SHOP — Retail stores and personal service shops which
cater to the day-to-day needs of nearby residents and which can be
located in close proximity to residential neighborhoods without an
adverse impact from undue vehicular congestion, excessive noise or
other objectional influences. Such shops and stores include drugstores,
beauty salons, barbershops, dry-cleaning and laundry pickup facilities
having a floor area of less than 3,000 square feet and grocery stores of
less than 8,000 square feet in floor area.
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one
or more structures.
LOT, AREA OF — The horizontally projected area of a lot computed
exclusive of any portion of the right-of-way of any public thoroughfare.
LOT, DEPTH OF — A mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines.
LOT OF RECORD — Any lot which, individually or as a part of a
subdivision, has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
the county.
LOT, WIDTH OF — The distance between the side lines of the zoning
lot measured at the shortest distance at or between the front and rear
building lines as determined by the prescribed front and rear yard
requirements.
LOT, ZONING — A parcel of land, fronting on a street, which is or
may be occupied by a main structure or a unit group of buildings with
accessory uses and structures and the open spaces required under this
chapter, including easement areas, if any, but not including any public
or private street or alley.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area.
An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area, used solely for
parking of vehicles, building access and incidental storage, in an area
other than basement area is not considered the "lowest floor" of a
building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that
the structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation design
requirements of this chapter.[Added 7-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1988]
MAJOR EXCAVATION — Any grading, filling or other operation (other
than in connection with a foundation for a structure) involving:
Strip or other mining of coal or other minerals, excavating of sand
or rock and the crushing of rock, drilling for gas or oil, recovery of
metal or natural resources and similar operations;
(1)
§ 359-49 ZONING § 359-49
359:907
MANUFACTURING — The processing and fabrication of any article,
substance or commodity.
MEDICAL CLINIC — Any establishment where human patients are not
hospitalized overnight but are examined and treated by doctors or
others who are duly licensed to perform medical healing arts.
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — A chartered, nonprofit organization, the
primary purpose of which is the advancement of its members or of
the community in education, fraternal, cultural or civic pursuits and
activities.
MINOR ARTERIAL HIGHWAY — A functional classification, established
by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO), for the grouping or categorizing of roadways
according to the character of service they provide as part of an overall
highway system. Minor arterials connect with and augment the
principal arterial system; more emphasis is placed on land access;
they are important to intracommunity continuity; and have lower traffic
volumes than principal arterials and includes: Center Road, Haymaker
Road, James Street, Monroeville Boulevard, Monroeville Road,
Northern Pike, Old William Penn Highway, Pitcairn Road, Stroschein
Road, Thompson Run Road and Wilmerding-Monroeville Road.[Added
3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2220]
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but
not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof,
the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support or the
removal or change of any required means of egress or rearrangement
of parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements, nor shall
"minor repairs" include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader,
gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or
other work affecting public health or general safety.
MOBILE HOME — A prefabricated dwelling unit designed for
transportation on streets and highways on its own wheels or on a flatbed
or other trailer and arriving at the site where it is intended to be
occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy except for
connection to utilities and minor or incidental unpacking and assembly
operations and constructed so that it may be used with or without a
permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A planned residential development which is to
be occupied by two or more mobile homes.
Material alteration of the ground surface so as to affect streets
and recreation sites and other public facilities or physically affect
private property within 1,000 feet of the operation;
(2)
(3) A volume of earth movement exceeding 10,000 cubic yards; or
(4) A change in ground elevation exceeding 15 feet.
§ 359-49 § 359-49
359:908
MUNICIPALITY — Municipality of Monroeville.[Added 8-9-1994 by
Ord. No. 1898; amended 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2249]
MUNICIPAL LANDFILL INSPECTOR — Employee(s) of the Municipality
of Monroeville certified by the Department of Environmental Resources
to act as a host municipality inspector of municipal waste landfills with
the following authority, including to enter onto the property, inspect
any records required by the Department of Environmental Resources,
collect samples and conduct inspections in accordance with
Department of Environmental Resources regulations.[Added
7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1843]
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and any other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid
or contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential,
municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from
community activities and any sludge not meeting the definition of
"residual waste" or "hazardous waste" hereunder from a municipal,
commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater
treatment plant or air pollution control facility.[Added 7-21-1993 by
Ord. No. 1843]
MUNICIPAL WASTE DISPOSAL OR PROCESSING FACILITY — A waste
facility using land for disposing or processing of municipal waste. The
facility includes land affected during the lifetime of operations,
including but not limited to areas where disposal or processing
activities actually occur, support facilities, buffer areas, borrow areas,
offices, equipment sheds, air and water pollution control and treatment
systems, access roads, associated on-site or contiguous collection,
transportation and storage facilities, closure and postclosure care and
maintenance activities and other activities in which the natural land
surface has been disturbed as a result of or incidental to operation of
the facility.[Added 7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1843]
MUNICIPAL WASTE LANDFILL — A facility using land for disposing of
municipal waste. The facility includes land affected during the lifetime
of operations, including but not limited to areas where disposal or
processing activities actually occur, support facilities, buffer areas,
borrow areas, offices, equipment sheds, air and water pollution control
and treatment systems, access roads, associated on-site or contiguous
collection, transportation and storage facilities, closure and postclosure
care and maintenance activities and other activities in which the
natural land surface has been disturbed as a result of or incidental
to operation of the facility. The term does not include a construction/
demolition waste landfill or a facility for the land application of sewage
sludge, as more specifically defined in Title 25, Chapter 271.1, of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources regulations, as
amended.[Added 7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1843]
NATURAL ELEVATION — A topographic elevation present in or
produced by nature and undisturbed by man.[Added 7-21-1993 by
Ord. No. 1843]
§ 359-49 ZONING § 359-49
359:909
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after July 10, 1979, with the adoption of Ordinance
1192 by Monroeville Council,284 and includes any subsequent
improvements thereto.[Added 7-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1988]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot whose width, area or other dimension
does not conform to the regulations of this chapter and which was a lot
of record or lawfully existed at the time the regulations with which it
does not conform became effective.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — Any structure or part of a
structure legally existing at the time of enactment of this chapter or
any of its amendments which does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any use or arrangement of land or
structures legally existing at the time of enactment of this chapter or
any of its amendments which does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in
a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided
to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed
or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form
of consideration.[Added 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898; amended
1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2249]
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast.[Added
8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898; amended 1-14-2003 by Ord. No.
2249]
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME — An institution for the care
of persons who are residents by virtue of requiring specialized care
and supervision relating to health, social and/or rehabilitative services.
The facility shall be licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
as a skilled or intermediate care facility. The term shall not include
hospitals, psychiatric hospitals or alcohol and drug abuse rehabilitation
centers.[Added 5-11-1994 by Ord. No. 1886]
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
pile abutment, projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert,
building, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along,
across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or flood-prone area
which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water
either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water
or which is placed where the flow of the water might carry the same
downstream to the damage of life and property.
ONE-FAMILY HOUSE — A detached building having accommodations
for and occupied by not more than one family.
284. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1192, regarding flood damage prevention, was superseded by
the floodplain regulations in this chapter. See §§ 359-18 through 359-20.
§ 359-49 § 359-49
359:910
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood of such magnitude that it has
only a one-percent chance of occurring each year, although such flood
may occur in any year.
OPERATE — To construct a municipal waste management facility in
anticipation of receiving solid waste for the purpose of processing or
disposal; to receive, process or dispose of solid waste; to carry on
an activity at the facility that is related to the receipt, processing or
disposal of waste or otherwise affects land at the facility; to conduct
closure and postclosure activities at a facility.[Added 7-21-1993 by
Ord. No. 1843]
OPERATOR — The person or municipality that operates a municipal
waste processing or disposal facility.[Added 7-21-1993 by Ord. No.
1843]
PARKS AND RECREATION — A facility operated by a public agency,
nonprofit agency or homeowners' association to provide open space and
recreational facilities serving the neighborhood, the community or the
general public.[Added 6-9-1987 by Ord. No. 1571]
PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department of Environmental
Resources to operate a municipal waste disposal processing facility.
The term includes a permit modification, permit reissuance and permit
renewal.[Added 7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1843]
PERMIT AREA — The area of land and water within the boundaries
of the permit which is designated on the permit application maps as
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
The area includes the areas which are or will be affected by the
municipal waste processing or disposal facility.[Added 7-21-1993 by
Ord. No. 1843]
PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE — A person in whose name a licensing
permit to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well
as the individual listed on the application for a licensing permit.[Added
8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898; amended 1-14-2003 by Ord. No.
2249]
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.[Added 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898;
amended 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2249]
PERSONAL CARE HOME — A residential premises for ambulatory,
elderly persons in which food, shelter and personal assistance or
supervision is provided for a period exceeding 24 consecutive hours for
more than three persons who are not relatives of the operator and who
require assistance or supervision in such matters as dressing, bathing,
diet or medication prescribed for self-administration but do not require
hospitalization or care in a skilled nursing home or intermediate care
facility as defined in current state licensure requirements.[Added
6-9-1987 by Ord. No. 1571]
§ 359-49 ZONING § 359-49
359:911
PERSONAL SERVICES — A commercial establishment providing such
personal services as hair dressing and cutting, clothes cleaning,
laundering, shoe repair, tailor shops and the like.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — A planned group unit or planned
residential development as defined and regulated herein.
PLANNED GROUP UNIT — A zoning lot on which there is development
of more than one principal structure and built in accordance with
a unified site development plan which may provide for industrial,
recreation and open space and/or commercial uses and which is
reviewed and approved in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — At least five acres of land,
controlled by one landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a
number of dwelling units, the development plan for which does not
correspond in lot size, bulk or type of buildings, density, lot coverage
and required open space to the regulations established in any one
residential district of this chapter.
PLANNING AGENCY — The Planning Agency of the Municipality of
Monroeville, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
POSTCLOSURE — Activities after closure which are necessary to
ensure compliance with the Solid Waste Management Act285 and
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources regulations,
including application of final cover; grading; revegetation;
groundwater, surface water and gas monitoring; erosion control and
gas control; leachate treatment; and abatement of pollution or
degradation to land, water, air or other natural resources.[Added
7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1843]
PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL HIGHWAY — A functional classification,
established by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO), for the grouping or categorizing of
roadways according to the character of service they provide as part of
an overall highway system. Principal arterial highways have high traffic
volumes, carry the majority of trips between regional activity centers
and communities and provide some access to property, and include
the following roadways: Broadway Boulevard/Route 130; Golden Mile
Highway/Route 286; Mosside Boulevard/Route 48; and William Penn
Highway/Route 22.[Added 7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1843; amended
3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2220]
PUBLIC BUILDING — A structure owned or leased and operated by a
governmental agency.
PUBLIC USE — A lot, building, structure or any combination thereof
owned and exclusively occupied by a federal, state or local
governmental agency.[Added 5-12-1998 by Ord. No. 2081]
285. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 359-49 § 359-49
359:912
REAR YARD DEPTH — The prescribed minimum open space extending
across the entire width of the lot between the back line of the building
or accessory structure and the rear lot line.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis; not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest
horizontal projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light-duty truck; and, not designed for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping,
travel or seasonal use.[Added 7-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1988]
RECREATION CLUB — A noncommercial facility operated by and for its
members and providing recreational facilities for the use of members
and their guests.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood
elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of one and 1/2 feet.
RESEARCH LABORATORY — A facility for applied research conducted
within an enclosed structure where no goods are produced in quantity.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse, other discarded materials or
other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials, resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations
and sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment or air pollution control facility,
if it is not hazardous. The term does not include coal refuse as defined
in the Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act (52 P.S. §§ 30.51 to 30.101).
The term does not include treatment sludges from coal mine drainage
treatment plants, disposal of which is being carried on under and in
compliance with a valid permit issued under the Clean Streams Law (35
P.S. §§ 691.1 to 691.1001).[Added 7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1843]
SCREENING — A fence, evergreen hedge or wall at least six feet high,
provided in such a way that it will block a line of sight. The "screening"
may consist either of one or several rows of bush or trees or of a
constructed fence or wall.
SEAT — A fixed seat in a theater, auditorium or meeting room or 24
linear inches of an installed bench or pew or, in the absence of these,
six square feet of floor space in the seating area.
SECURITY ILLUMINATION — Level of illumination in prescribed areas
of 0.5 footcandles.
SEMINUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than
the genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.[Added
8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898; amended 1-14-2003 by Ord. No.
2249]
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any
form of consideration:[Added 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898; amended
1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2249]
§ 359-49 ZONING § 359-49
359:913
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore
or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion-picture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual
encounter center or any combination thereof.[Added 8-9-1994 by
Ord. No. 1898; amended 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2249]
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments which
is planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit related in its
location, size and type of shops to the trade area that the unit serves.
SIDE YARD WIDTH — The prescribed minimum open space extending
from the side of any building or accessory structure to the side lot line
throughout the entire depth of the yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a
front line shall be deemed as a side line.
SIGN — Any surface, fabric or device bearing lettered, pictorial or
sculptured matter designed to convey information visually and exposed
to public view or any structure (including billboards, poster panels or
other graphic displays) designed to carry the above visual information.
SIGN FACE — The entire area on which graphic or written material
or information is placed for viewing in a single direction.[Added
8-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1764]
SITE — The area where municipal waste processing or disposal
facilities are operated. If the operator has a permit to conduct the
activities and is operating within the boundaries of the permit, the
"site" is equivalent to the permit area.[Added 7-21-1993 by Ord. No.
1843]
SOLID WASTE — Waste, including but not limited to municipal, residual
or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous materials.[Added 7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1843]
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — The male genitals in a state of
sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female
genitals.[Added 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898; amended 1-14-2003
by Ord. No. 2249]
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the
following:[Added 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898; amended 1-14-2003
by Ord. No. 2249]
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
(1)
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminude.
(2)
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
(1)
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
(2)
§ 359-49 § 359-49
359:914
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above.
STREET — A right-of-way intended primarily for vehicular traffic and
usually providing for utilities and pedestrian travel. A "street" may be
designated by other appropriate names, such as highway, thoroughfare,
boulevard, parkway, road, avenue, drive, lane or place.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the
land, including, in addition to buildings, billboards, carports, porches
and other building features, but not including sidewalks, drives, fences
and patios.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
division of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the division of land for
agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving
any new street or easement of access, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
conditions would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.[Added 7-9-1996
by Ord. No. 1988]
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — The increase in floor areas occupied by the business
by more than 25%, as the floor areas exist on the date of enactment
of this amendment.[Added 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898; amended
1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2249]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start or
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:[Added
7-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1988]
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Subsections (1) through (3) above.
(4)
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local Code
Enforcement Official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
§ 359-49 ZONING § 359-49
359:915
SWIMMING POOL — A container of water used for swimming or
bathing purposes of any depth or size if wholly or partially sunk beneath
adjacent ground level. If erected above ground, the same shall be
covered under the terms of this chapter only if it has at least one
dimension greater than 15 feet or is more than 36 inches in depth.
As herein defined, the term "swimming pool" shall be deemed to be a
structure.
TANDEM — A group of two or more arranged one behind the other or
used or acting in conjunction.[Added 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2220]
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to showing motion
pictures or for dramatic, dance, musical or other live
performances.[Added 8-10-1999 by Ord. No. 2118]
TOPOGRAPHIC RELIEF — The vertical distance between the highest
natural point on the proposed disposal area and the lowest natural
point on the proposed disposal area (e.g., the difference in elevation of
the highest natural point and the lowest natural point). A percentage
of this difference is added to the highest natural point to establish the
highest man-made elevation of the proposed disposal area at closure.
As detailed in § 359-33BB(13) of this chapter, the maximum allowable
additional topographic relief shall not exceed 100 feet.[Added
7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1843]
TOWNHOUSE — A row of three or more attached one-family dwellings,
separated by vertical party or lot line walls, and each having private
entrances.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:[Added
8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898; amended 1-14-2003 by Ord. No.
2249]
TWO-FAMILY HOUSE — A detached structure having accommodations
for and occupied by not more than two families.
USE — The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed
or intended or for which land or a building is or may be occupied or
maintained.
Any alterations of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
(1) The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
(2)
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.
(3)
§ 359-49 § 359-49
359:916
VARIANCE — An authorization to vary slightly from the strict
interpretation of the standards of this chapter which may be granted by
the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with law.
VEHICLE SALES AREA — The sale or leasing of automobiles, mobile
homes, trucks, recreational vehicles or farm equipment on a
predominantly open lot where no repair work except that which is
minor and incidental to the sale of vehicles is performed.
VEHICLE SALES ROOM — The sale or leasing of automobiles, mobile
homes, trucks, recreational vehicles or farm equipment within an
enclosed structure which may also include the servicing and
maintenance of such vehicles when conducted within a fully enclosed
structure.
VETERINARY CLINIC — A facility where animals are treated by a
licensed veterinarian but are not boarded.
YARD — An open space on a lot, other than a court, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, not occupied by a structure
or used for parking or storage, except as otherwise provided, and not
including any portion of a street or alley.
ZONING OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A document issued by the Zoning
Officer upon completion of the construction of a structure or change
in use of a structure or parcel of land or change of occupancy of a
structure and indicating that the use and structure are in compliance
with the ordinances of the Municipality having jurisdiction over the
location of such use or structure, that all conditions attached to the
granting of the zoning certificate have been met and that the structure
and land may be occupied and used for the purposes set forth in the
zoning permit.
ZONING PERMIT — A document issued by the Zoning Officer stating
that a proposed use or development will be in compliance with this
chapter and authorizing the applicant to proceed to obtain all required
building permits.
§ 359-49 ZONING § 359-49
359:917

ARTICLE VII
Sexually Oriented Businesses
[Added 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1898; amended in its entirety
1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2249]
§ 359-50. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses,
to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the
Municipality and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent
the continued deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the Municipality. The provisions of this article have
neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on
the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material.
§ 359-51. Classification.
Sexually oriented businesses are defined in Article VI, Definitions, and are
classified as follows:
§ 359-52. Permit required; qualifications; designated applicants.
A. Adult arcades.
B. Adult bookstores or adult video stores.
C. Adult cabarets.
D. Adult motels.
E. Adult motion-picture theaters; adult theaters.
F. Escort agencies.
G. Nude model studios.
H. Sexual encounter centers.
A. Any person who operates a sexually oriented business without a valid
permit issued by the Municipality is guilty of a violation of this chapter.
B. An application for a permit to operate a sexually oriented business must
be made on a form provided by the Zoning Officer. The application must
be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the floor plan and plot
plan configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor
space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or
§ 359-50 ZONING § 359-52
359:919
§ 359-53. Issuance or denial of permit; posting; certification of
compliance.
drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
C. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
article and the premises must be inspected and found to be in
compliance with applicable laws or ordinances by the Zoning Officer,
the Building Official and the Fire Official.
D. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, that person must sign the application for a permit as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is other than an individual, each individual who has a tenpercent
or greater interest in the business must sign the application for
a permit as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually
oriented business or as the entity which wishes to operate such a
business, each individual having a direct or indirect interest of 10% or
greater in the corporation must sign the application for a permit as
applicant.
E. The fact a person possesses other types of municipal permits does not
exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining a sexually
oriented business permit.
A. The Zoning Officer shall notify the applicant within 30 days after
receipt of an application that the Zoning Official intends to approve or
disapprove the application. The Zoning Official shall notify the
applicant of an intent to disapprove the application only if one or more
of the following is found to be true:
(1) Any individual set forth on the application that is under 18 years of
age.
(2) An application or an applicant's spouse is overdue in the payment
to the Municipality of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed
against him or imposed upon him in relation to a sexually oriented
business.
(3) An applicant has provided false or misleading information on the
application form or has failed to provide a complete application.
(4) An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a
permit by the Municipality to operate a sexually oriented business
within the preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked
within the preceding 12 months.
(5) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have
been disapproved by the Zoning Officer, the Building Official and/or
§ 359-52 § 359-53
359:920
the Fire Official as not being in compliance with applicable laws
and ordinances.
(6) The permit fee required by this article has not been paid.
(7) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with any of the provisions of this article.
(8) An individual applicant or any individual holding a direct or indirect
interest of more than 10% of a corporate applicant, or any of the
officers and directors of a corporate applicant, if the applicant is a
corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if
the application is a partnership; or the manager or other person in
charge of the operation of the applicant's business, has or have
been convicted of and offense involving sexual misconduct within
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including, but not limited to,
prostitution, obscenity and possession of child pornography, or
convicted of any offense in any jurisdiction other than the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that would have constituted an
offense involving sexual misconduct if committed within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. In order for approval to be denied
pursuant to this subsection, the person or persons' conviction or
released in connection with the sexual misconduct offense must
have occurred within two years of the date of application in the
event of a misdemeanor and within five years of the date of
application in the event of a felony.
B. The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of
the sexually oriented business. The permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented
business so that it may be easily read at any time.
C. The Zoning Officer, the Building Official and Fire Official shall complete
their certification that the premises are in compliance or not in
compliance within 20 days of receipt of the application by the Zoning
Officer. The certifications shall be promptly presented by the Zoning
Officer. To the extent that the Zoning Officer, the Building Official, and
the Fire Official fail to complete their certification for reasons other
than denial of access by the applicant, the failure to complete the
certification cannot be used as a basis to deny a certification. Rather,
the premises will be deemed to be in compliance with applicable laws
and ordinances.
D. In the event the Zoning Officer issues a notice of intent to deny the
application, the notice shall state the reason or reasons giving rise to
the Zoning Officer's determination of an intent to deny and shall
provide the applicant with the opportunity to demand a hearing before
the Zoning Hearing Board to dispute the Zoning Officer's findings. The
demand for hearing shall be made in writing to the Zoning Official
within 10 days of issuance of the intent to deny. If the applicant fails to
§ 359-53 ZONING § 359-53
359:921
§ 359-54. Fees.
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is $500.
§ 359-55. Inspection.
§ 359-56. Expiration of permit; denial of renewal.
demand a hearing on the intent to deny within 10 days after issuance of
the intent to deny by the Zoning Officer, the application shall be deemed
denied. In the event the applicant timely requests a hearing before the
Zoning Hearing Board, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for
the next regularly scheduled Zoning Hearing Board meeting occurring
at least 10 days after the demand for hearing. In the event there
are no regularly scheduled Zoning Hearing Board meetings, a hearing
shall be scheduled no less than 30 days following issuance of the
demand for hearing. At the hearing, the applicant and the Municipality
shall submit whatever information or evidence either party has to
substantiate their respective positions. At the conclusion of the hearing,
the Zoning Hearing Board shall either approve or disapprove the
application based on the information received at the hearing. The
decision either approving or disapproving the application shall be
rendered within 90 days after the application is filed with the Zoning
Officer and if disapproved shall contain a brief explanation setting
forth the reasons for disapproval. If no decision is rendered on the
application within 90 days after receipt of the application, the
application shall be deemed approved and the permit shall be deemed
to have been granted immediately. The applicant may agree to extend
the time frames as set forth herein by agreement to extend in writing.
A. An applicant, or permittee, shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, Building Official, Fire Official, Zoning Officer, or other
Municipal departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a
sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with
the law, at any time that the sexually oriented business is occupied or
open for business. In the event the business has not yet opened for
regular business, the applicant or permittee shall permit the said
representatives access to inspect the premises at mutually convenient
times during regular business hours (9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.) within five
days of request to inspect.
B. A person who operates or intends to operate a sexually oriented
business or his agent or employee violates this Zoning Chapter if he
refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is
occupied or open for business or within five days of request if not yet
regularly open for business.
A. Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in § 359-53.
Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the
§ 359-53 § 359-56
359:922
§ 359-57. Suspension of permit.
The Zoning Officer shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed 30 days
if he determines that a permittee or an employee of a permittee has:
§ 359-58. Revocation of permit; term; appeal.
expiration date and, when made less than 30 days before the expiration
date, the pendency of the application will not prevent the expiration of
the permit.
B. If the renewal of a license is denied, the applicant shall not be issued a
permit for one year from the date of denial, except that after 90 days
have elapsed since the date of denial, the applicant may be granted a
permit if the Zoning Officer finds that the basis for denial of the renewal
permit has been corrected or abated.
A. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article;
B. Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually
oriented business premises or engaged in the use of illegal narcotics;
C. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter;
D. Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises;
E. Failed to man managers' stations and/or maintain viewing rooms as set
forth in § 359-61.
A. The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit if a cause of suspension set
forth in § 359-57 occurs and the permit has been suspended within the
preceding 12 months.
B. The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit if he determines that:
(1) A permittee, or any of the persons specified in § 359-53A(8), is or
has been convicted of the offenses specified in § 359-53A(8);
(2) A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the Municipality during the application process;
(3) A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
(4) A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;
(5) A permittee or an employee of a permittee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the
permittee's permit was suspended;
§ 359-56 ZONING § 359-58
359:923
§ 359-59. Transfer of permit.
A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another person. A permittee
shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
permit at any place other than the address designated in the application.
§ 359-60. Location of sexually oriented businesses.
(6) A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation or other explicit sexual conduct to occur in or on the
permitted premises; or
(7) A permittee is delinquent in payment to the Municipality or state of
any taxes or fees relating to sexually oriented business.
C. When the Zoning Officer revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue
for one year, and the permittee shall not be issued a sexually oriented
business permit for one year from the date revocation became effective,
except that if the revocation is pursuant to Subsection B(1) above, the
revocation shall be effective for two years in the event of a
misdemeanor or five years in the case of a felony.
D. After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application,
or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or licensee or
permittee shall have the right to appeal said action and to seek prompt
judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
A. A person is guilty of a violation of this Zoning Chapter if he operates or
causes to be operated a sexually oriented business outside of the
district in which a sexually oriented business is a conditional use. No
sexually oriented businesses shall be located outside a district in which
a sexually oriented business is a conditional use. Sexually oriented
businesses, as defined herein, shall be permitted in an M-2 Industrial
Zoning District, as a conditional use.
B. A person is guilty of a violation of this Zoning Chapter if he operates or
causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of:
(1) A church;
(2) A public or private pre-elementary, elementary, or secondary
school;
(3) A public library;
(4) A child-care facility or nursery school; and
(5) A public park adjacent to any residential district.
C. A person is guilty of a violation of this Zoning Chapter if he causes or
permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or
§ 359-58 § 359-60
359:924
§ 359-61. Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit
films or videos.
transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within
3,000 feet of another sexually oriented business.
D. A person is guilty of a violation of this chapter if he causes or permits
the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually
oriented business in the same building, structure or portion thereof; or
the increase of floor areas of any sexually oriented business in any
building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually
oriented business.
E. For the purpose of this article, measurement shall be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted to the
nearest property line of the premises of a church, public or private preelementary,
elementary or secondary school, public library, child-care
facility or nursery school or to the nearest boundary of an affected
public park.
F. For purposes of Subsection C of this section, the distance between any
two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest
exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
G. Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the date of
enactment of this article that is in violation of Subsections A through F
of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such
nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or
altered, except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. In the
event that two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 3,000
feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually
oriented business which was first established and continually operating
at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established
business is nonconforming.
H. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the
grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business permit, of a church,
public or private pre-elementary, elementary or secondary school,
public library, child-care facility, nursery school or public park within
1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only
to the renewal of a valid permit and does not apply when an application
for a permit is submitted after a permit has expired or has been
revoked.
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space a film or
§ 359-60 ZONING § 359-61
359:925
videocassette or other video or other image production or reproduction
which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) The application for a permit to operate a sexually oriented business
shall be accompanied by a floor plan and plot plan diagram of the
premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or
more manager's stations, the location of all viewing rooms,
partitions and doors and the location of all overhead lighting
fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which
patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed
32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the
place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted.
A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram
should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all
areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus
six inches. The Zoning Officer may waive the foregoing diagram for
renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the
premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station
may be made without the prior approval of the Zoning Officer or
designee.
(4) It is the duty of the owners and operators of the premises to ensure
that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each
manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose, excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain
video reproduction or viewing equipment. If the premises has two
or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the
premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron
is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by
direct line of sight from the manager's stations.
(6) It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall also be
the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to
ensure that the view as specified in Subsection A(5) remains
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or
§ 359-61 § 359-61
359:926
§ 359-62. Exemptions.
It is a defense to prosecution under §§ 359-53 and 359-60 that a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
§ 359-63. Injunction.
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business without a valid permit or in violation of this article is subject to an
action in equity or a suit for injunction as well as citations for violations of
this Zoning Chapter.
other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is
permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this section.
(7) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
time. No connections or openings to an adjoining viewing room
shall be permitted.
(8) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle
as measured at the floor level.
(9) It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall also be
the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to
ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all
times that any patron is present in the premises.
B. A person having a duty under Subsection A(1) through (9) is guilty of a
violation of this Zoning Chapter if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
A. By a proprietary school, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;
B. By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
C. In a structure:
(1) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for
viewing; and
(2) Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class; and
(3) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
§ 359-61 ZONING § 359-64
359:927
§ 359-64. Existing sexually oriented businesses.
Any existing business that would qualify under this article shall have one
year from the time of enactment to come into compliance with this article.
§ 359-65. Decisions of Zoning Officer.
With exception of the issuance of the sexually oriented business permit
which appeal/hearing procedure is set forth in § 359-53 of this article,
any decision of the Zoning Officer made under any of the provisions set
forth herein shall be immediately appealable to the Zoning Hearing Board.
Appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board shall be made within 10 days of
the date of the decision of the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Hearing Board
shall thereafter consider the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting
occurring at least 10 days after the notice of appeal or in the event there are
no regularly scheduled meetings then within the next 30 days of the notice
of appeal. The Zoning Hearing Board shall render a decision to affirm or
override the decision of the Zoning Officer within 60 days after receipt of
the notice of appeal. In the event no decision is rendered within 60 days of
receipt of the notice of appeal, the decision of the Zoning Officer shall be
deemed to be overruled. The business may continue in operation pending
the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 359-66. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation and/or other entity who or which shall be convicted
of a violation of any of the provisions of this article before any District
Magistrate or other court of competent jurisdiction shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $500 per violation, per day, and cost of
prosecution, and who fails to correct any violation of this article within 90
days from the date of said conviction shall be subject to revocation of any
and all applicable permits and approvals issued by the governing body of
the Municipality of Monroeville.
§ 359-67. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable and if any section, sentence,
clause, part or provision hereof shall be held illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of
the court shall not affect the remaining sections, sentences, clauses, parts
or provisions of this article. It is hereby declared to is the intent of the
Council that this article would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or provision had not been
included herein.
§ 359-64 § 359-67
359:928
APPENDIX
Chapter A363
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television rate ordinances — See Ch.
169.
Chapter A364
EMPLOYEE SAFETY MANUAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 97.
Chapter A365
TELEPHONE FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 320.
§ A365-1. Erection of poles; underground system.
All poles erected by the Bell Telephone Company shall extend not less than
20 feet above the surface of the ground and shall be so located as in no way
to interfere with the safety or convenience of persons traveling on or over
streets, alleys and highways, and, in the installation and maintenance of its
underground system, said company shall not open or encumber more of any
street, alley or highway than will be necessary to enable it to perform the
work with proper economy and efficiency.
§ A365-2. Plan approval required.
Whenever said company shall desire to erect, lay down or construct any
booths, posts, poles, conduits or manholes. It shall present a plan or plans
showing the location, number and size thereof to the Secretary of the
Municipality, who shall approve or disapprove the same as to location,
which plan or plans, or copy thereof, with approval endorsed thereon, shall
be filed with the Municipal Secretary before any work shown thereon is
started. In case said Secretary disapproves any plan or plans, he shall
designate thereon, by the use of appropriate words or marks, or both, some
other location suitable for the purposes of said company.
§ 359-67 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A365-3
A363:929
§ A365-3. Supervision of work.
The erection of booths and poles and the construction of conduits and
manholes under the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to the
supervision of the Secretary of the Municipality, and said company shall
replace and properly relay that portion of any sidewalk or street pavement
which may have been disposed or damaged by it in the construction and
maintenance of its system.
§ A365-4. Wires for use by Municipality.
Space on the poles erected and in the conduit constructed under the
provisions of this ordinance may be used, free of charge, for the purpose
of carrying wires of any fire alarm or police telegraph system owned and
maintained by said Municipality, provided that said wires are placed and
maintained in such a manner as may be prescribed by said company and
that no use shall be made of such space by said Municipality which will
result in interfering with or impairing the operation or use of said
company's property or service or will endanger its property or employees.
§ A365-5. Maintenance of apparatus.
Said company shall maintain all posts, poles, booths, telephones, cables,
wires, conduits, ducts, mains, pipes, manholes and all other apparatus
erected or constructed under the provisions of this ordinance in good and
safe order and condition and shall at all times fully indemnify, protect
and save harmless said Municipality from and against all actions, claims,
suits, damages and charges and against all loss and necessary expenditures
arising from the erection, construction and maintenance of its system or
from its neglect or failure to maintain said apparatus in good and safe order
and condition.
§ A365-6. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this ordinance contained shall be construed to grant similar
privileges to other companies nor to conflict with the powers and
jurisdiction now or hereafter vested by law in the Pennsylvania Department
of Highways or its successors over certain highways or with any rules and
regulations issued from time to time by said Department or its successors
governing the use of such highways by public service corporations.
§ A365-7. Compliance with other provisions required.
Said company shall be governed by all legal ordinances of a general nature
affecting its operations in the Municipality of Monroeville that are now
in force and enacted under and by virtue of the police powers of said
Municipality or the laws of the state, as well as all such ordinances
hereafter so enacted, provided that the terms, conditions and regulations
prescribed therein do not impair or abridge the permission contained in this
ordinance.
§ A365-3 § A365-8
A365:930
§ A365-8. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect at the expiration of 30 days from the date
when a copy thereof shall have been filed in the office of the Secretary of the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, provided that if the Commission
shall, prior to the expiration of such period, institute a proceeding under
the provisions of § 911 of the Public Utility Law affecting its validity, this
ordinance shall become effective only upon approval by said Commission.
§ A365-9. Acceptance of terms.
Said company shall, under its seal and by its proper officers, within 60 days
from the date of the final enactment of this ordinance, signify in writing
its acceptance of all terms, conditions, regulations and restrictions herein
contained, in default of which this ordinance shall become null and void and
of no effect.
§ A365-10. Payment of advertising and printing fees.
All legal advertising or printing fees incurred by the Municipality of
Monroeville, County of Allegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in
connection with the passage of this ordinance shall be paid by said
company.
Chapter A366
EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 43.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 97.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 116.
DISPOSITION LIST
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2357 1-10-2006 Activities of Council and
Mayor and expense
reimbursements
Ch. 6
2358 Zoning amendment Vetoed by Mayor
2359 2-14-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 194
§ A365-8 EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK § DL-1
A366:931
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2360 2-14-2006 Salaries and Compensation
amendment
NCM (see Ch. 123)
2361 3-14-2006 Civil Service Commission
and rules for certification of
police officers
Ch. 21
2362 3-14-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 194
2363 4-11-2006 Police Department Collective
Bargaining Agreement
amendment
Ch. 97, Art. II
2364 4-11-2006 Police pension plan Ch. 93, Art. I
2365 4-11-2006 Fire lanes Ch. 202
2366 4-11-2006 2006 budget fund transfers NCM
2367 5-9-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2368 5-9-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 359
2369 5-9-2006 Emergency and municipal
services tax amendment
Ch. 334, Art. II
2370 5-9-2006 Rights-of-way Ch. 304
2371 5-9-2006 Pensions: medical and life
insurance
Ch. 93, Art. III
2372 6-13-2006 Budget transfer of funds NCM
2373 7-11-2006 Benefits of exempt and
nonexempt employees
amendment
Ch. 97, Art. VIII
2374 8-8-2006 Fees: Cost of collections Ch. 194, Art. II
2375 8-8-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
New legislation
pending; see Ch. 352
2376 9-12-2006 Street vacation NCM
2377 9-12-2006 Agreement to purchase fire
equipment and provide
financial assistance to
volunteer fire departments
NCM
2378 11-14-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 194
2379 11-14-2006 Taxation: realty transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 334, Art. VI
2380 12-12-2006 Budget transfer of funds NCM
2381 12-12-2006 2007 Budget NCM
2382 12-12-2006 Tax reenactment NCM
2383 12-12-2006 Tax rate 2007 NCM
§ DL-1 § DL-1
A366:932
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2384 12-12-2006 Salaries NCM
2385 12-12-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 194
2386 12-21-2006 Collective bargaining
agreement
NCM
2387 2-13-2007 Electronic filing of local
payroll withholding taxes
Ch. 334, Art. XV
2388 2-13-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
NLP; see Ch. 352
2389 2-13-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
NLP; see Ch. 352
2390 2-13-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
NLP; see Ch. 352
2391 2-13-2007 Numbering of buildings
repealed; property
maintenance
Ch. 166, reference
only; Ch. 290
2392 3-13-2007 Business tax amendment Ch. 334, Art. III
2393 5-8-2007 Collective bargaining
agreement
NCM
2394 6-12-25007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
NLP; see Ch. 352
2395 6-12-2007 Collective bargaining
agreement
NCM
2396 7-10-2007 Denial of rezoning
application
NCM
2397 8-14-2007 Denial of OAS Special Use/
Overlay Zoning District
NCM
2398 10-9-2007 Bond NCM
2399 11-13-2007 Local services tax Ch. 334, Art. II
2400 11-13-2007 Bond NCM
2401 11-13-2007 Cable franchise agreement NCM; see Ch. A363
2402 11-13-2007 Street acceptance NCM
2403 12-11-2007 Budget transfer of funds NCM
2404 12-11-2007 2008 Budget NCM
2405 12-11-2007 Fees Ch. 194
2406 12-11-2007 Tax rate 2008 NCM
2407 12-11-2007 Tax reenactment NCM
2408 12-14-2007 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK § DL-1
A366:933
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2409 12-11-2007 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 6
2410 12-11-2007 Collective bargaining
agreement
NCM
2411 12-11-2007 Redevelopment Authority Ch.
2412 1-8-2008 Realty transfer tax Ch. 334, Art. VI
2413 2-12-2008 Special events Ch. 317
2414 2-12-2008 Noise amendment Ch. 263
2415 2-12-2008 Budget amendment NCM
2416 2-12-2008 Civil Service Commission
and rules for certification of
police officers amendment
Ch. 21
2417 3-11-2008 Monroeville Growth Alliance
repealed
Ch. 33, Art. II,
reference only
2418 3-11-2008 Budget amendment NCM
2419 3-11-2008 Residential visitability tax
credit program
Ch. 334, Art. XV
2420 5-13-2008 Hospital Authority repealer Ch. 16, Art. I,
reference only
2421 5-13-2008 Pensions: medical and life
insurance amendment
Ch. 93, Art. III
2422 5-13-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
NLP; see Ch. 352
2423
2424
2425 8-12-2008 Greater Monroeville
Convention and Visitors
Bureau Interim Board
Ch. 23
2426 8-12-2008 Agreement to purchase fire
equipment and provide
financial assistance to
volunteer fire departments
amendment
NCM
2429 9-25-2008 Street acceptance NCM
§ DL-1 § DL-1
A366:934

ZONING
 359 Attachment 1:1 08 - 01 - 2006
359 Attachment 1
Municipality of Monroeville
Table 201 A
Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area Requirements
District
S-1
Special
Conservancy
S
Conservancy
R-1
One-family
residential
R-2
One-family
residential
Permitted Uses Agriculture
Cemetery
Nature preserve
Parks and
recreation
Accessory uses
Agriculture
Cemetery
Nature preserve
One-family
residential
Parks and
recreation
Accessory uses
Agriculture
One-family
residential
Parks and
recreation
Accessory uses
Agriculture
One-family
residential
Parks and
recreation
Accessory uses
Conditional Uses Golf course
Municipal waste –
landfills
Major excavation
Major timbering
and logging
operation
Public building
Stable
Utility substation
Church and school
Golf course
Group dwelling A
Heliport
Major excavation
Major timbering
and logging
operation
Public building
Public school
Stable
Utility substation
Church and school
Dependent
dwelling
Golf course
Group dwelling A
Major excavation
Major timbering
and logging
operation
Public building
Public school
Recreation club
Utility substation
Church and school
Dependent
dwelling
Golf course
Group dwelling A
Major excavation
Major timbering
and logging
operation
Public building
Public school
Recreation club
Utility substation
Planned
Developments
 Planned residential
development
Planned residential
development
Minimum lot area 20,000 square feet 20,000 square feet 10,000 square feet 7,500 square feet
Minimum lot width 100 feet 100 feet 75 feet 60 feet
Minimum lot
frontage
60 feet 60 feet 50 feet 40 feet
Minimum front
yard
30 feet 30 feet 30 feet 30 feet
Minimum side yard 15 feet 15 feet 15 feet 10 feet
Minimum rear yard 40 feet 40 feet 40 feet 40 feet
Maximum height 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 
MONROEVILLE CODE
 359 Attachment 1:2 08 - 01 - 2006
Table 201 B
Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area Requirements
District
R-2T
One-family
residential
R-3
One-family
residential
R-4
Multi-Family
Residential
R-5
Multi-Family
Residential
Permitted Uses Agriculture
One-family
residential
Parks and
recreation
Townhouses
Accessory uses
Agriculture
Garden apartments
One-family
residential
Parks and
recreation
Townhouses
Two-family house
Accessory uses
Agriculture
Garden apartments
One-family
residential
Parks and
recreation
Townhouses
Two-family house
Accessory uses
Apartments
Garden apartments
Single-family
residential
Townhouses
Two-family house
Parks and
recreation
Accessory uses
Conditional Uses Child-care center
Church and school
Dependent
dwelling
Group dwelling A
Major excavation
Major timbering
and logging
operation
Public building
Public school
Recreation club
Utility substation
Child-care center
Church and school
Dependent
dwelling
Golf course
Group dwelling B
Group dwelling C
Major excavation
Major timbering
and logging
operation
Membership club
Public building
Public school
Recreation club
Utility substation
Apartments
Child-care center
Church and school
Group dwelling B
Group dwelling C
Major excavation
Membership club
Nursing home
Personal Care
Home
Personal Care
Home
Public building
Public school
Recreation club
Utility substation
Child-care center
Church and school
Group dwelling C
Hospital
Major excavation
Major timbering
and logging
operation
Membership club
Nursing home
Personal care home
Public building
Public school
Recreation club
Utility substation
Planned
Developments
Planned residential
development
Planned residential
development
Planned residential
development
Planned residential
development
Minimum lot area 7,500 square feet 7,500 square feet 7,500 square feet 10,000 sq. ft
Minimum lot width 60 feet 60 feet 60 feet 75 feet
Minimum lot
frontage
40 feet 40 feet 40 feet 60 feet
Minimum front
yard
30 feet 30 feet 30 feet 40 feet
Minimum side yard 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet 20 feet
Minimum rear yard 40 feet 40 feet 40 feet 40 feet
Maximum height 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 100 feet 
ZONING
 359 Attachment 1:3 08 - 01 - 2006
Table 201 C
Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area Requirements
District
C-1
Shopping Commercial
C-2
Business Commercial
C-3
Commercial
Permitted Uses Banks
Limited office
Local restaurant
Local retail shop
Personal services
Amusement Use
Auditorium
Banks
Business college
Business services
Club
Convention center
Department store
Food services
Funeral home
Medical clinic
Nurseries
Offices
Personal services
Restaurant, bar
Retail stores
Shopping center
Studio
Theater
Vehicle salesroom
Veterinary clinic
Accessory uses
Amusement use
Banks
Business college
Business services
Club
Funeral home
Local retail shop
Medical clinic
Nurseries
Offices
Personal services
Restaurant, bar
Studio
Vehicle salesroom
Veterinary clinic
Accessory uses
Conditional Uses Child-care center
Commercial commuter
lot
Major excavation
Major timbering and
logging operation
Public Use
Retail Store
Utility substation
Billboards
Church
Commercial
communication tower
Commercial
communication antenna
Commercial commuter
lot
Drive-in restaurant
Drive-in theater
Gas station
Heliport
Hotel
Major excavation
Major timbering and
logging operation
Public use
Utility substation
Vehicle sales area
Vehicle services
Child-care center
Church
Commercial commuter
lot
Drive-in restaurant
Drive-in theater
Gas station
Major excavation
Major timbering and
logging operation
Public use
Retail store
Shopping center
Utility substation
Vehicle sales area
Vehicle services
Planned Developments Planned group unit Planned group unit Planned group unit
Minimum front yard 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet
Minimum side yard 15 feet 15 feet 15 feet
Minimum rear yard 0 feet 0 feet 20 feet
Maximum height 30 feet 45 feet 30 feet
Building setback 40 feet 40 feet 40 feet 
MONROEVILLE CODE
 359 Attachment 1:4 08 - 01 - 2006
Table 201 D
Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area Requirements
District
L
Special Use
M-1
Planned Industrial
M-2
Industrial
Permitted Uses Agriculture
Office
Research laboratory
Accessory uses
Agriculture
Ancillary cafeteria
Distribution center
Light manufacturing
Offices
Research laboratory
Warehousing
Accessory uses
Agriculture
Ancillary cafeteria
Automobile salvage
Brewery
Contractors yard
Distribution center
Grain elevator
Light manufacturing
Nurseries
Offices
Quarry, stone mill
Research laboratory
Trade school
Utility substation
Vehicle sales area
Warehousing
Accessory uses
Conditional Uses Church
Community Use
Heliport
Hospital
Major excavation
Major timbering and
logging operation
Nursing home
Public Use
Utility substation
Billboards
Commercial
communication tower
Commercial
communication antenna
Community Use
Freight terminal
Gas station
Personal care home
Hospital
Major excavation
Major timbering and
logging operation
Manufacturing
Public use
Utility substation
Vehicle services
Billboards
Commercial
communication tower
Commercial
communication antenna
Heliport
Major excavation
Major timbering and
logging operation
Heliport
Manufacturing
Public use
Sexually oriented
business
Vehicle services
Planned Developments Planned group unit Planned group unit Planned group unit
Minimum front yard 35 feet 40 feet 30 feet
Minimum side yard 15 feet 20 feet 20 feet
Minimum rear yard 10 feet 20 feet 10 feet
Maximum height 45 feet 45 feet 85 feet
Building setback 35 feet 40 feet 30 feet 
ZONING
 359 Attachment 1:5 08 - 01 - 2006
Table 201
Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area Requirements
LIST OF AMENDMENTS
The following ordinances have enacted amendments to former Schedule A: Permitted and
Conditional Uses, Parts 1 and 2, and former Schedule B: Yard and Area Requirements, Parts 1
and 2, and to current Table 201, Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area Requirements,
Parts A through D.
Ordinance
Number Date of Adoption
1571 6-9-1987
1829 2-9-1993
1886 5-11-1994
1898 8-9-1994
1952 8-18-1995
1995 10-8-1996
2220 3-12-2002
2249 1-14-2003
2287 1-13-2004
2368 5-9-2006 

ZONING
 359 Attachment 1:1 08 - 01 - 2006
359 Attachment 1
Municipality of Monroeville
Zone standards

District
S-1
Special
Conservancy
S-Conservancy
R-1
One-family
residential
R-2
One-family
residential
Minimum lot area 20,000 square feet 20,000 square feet 10,000 square feet 7,500 square feet
Minimum lot width 100 feet 100 feet 75 feet 60 feet
Minimum lot
frontage
60 feet 60 feet 50 feet 40 feet
Minimum front
yard
30 feet 30 feet 30 feet 30 feet
Minimum side yard 15 feet 15 feet 15 feet 10 feet
Minimum rear yard 40 feet 40 feet 40 feet 40 feet
Maximum height 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 
MONROEVILLE CODE
 359 Attachment 1:2 08 - 01 - 2006

Zone standards
District
R-2T
One-family
residential
R-3
One-family
residential
R-4
Multi-Family
Residential
R-5
Multi-Family
Residential
Minimum lot area 7,500 square feet 7,500 square feet 7,500 square feet 10,000 sq. ft
Minimum lot width 60 feet 60 feet 60 feet 75 feet
Minimum lot
frontage
40 feet 40 feet 40 feet 60 feet
Minimum front
yard
30 feet 30 feet 30 feet 40 feet
Minimum side yard 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet 20 feet
Minimum rear yard 40 feet 40 feet 40 feet 40 feet
Maximum height 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 100 feet 
ZONING
 359 Attachment 1:3 08 - 01 - 2006

Zone standards
District
C-1
Shopping Commercial
C-2
Business Commercial
C-3
Commercial
Planned Developments Planned group unit Planned group unit Planned group unit
Minimum front yard 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet
Minimum side yard 15 feet 15 feet 15 feet
Minimum rear yard 0 feet 0 feet 20 feet
Maximum height 30 feet 45 feet 30 feet
Building setback 40 feet 40 feet 40 feet 
MONROEVILLE CODE
 359 Attachment 1:4 08 - 01 - 2006

Zone standards
District
L
Special Use
M-1
Planned Industrial
M-2
Industrial
Permitted Uses Agriculture
Office
Research laboratory
Accessory uses
Agriculture
Ancillary cafeteria
Distribution center
Light manufacturing
Offices
Research laboratory
Warehousing
Accessory uses
Agriculture
Ancillary cafeteria
Automobile salvage
Brewery
Contractors yard
Distribution center
Grain elevator
Light manufacturing
Nurseries
Offices
Quarry, stone mill
Research laboratory
Trade school
Utility substation
Vehicle sales area
Warehousing
Accessory uses
Conditional Uses Church
Community Use
Heliport
Hospital
Major excavation
Major timbering and
logging operation
Nursing home
Public Use
Utility substation
Billboards
Commercial
communication tower
Commercial
communication antenna
Community Use
Freight terminal
Gas station
Personal care home
Hospital
Major excavation
Major timbering and
logging operation
Manufacturing
Public use
Utility substation
Vehicle services
Billboards
Commercial
communication tower
Commercial
communication antenna
Heliport
Major excavation
Major timbering and
logging operation
Heliport
Manufacturing
Public use
Sexually oriented
business
Vehicle services
Planned Developments Planned group unit Planned group unit Planned group unit
Minimum front yard 35 feet 40 feet 30 feet
Minimum side yard 15 feet 20 feet 20 feet
Minimum rear yard 10 feet 20 feet 10 feet
Maximum height 45 feet 45 feet 85 feet
Building setback 35 feet 40 feet 30 feet 
ZONING
 359 Attachment 1:5 08 - 01 - 2006
Table 201
Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area Requirements
LIST OF AMENDMENTS
The following ordinances have enacted amendments to former Schedule A: Permitted and
Conditional Uses, Parts 1 and 2, and former Schedule B: Yard and Area Requirements, Parts 1
and 2, and to current Table 201, Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, Yard and Area Requirements,
Parts A through D.
Ordinance
Number Date of Adoption
1571 6-9-1987
1829 2-9-1993
1886 5-11-1994
1898 8-9-1994
1952 8-18-1995
1995 10-8-1996
2220 3-12-2002
2249 1-14-2003
2287 1-13-2004
2368 5-9-2006 