Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 104]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) [53 P.S. § 66601(d)] of the Second Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Middlesex, County of Butler, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections
by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through
175, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained
and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Middlesex, which
shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of
Middlesex," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Middlesex, and it is the intention
of said Board of Supervisors that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only
such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall
be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Township of Middlesex which
is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain
in full force and effect.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 1-19-2005.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement. This specifically includes intergovernmental cooperation
agreements.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
§ 1-4 MIDDLESEX CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. The current Zoning Ordinance of the Township, and any amendments
thereto, including any ordinance concerning changes and amendments
to the Zoning Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees, and amendments thereto.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Township,
except as subsequently legislated by resolution.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Township for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule1 A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Board of Supervisors, and it
is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 9-21-2005 by Ord. No.
104." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had
previously been formally amended to read as such. All such changes
and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of
the Code specified in § 1-15.
C. Nomenclature.
(1) Throughout the Code, references to the following are updated as
indicated:
(a) "Department of Environmental Resources" or "DER" to
"Department of Environmental Protection" or "DEP."
(b) "Department of Community Affairs" or "DCA" to "Department
of Community and Economic Development" or "DCED."
(c) "District Magistrate" or "Justice of the Peace" to "District
Justice."
(2) In Ch. 84, "Federal Emergency Management Administration" and
"Federal Emergency Management Association" are changed to
"Federal Emergency Management Agency."
D. Penalties.
(1) Sections 53-5, 57-3A, 68-5, 84-15B, 101-8C, 128-5, 134-11A,
134-21, 140-9A and B, 144-34A, 147-6, 147-14 and 168-6 are added
or amended, in whole or in part, to provide that the penalty
provision shall be at the summary enforcement level, as follows:
"Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter
shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a
District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In
default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of
this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense."
(2) Section 155-12 is amended, in whole or in part, to provide that the
penalty provision shall be at the civil enforcement level, as follows:
"Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter
shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township before a District Justice,
pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the Township in the
enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed until
the date of the determination of the violation by the District Justice.
If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
§ 1-6 MIDDLESEX CODE § 1-6
1:6
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy shall
be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute
a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of
the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief,
including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:7
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction of the Code in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. The enactment and application of this
ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction, the
availability of at least one copy of the Code for inspection by the public and
the filing of an attested copy of this ordinance with the county, as required
by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance, upon being found liable therefor
in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed
until the date of the determination of the violation by the District Justice
and/or Court. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
§ 1-11 MIDDLESEX CODE § 1-14
1:8
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after September 21, 2005.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 28. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 40.
§ 1-15 MIDDLESEX CODE § 1-15
4:10
ARTICLE I
Reorganization
[Adopted 12-2-1992 by Ord. No. 59]
§ 4-1. Statutory authority.2
Section 1301 of the Second Class Township Code, Act of May 1, 1933 (P.L.
103, No. 69), 53 P.S. § 66301, as reenacted and amended, authorizes the
creation of the office of Township Manager and provides that the office of
Township Manager shall not be incompatible with the office of Township
Secretary, Township Treasurer, or any other Township office or employment,
except that of Supervisor. 53 P.S. § 65607 authorizes the Township
Supervisors to employ or hire such persons as are necessary for the general
conduct of the business of the Township.
§ 4-2. Elimination and establishment of positions; chain of
command.
A. Elimination of Assistant Secretary and Zoning Officer. The positions of
Assistant Secretary and Zoning Officer shall be eliminated effective the
31st day of December 1992, and the current occupants of those
positions shall be terminated effective 12:00 midnight, December 31,
1992.3
B. Creation of position of Secretary to Township Manager.
(1) The position of Secretary to Township Manager is hereby created
for Middlesex Township.
(2) The position of Secretary to Township Manager shall be that of an
at-will employee.
(3) The compensation of the Secretary to Township Manager shall be
as established by the Board of Supervisors and shall be paid out of
the General Fund of the Township. Compensation may be changed
by resolution from time to time at the discretion of the Board of
Supervisors.4
(4) The Secretary to Township Manager shall serve under the
supervision of the Township Manager and shall perform such duties
as are assigned by the Township Manager and such other duties as
may be determined by the Board of Supervisors in the job
description for this position.
C. Chain of command.
(1) The Township Manager shall report directly to the Board of
Supervisors.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 4-1 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 4-2
4:11
(2) The Police Chief, Secretary to Township Manager, and Roadmaster
shall report directly to the Township Manager and/or to the
Supervisors, as the Supervisors may direct.5
5. Editor's Note: The Reorganizational Chart which was originally included at the end of this
article is on file in the Township offices.
§ 4-2 MIDDLESEX CODE § 4-2
4:12
ARTICLE II
Manager
[Adopted 12-2-1992 by Ord. No. 60]
§ 4-3. Statutory authority.6
Section 1301 of the Second Class Township Code,7 Act of May 1, 1933 (P.L.
103, No. 69), reenacted and amended July 10, 1947 (P.L. 1481, No. 567),
and reenacted and amended June 27, 1973 (P.L. 74, No. 331), as amended,
authorizes the creation of the office of Township Manager.
§ 4-4. Creation of office.
The office of Township Manager is hereby created by and for Middlesex
Township.
§ 4-5. Appointment.
The Manager shall be appointed for a definite or an indefinite term by
a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors. The Manager shall, unless
removed by the Board of Supervisors, or unless such person resigns, serve
until his successor is appointed and qualified. The Manager shall be subject
to removal by the Supervisors by majority vote, unless a contract of specific
duration is entered into, in which event the Manager shall receive 30 days'
written notice.
§ 4-6. Compensation.
The compensation of the Township Manager shall be as established by the
Board of Supervisors by resolution and shall be paid out of the General Fund
of the Township. Compensation may be changed by resolution from time to
time at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 4-7. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to the duties of his office as
herein outlined. The Manager shall have such experience and education and
professional qualifications as may from time to time be determined by the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 4-8. Powers and duties.
A. The powers and duties of administration of all Township business shall
be vested in the Manager, unless expressly imposed or conferred by
statute upon other Township officers.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
7. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 66301.
§ 4-3 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 4-8
4:13
B. The Manager is the general manager and administrator of the Township
and, as such, is responsible for carrying out the policies and directives
of the Board of Supervisors. The Manager is directly responsible to the
Board of Supervisors in all matters relating to his other performance
and is specifically responsible for:
(1) Administration. The general administration of the Township, to
include correspondence, reports, recordkeeping, bookkeeping,
etc., for an accurate and efficient administrative procedure for the
conduct of the business of the Township.
(2) Budget. Must submit, before the close of such fiscal year, a
recommended budget for the next fiscal year. Must be responsible
for the administration of the budget, after its adoption by the Board
of Supervisors, and must develop long-range fiscal plans for the
municipality.
(3) Police Department. General overview of this Department,
particularly in the areas of budget and procurement, vehicle
maintenance, personnel procurement, etc.
(4) Road Department. General supervision of matters relating to roads,
streets, highways, gutters, drainpipes, etc., to include maintenance
and repair, snow removal, ice control, etc. Responsible for
procurement of all materials and supplies and maintenance of
vehicles and equipment.
(5) Code enforcement. General supervision of the activities of the Code
Enforcement Officer, to include enforcement of Township
ordinances, building and related codes.
(6) Planning and zoning. General supervision to ensure administrative
support is provided to the Board of Supervisors, the Planning
Commission and the Zoning Hearing Board.
(7) Personnel. Recommending to the Board of Supervisors action
required in respect to personnel, including procurement thereof.
Responsible for the training of all Township personnel, except the
uniformed police personnel.
(8) Township facilities. Maintenance, repair, cleanliness and use of all
Township buildings and facilities, including parks and playgrounds.
(9) Meetings. Shall attend all meetings of the Board of Supervisors and
keep the Board of Supervisors informed as to the conduct of
Township affairs.
(10) Purchasing. Shall be purchasing officer of the Township and shall
make purchases in accordance with the provisions of the Township
Code. All capital expenditures shall be subject to prior approval of
the Board of Supervisors.
§ 4-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 4-8
4:14
§ 4-9. Bond required.
The Manager shall post bond with a corporate surety in an amount
approved by the Board of Supervisors, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his duties. The fee for said bond shall be paid by the
Township.
§ 4-10. Conflict of interest.
The Township Manager shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in
contracts with the Township.
§ 4-11. Disability or absence of Manager.
During any absence of the Manager, the normal operating functions of the
Township shall be delegated to an Acting Manager or to the appropriate
department heads in accordance with such table of organization as
established by the Board of Supervisors and in force at the time of the
disability or absence of the Manager.
(11) Township Secretary. The duties of Township Secretary, as set forth
at 53 P.S. § 65802, shall be included in the duties of the Township
Manager, as permitted by 53 P.S. § 66301.8
(12) Township Treasurer. The Township Manager shall be responsible
for the duties of Township Treasurer as set forth in 53 P.S. § 65704.9
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 4-8 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 4-11
4:15
Chapter 7
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 134. Water — See Ch. 168.
§ 4-11 MIDDLESEX CODE § 4-11
7:16
ARTICLE I
Middlesex Township Sewer and Water Authority
[Adopted 9-14-1970 by Ord. No. 20]
§ 7-1. Purpose; statutory authority.
It is the desire of the governing body of this municipality and said governing
body hereby signifies its intention to organize a municipal authority, under
the Municipality Authorities Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.10
§ 7-2. Articles of Incorporation.
In pursuance to said desire and intention, and in conformity with the terms
and provision of said Municipality Authorities Act and its amendments, the
proposed Articles of Incorporation are hereby set forth in full, as follows.11
§ 7-3. Implementation and filing.
The proposed Articles of Incorporation of said Authority shall be executed
by and on behalf of this municipality by the Chairman of the Board of
Supervisors, and the Seal of said municipality shall be thereto affixed and
attested by the Township Secretary. It is authorized and directed that a
Notice of Intention to file the Articles of Incorporation as required by
the aforementioned Act be published and no additional publication of this
article shall be required, and when said Articles of Incorporation are
properly executed by the incorporating municipality the same shall be filed
with the Secretary of the Commonwealth.
10.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
11.Editor's Note: The proposed Articles of Incorporation adopted as part of this ordinance
are on file in the Township offices.
§ 7-1 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 7-3
7:17

ARTICLE II
North Allegheny Joint Water Authority
[Adopted 12-4-1978 by Ord. No. 37]
§ 7-4. Purpose; statutory authority.
It is the desire of the Board of Supervisors of Middlesex Township, Butler
County, Pennsylvania, and the Board of Supervisors hereby signifies its
intention, together with Hampton Township, Harmar Township, the
Township of Indiana, Richland Township and West Deer Township, all of
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and the Borough of Mars and Valencia
Borough, both of Butler County, Pennsylvania, to organize a Joint Authority
under the Municipality Authorities Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as
amended.12
§ 7-5. Name of Authority.
The name of the proposed Joint Authority shall be "North Allegheny Joint
Water Authority."
§ 7-6. Appointment of Board members.
The following persons are hereby appointed members of the Board of North
Allegheny Joint Water Authority for the terms of office indicated.13
§ 7-7. Articles of Incorporation.
Pursuant to said desire and intention of the Board of Supervisors and in
conformance with the terms and provisions of said Municipality Authorities
Act of 1945 and its amendments, the proposed Articles of Incorporation are
hereby set forth in full, as follows.14
§ 7-8. Implementation and filing.
The proposed Articles of Incorporation of the Joint Authority shall be
executed by and on behalf of Middlesex Township by its Chairman of the
Board of Supervisors, and the Seal of said Township shall thereto be affixed
and attested by its Township Secretary, and filed with the Secretary of
the Commonwealth. Ralph Lynch, Jr., Esquire, is hereby authorized and
directed to cause to be published the Notice of Intention to file the Articles
of Incorporation with the Secretary of the Commonwealth as required by
the aforementioned Act. No additional publication of this article is required.
12.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
13.Editor's Note: The names, addresses, municipalities represented, and terms of the original
members of the Board of the Authority, which originally followed this section, are on file
in the Township offices.
14.Editor's Note: The proposed Articles of Incorporation, which originally followed this
section, are on file in the Township offices.
§ 7-4 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 7-8
7:19
Chapter 15
FIRE COMPANY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Intergovernmental agreements — See Ch. 19. Emergency services reimbursement — See
Ch. 76.
§ 15-1. Official recognition.
The Middlesex Volunteer Fire Company, organized and existing in the
Township of Middlesex, Butler County, Pennsylvania, is hereby designated
as the officially recognized fire company for the Township.
§ 15-2. Authorized activities.
The Middlesex Volunteer Fire Company and its membership are authorized
by the Board of Supervisors to perform the following, in addition to the
normal fire-fighting, rescue and emergency medical duties, for workmen's
compensation purposes:
A. Participation in drills, practices, training sessions, and pre-fire planning
activities authorized by the Fire Chief and supervised by a qualified
instructor, or a Fire Company officer.
B. Participation in community celebrations, ceremonial observances and
funerals for deceased fire fighters or other public figures where such
attendance is deemed appropriate by the Fire Chiefs.
C. While performing duties necessary to prepare the fire station for use as
a distribution center or a polling place for the primary and general
elections. This is extended to include like services performed at other
municipal or school district buildings.
D. Preparation for and responsible participation in parades, provided that
attendance has the prior approval of the Fire Company.
E. Any public service functions performed for the welfare of the
community, including recovery of animals, as long as these activities
are responsibly supervised and are sanctioned by the Fire Company.
F. Any and all public safety activities undertaken by Fire Company
members to render care to the injured, prevent loss of life, provide
comfort and security to victims, and limit or prevent damage to or loss
of property as circumstances may dictate.
G. While rendering assistance to police officers where such aid is
specifically requested or is done without request to protect the public
welfare from imminent danger, including fire/police duties.
§ 7-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 15-2
15:20
Chapter 19
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Company — See Ch. 15.
H. Participation in fire prevention activities, post-fire investigations, bomb
searches, and evacuation drills.
I. While participating in public programs to promote health and safety, to
enlist new members, or solicit community support, or conduct fundraising
activities so long as no compensation is being paid to the
member while engaged in the fund-raising activity, 100% of the
proceeds to the Fire Company, and so long as each activity is sanctioned
by the Fire Company.
J. While safely and responsibly performing maintenance and remodeling
work of the Fire Company vehicle, buildings, grounds or equipment.
This is extended to include work done on Township vehicles, buildings,
grounds or equipment.
K. The Fire Company may also respond to calls and provide services to
municipalities outside of the Township pursuant to mutual aid
agreements.
L. Such other duties necessary for the efficient operation of the Volunteer
Fire Company as may, from time to time, be assigned by the Township
Supervisors and the officers of the Fire Company and as may be defined
within the constitution and bylaws of the Middlesex Volunteer Fire
Company.
§ 15-2 FIRE COMPANY § 15-2
15:21

ARTICLE I
Mutual Aid: Penn Township
[Adopted 11-7-1977 by Ord. No. 35]
§ 19-1. Agreement authorized.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and the Secretary of Middlesex
Township are hereby authorized to execute and deliver on behalf of the
Township of Middlesex that agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto
and made a part hereof,15 providing for mutual cooperation between the
Township of Middlesex and the Township of Penn regarding police
assistance across the boundaries of the two municipalities.
15.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 19-1 FIRE COMPANY § 19-1
15:23

ARTICLE II
Mutual Aid: Adams Township
[Adopted 1-15-1979 by Ord. No. 39]
§ 19-2. Agreement authorized.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and the Secretary of Middlesex
Township are hereby authorized to execute and deliver on behalf of the
Township of Middlesex that agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto
and made part hereof,16 providing for mutual cooperation between the
Township of Middlesex and the Township of Adams regarding police
assistance across the boundaries of the two municipalities.
16.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 19-2 FIRE COMPANY § 19-2
15:25

ARTICLE III
Mutual Aid: Richland Township
[Adopted 1-15-1979 by Ord. No. 40]
§ 19-3. Agreement authorized.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and the Secretary of Middlesex
Township are hereby authorized to execute and deliver on behalf of the
Township of Middlesex that agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto
and made part hereof,17 providing for mutual cooperation between the
Township of Middlesex and the Township of Richland regarding police
assistance across the boundaries of the two municipalities.
17.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 19-3 FIRE COMPANY § 19-3
15:27

ARTICLE IV
Local Government Investment Trust
[Adopted 6-1-1981 by Ord. No. 42]
§ 19-4. Intent.
This municipality shall join with other municipalities in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act18 by becoming a settlor
of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust (the Trust) and
entering into the Declaration of Trust, which is adopted by reference with
the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a copy
of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article
was adopted.
§ 19-5. Purchase and redemption of shares.
This municipality is authorized to purchase shares in the Trust from time
to time with available municipal funds, and to redeem some or all of those
shares from time to time as funds are needed for municipal purposes. These
actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose, pursuant
to general or specific instructions by the governing body adopting this
article.
§ 19-6. Custody of funds.
The Trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody of this
municipality's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in the
Trust.
§ 19-7. Findings.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 19-4;
B. The municipality's participation in the Trust shall be terminable at any
time by ordinance;
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this municipality's funds in obligations which are
otherwise legal investments as part of a pooled arrangement with other
governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other advantages
of pooled investments;
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
municipal funds except through the purchase of shares in the Trust;
18.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 19-4 FIRE COMPANY § 19-7
15:29
E. The Trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein; and
F. Shares may be purchased and redeemed from time to time as this
municipality may determine to be necessary or appropriate to meet its
cash investment requirements.
§ 19-7 MIDDLESEX CODE § 19-7
15:30
ARTICLE V
Mutual Aid: Saxonburg Borough
[Adopted 12-15-1999 by Ord. No. O-99-12-3]
§ 19-8. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to further the ability of each municipality to
fight and deter crime, maintain order and satisfactorily handle emergencies
in the municipalities that involve police service, fire service, ambulance
service or other emergency service.
§ 19-9. Individuality of forces continued.
This agreement is not meant to make the police force of either municipality
one force or to otherwise combine them.
§ 19-10. Provision of mutual aid.
Saxonburg Borough and Middlesex Township agree to provide and furnish
patrols, assist in fighting crime, assist in emergencies or enforce traffic
ordinances and regulations upon the roads of the municipalities but shall
not be required to respond to any emergencies, enforce any statutes,
ordinances or regulations, any other statement or provision in this
agreement or any other agreement to the contrary, notwithstanding. The
intent of the parties is that aid shall be provided according to the terms
herein, upon request of either municipality.
§ 19-11. Failure to provide aid; remedies.
The failure of Saxonburg Borough or Middlesex Township to provide such
service adequately shall constitute grounds for the termination of this
agreement. The termination of this agreement shall be the sole and
exclusive remedy available in case of breach of this agreement by either
municipality and/or its police department.
§ 19-12. Disposition of fines.
Any fines or penalties shall be payable to the municipality whose
ordinances, statutes and regulations were violated.
§ 19-13. Officers to remain employees of respective municipality.
At all times, the police officers of Saxonburg Borough shall be deemed
employees of Saxonburg Borough and not Middlesex Township, and the
employees of Middlesex Township shall be deemed employees of Middlesex
Township and not Saxonburg Borough.
§ 19-8 FIRE COMPANY § 19-14
15:31
§ 19-14. Remuneration of officers.
At all times, each municipality shall be responsible for any remuneration
due its police officer or officers (employees), including salary, pension plan
contributions, workmen's compensation benefits, insurance coverages, etc.
§ 19-15. Termination of agreement.
This agreement may be terminated by either municipality or by their mutual
consent upon one month's written notice to the other municipality of the
intention to cancel. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the
President of Council of Saxonburg Borough or to the Chairman of the Board
of Supervisors of Middlesex Township.
§ 19-16. Management, direction and control of officers.
Each municipality shall retain responsibility for the management, direction
and control of its officers.
§ 19-17. Equipment, materials and supplies.
All equipment, material and supplies used by the police officers acting
pursuant to the provisions of this agreement shall remain the sole and
separate property of the police officer/department of the municipality which
purchased and paid for said equipment, material and supplies.
§ 19-18. Additional rules and procedures.
The parties hereto hereby agree that additional rules and regulations and
standard operating procedures may need to be implemented and amended
from time to time for additional or different police services, fire services
or other emergency services and hereby agree that the same may be
completed by an appropriate resolution adopted by each municipality
hereto.
§ 19-19. When effective.
This article shall become effective upon execution and adoption thereof by
the respective municipalities.
§ 19-14 MIDDLESEX CODE § 19-19
15:32
ARTICLE VI
Multimunicipal Comprehensive Plan
[Adopted 3-19-2003 by Ord. No. 89]
§ 19-20. Agreement authorized.
The Board of Supervisors of Middlesex Township, Butler County, hereby
approves and adopts the Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement for
Multimunicipal Planning between Middlesex Township and Richland
Township (the "agreement") attached hereto and incorporated herein as
Exhibit A.19
§ 19-21. Implementation.
The Chairman of the Middlesex Township Board of Supervisors is hereby
authorized and directed to sign the attached agreement on behalf of
Middlesex Township and the Township Secretary is authorized and directed
to attest the same.
19.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 19-20 FIRE COMPANY § 19-21
15:33

ARTICLE VII
Emergency Operations Plan
[Adopted 6-18-2003 by Ord. No. 93]
§ 19-22. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Middlesex Township Emergency
Management Agency Ordinance."
§ 19-23. Parties to agreement; purpose.
The Township of Middlesex hereby resolves to enter into an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement with the County of Butler,
Pennsylvania, and such other municipalities as would desire to enter into
an intergovernmental cooperation agreement in the future, and hereby
agree that the Butler County Emergency Operations Plan will serve as
the emergency operations plan for each municipality that signs the
intergovernmental cooperation agreement.
§ 19-24. Conditions of agreement.
The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperation agreement to be
entered into between Middlesex Township and Butler County are described
as follows:
§ 19-25. Registration with county.
A copy of this article shall be filed with the County Emergency Management
Agency and shall remain in effect unless amended. Any amendments shall
also be filed with the County Emergency Management Coordinator.
A. Middlesex Township agrees that it shall adopt and declare the Butler
County Emergency Operations Plan to be the emergency operations
plan of each of their municipalities for the purpose of fulfilling the
requirements in Subsection 7503(1) of the Emergency Management
Services Code to prepare, maintain and keep current a disaster
emergency management plan for each of their municipalities.
B. Middlesex Township's Emergency Management Coordinator shall
annually review the Butler County Emergency Operation Plan and
recommend changes, improvements or additional information to the
Plan in order to ensure that the Plan adequately addresses the public
safety and welfare needs of Middlesex Township.
§ 19-22 FIRE COMPANY § 19-25
15:35

ARTICLE VIII
Butler County Council of Governments
[Adopted 4-16-2008 by Ord. No. 116]
§ 19-26. Legislative authority; intent.
The Township is authorized pursuant to the authority of the Act of
December 19, 1996, P.L. 1158, as amended (53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.)
(hereinafter the "Act"), to jointly cooperate with other local governments
in the exercise or performance of their respective governmental functions,
powers or responsibilities, and the Township hereby signifies its intention
and desire to organize a council of governments under the provisions of law,
including but not limited to the Act. Said organization shall be known as
the "Butler County Council of Governments" (hereinafter the "Butler County
COG").
§ 19-27. Authorization of membership; purpose.
The Board of Supervisors hereby consents to joining the Butler County COG,
a council of governments formed under the provisions of Act 180,20 for
the purpose of providing various services, including but not limited to the
purposes identified in the bylaws of the Butler County COG, attached hereto
and incorporated herein as Exhibit A, as may be amended from time to time
by the Butler County COG.21
§ 19-28. Funding; powers.
§ 19-29. Authority of Board to enter into contracts.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Middlesex is hereby authorized
to enter into contracts with the Butler County COG to provide such services,
programs and joint purchases as the Board of Supervisors of the Township
shall, by resolution, determine from time to time.
A. The Butler County COG shall be supported by contributions from its
members, grants and fees for services.
B. Real and personal property may be purchased, sold or leased by the
Butler County COG in accordance with applicable law.
C. No new entity is being created which would be empowered by 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 2307(7) to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security.
20.Editor’s Note: Said Act was repealed 12-19-1996 by P.L. 1158, No. 177. See now 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
21.Editor’s Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 19-26 FIRE COMPANY § 19-29
15:37

ARTICLE IX
PSATS Unemployment Compensation Group Trust
[Adopted 8-18-2015 by Ord. No. 129]
§ 19-30. Agreement; adopted.
§ 19-31. Purpose.
The participation of the Township in the trust is authorized for the purpose
of pooling resources for the purpose of providing unemployment
compensation insurance for participating employers at reasonable cost.
§ 19-32. Conditions of participation.
As set forth in greater detail in the restated trust agreement and as
otherwise stated herein, the following conditions apply to the participation
of the Township in the trust:
§ 19-33. Conditions of withdrawal.
The Township agrees to participate in the trust and may withdraw for any
reason and in accordance with the restated trust agreement, provided that
it has fulfilled all its financial obligations to the trust upon withdrawal.
A. The Board of Supervisors adopts the restated trust agreement and
agrees to participate in the trust in accordance with the amended and
updated terms of the restated trust agreement, and the Chairman of the
Board of Supervisors and Secretary of the Township are hereby
authorized to sign the restated trust agreement and any other
agreements necessary for the Township's participation in the trust.
B. The restated trust agreement is on file for inspection and review at the
Township's offices at 133 Browns Hill Road, Valencia, PA 16059. The
restated trust agreement may be subsequently modified or amended in
accordance with its terms, but in no event shall such modifications or
amendments divert any of the trust funds from the purposes of the
trust. The Township may withdraw from the trust in accordance with
the restated trust agreement, including if the Board of Supervisors
determines the modifications or amendments are not in the best
interests of the Township.
A. That each participating employer must meet the admission and
eligibility requirements set forth therein;
B. That each participating employer agrees to pay all contributions when
due as provided in the restated trust agreement or as otherwise
established by the Board of Trustees; and
C. That each participating employer complies with all other conditions of
the restated trust agreement.
§ 19-30 FIRE COMPANY § 19-34
15:39
§ 19-34. Effective date of agreement and participation.
The effective date of the Township's agreement to and joinder in the
restated trust agreement and the participation of the Township in the trust
pursuant to the terms of the restated trust agreement will be August 18,
2015.
§ 19-35. Delegation of powers.
Each participating employer delegates to the Board of Trustees the powers
enumerated in the restated trust agreement.
§ 19-36. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure of the trust shall consist of a Board of Trustees.
Under the restated trust agreement, the Board of Trustees is authorized
to, among other things, enter into contracts with third parties to perform
various services necessary for the administration of the trust.
§ 19-37. Provision of funds.
The funds required for the operation of the trust shall be provided by the
participating employers through scheduled appropriations as determined
by the Board of Trustees.
§ 19-38. Power to enter into contracts.
The trust is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for employees of
the trust, if any.
§ 19-39. Compliance with terms and conditions.
As a condition of participating in the trust, the Township agrees to comply
with all of the terms and conditions in the restated trust agreement.
§ 19-40. Certified copy.
The Secretary of the Township shall provide a certified copy of this article
upon its enactment to the Board of Trustees of the trust.
§ 19-41. Authority to act.
The Township Manager of the Township is hereby authorized to take any
and all such other actions as may be necessary or appropriate to carry
out the purposes of this article and comply with the requirements of the
attached restated trust agreement and any duly adopted amendments
thereto.22
22.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 19-34 MIDDLESEX CODE § 19-42
15:40
§ 19-42. Duration of participation.
The duration of the term of the Township's participation in the trust and
obligations under the restated trust agreement shall continue until
withdrawal from the trust by the Township in accordance with the terms of
the restated trust agreement.
§ 19-43. Findings and determinations.
The Board of Supervisors hereby specifically finds and determines as
follows:
§ 19-44. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and in the event that any
provision is held invalid, void, illegal, or unconstitutional by any court, it is
the intent of the Board of Supervisors that such determination by the court
shall not affect or render void the remaining provisions of this article. It is
the declared intent of the Board of Supervisors that this article would have
A. The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperative agreement are set
forth in the restated trust agreement incorporated by reference herein.
B. The Township shall participate in the trust in accordance with the
restated trust agreement until it withdraws by giving notice to the
Board of Trustees in accordance with the terms of the restated trust
agreement.
C. The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperative
arrangement, including powers and scope of authority delegated to the
Board of Trustees, are set forth in the incorporated restated trust
agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing of the agreement are that i) funds
to implement the Township's obligations under the agreement shall
come from the normal and usual budgeted amounts for Township
employee compensation and employee benefits and ii) no borrowing is
anticipated to be required.
E. The trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the restated trust agreement.
F. All assets and property, real or personal, of the trust shall be titled to,
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the trust, and its Board
of Trustees, in accordance with the terms of the restated trust
agreement.
G. The trust, in accordance with the restated trust agreement, shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee welfare benefits to be offered to participating employers for
their eligible employees and dependents.
§ 19-42 FIRE COMPANY § 19-44
15:41
been enacted if any provision subsequently declared to be void, invalid,
illegal or unconstitutional had not been included at the time of enactment.
§ 19-45. Effect on rights and liabilities.
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to affect any rights or liabilities
of the Township, or to affect any cause of action, existing prior to the
enactment of this article.
§ 19-46. When effective.
This article shall take effect five days from the date of adoption.
§ 19-47. Statutory authority.
This article is being enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180, as
amended, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 19-44 MIDDLESEX CODE § 19-47
15:42
ARTICLE X
Emergency Services Unit
[Adopted 6-21-2017 by Ord. No. 131]
§ 19-48. Intent to participate.
The Board of Supervisors has evidenced its intent to participate in the
Butler County District Attorney's Emergency Services Unit (hereinafter
ESU) designed to coordinate tactical responses to critical incidents relating
to hostage-related incidents, barricaded gunmen, school violence, terrorist
acts, weapons of mass destruction, sniper ambush, civil disturbance, and
high-risk warrant service.
§ 19-49. Adoption of agreement.
The Board of Supervisors hereby adopts the agreement which provides the
framework for municipal participation and cooperation with the District
Attorney's ESU in cooperation with other participating municipalities under
the terms and conditions of the agreement, a copy of which is attached
hereto, made part hereof, and marked Exhibit A.23
§ 19-50. Duration of agreement.
The duration of the agreement shall be indefinite, subject to the provisions
for withdrawal and termination as provided in the agreement.
§ 19-51. Authority to execute agreement.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to execute
the attached agreement and any and all appropriate documentation
necessary to carry out the establishment and operation of the ESU.
§ 19-52. When effective.
This article shall become effective upon the execution of the agreement and
enactment and approval of this article by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 19-53. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the within
ordinance are hereby repealed.
23.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 19-48 FIRE COMPANY § 19-53
15:43
Chapter 28
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 40.
§ 19-53 MIDDLESEX CODE § 19-53
15:44
ARTICLE I
Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan
[Adopted 5-15-2002 by Ord. No. 80]
§ 28-1. Replacement of prior plans.
This article specifically replaces all other ordinances or parts of ordinances
establishing provisions for the nonuniform pension plan. This article
replaces the retirement plan for the nonuniformed employees of the
Township of Middlesex through the adoption of the Township of Middlesex
Nonuniform Retirement Plan.
§ 28-2. Establishment.
This article establishes a retirement plan for the nonuniformed employees
of the Township of Middlesex through the adoption of the pension document
effective May 15, 2002.24
§ 28-3. Severability.
In the event that any provision, section, sentence, clause, or part of this
retirement plan shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect
or impair any remaining provision, section, sentence, clause, or part of the
retirement plan, it being the intent of the Township that such remainder
shall be and remain in full force and effect.
24.Editor's Note: Said pension document and any amendments thereto are on file in the
Township offices.
§ 28-1 FIRE COMPANY § 28-3
15:45

ARTICLE II
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 10-16-2002 by Ord. No. 86]
§ 28-4. Replacement of prior plans.
This article specifically replaces all other ordinances or parts of ordinances
establishing provisions for the police pension plan. This article replaces the
retirement plan for the police officers of the Township of Middlesex through
the adoption of the Township of Middlesex Police Retirement Plan.
§ 28-5. Establishment.
This article establishes a retirement plan for the police officers of the
Township of Middlesex through the adoption of the pension document
effective October 16, 2002.25
§ 28-6. Modifications and amendments to plan. [Added 2-17-2010
by Ord. No. 11726]
All references in the police (uniform) pension plan related to killed-inservice
benefits, pursuant to Act 51 of 2009,27 effective October 9, 2009,
be and hereby are repealed, and the plan document as so amended is
approved.
§ 28-7. Severability.
In the event that any provision, section, sentence, clause, or part of this
retirement plan shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect
or impair any remaining provision, section, sentence, clause, or part of the
retirement plan, it being the intent of the Township that such remainder
shall be and remain in full force and effect.
25.Editor's Note: Said pension document and any amendments thereto are on file in the
Township offices.
26.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for an effective date of 10-9-2009 and the
renumbering of former § 28-6 as § 28-7.
27.Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 771.
§ 28-4 FIRE COMPANY § 28-7
15:47
Chapter 31
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 31-1. Establishment.
A Planning Commission consisting of five members is hereby created and
established for Middlesex Township, Butler County, Pennsylvania, pursuant
to the provisions of Article II, Section 201, of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10201), as established by the Act of
July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted.
§ 31-2. Composition; terms of office.
The Planning Commission shall be comprised of five members who shall
be appointed for terms of office of four years, except that the terms of the
members first appointed pursuant to this chapter shall be so fixed that no
more than two shall be reappointed or replaced during any future calendar
year.
§ 31-3. Compensation.
Except for elected or appointed officers or employees of the Township,
members of the Commission may receive compensation in an amount fixed
by the Board of Supervisors. Compensation shall not exceed the rate of
compensation authorized to be paid to members of the Board of
Supervisors. Without exception, members of the Planning Commission may
be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable expenses. However, elected
or appointed officers or employees of the Township shall not, by reason of
membership thereon, forfeit the right to exercise the powers, perform the
duties or receive the compensations of the municipal offices held by them
during such membership.
§ 31-4. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties conferred
and imposed upon it as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, established by the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended
and reenacted.
Chapter 36
RECREATION AND PARKS ADMINISTRATION
§ 36-1. Administration by Board of Supervisors.
Such powers as are now or may hereafter be provided by statute of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or by resolutions or ordinances of the
Township of Middlesex, Butler County, Pennsylvania, relating to the
development and operation of recreational systems, public parks and
§ 28-7 MIDDLESEX CODE § 36-1
31:48
playgrounds are hereby vested to the Middlesex Township Board of
Supervisors, Butler County, Pennsylvania, to be exercised by it subject
to any and all restrictions contained in such powers and resolutions,
ordinances and application.
Chapter 40
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4. Pensions — See Ch. 28.
§ 36-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 36-1
40:49

ARTICLE I
Board of Supervisors
[Adopted 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 99]
§ 40-1. Compensation established.
Each Supervisor of Middlesex Township elected or appointed to office after
the effective date of this article shall receive compensation as a Supervisor
in the annual amount of $2,000.
§ 40-2. Payment schedule.
Such compensation shall be paid in monthly or quarterly installments.
§ 40-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 40-2
40:51
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 53
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 53-1. Statement of intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to:
§ 53-2. Posting of number required.
Within 90 days after notification by the Township of Middlesex, the owners
and/or occupants of each property/dwelling/ building shall post the address
identification number assigned by the Township.
§ 53-3. Regulations regarding posting and display.
A. Establish a uniform system of property/dwelling/building address
numbering within the Township of Middlesex in order that there be an
accurate address data base in connection with the Township's
participation in the Butler County Enhance 9-1-1 System; and
B. Establish a uniform system of posting and displaying address
identification numbers in order that property/dwelling/building
addresses within the Township may be easily located in emergency
situations.28
A. All owners and/or occupants of which property/dwelling/building shall
conspicuously post the address identification number and identification
number plate at the entrance of the driveway to the premises.
B. The identification number plate shall be a minimum of 12 inches in
width and six inches in length with a white reflective Mylar background
with minimum four-inch black reflective numbers.
C. The identification number plate shall be mounted at a minimum height
of three feet from the bottom of plate to the ground and the reflective
side of the number plate shall be posted toward the traffic flow.
D. The identification number plate shall be mounted on display posts such
as wood pole, steel rod or masonry pillar. If displayed on a structure or
dwelling, rather than at the driveway entrance, the number plate must
be clearly visible from the street which provides public access to the
premises.
28.Editor's Note: Original Section I, Subsection C, regarding rental occupancy reporting,
which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). See now Ch. 128, Rental Occupancy Reports.
§ 40-2 MIDDLESEX CODE § 53-3
53:52
§ 53-4. Notice of violation.
§ 53-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense. Notice to the offender shall
not be necessary in order to constitute an offense.
Chapter 57
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste and recycling — See Ch. 140.
E. Regardless of the type of posting used, the identification number plate
must be clearly visible. The view of the plate must not be obstructed by
vegetation, trees or any other object(s) or debris.29
A. The Township Supervisors, or their designated representative for that
purpose, are hereby authorized to give written notice to the property
owner or occupant of any premises found to be in violation of any
section of this chapter. Such written notice shall direct and require the
property owner or occupant to post the address identification number
plate as to comply with the provisions of this chapter within 15 days
after issuance of such notice.
B. Upon failure of any owner or occupant to comply within the period of
time stated herein, the Township of Middlesex, or its designated
representative for that purpose, may post a street number on the
premises and collect the cost thereof, together with any additional
penalty authorized by law, from such owner or occupant in the manner
provided by law.
29.Editor's Note: Original Section IV, Landowner tenant notice responsibilities, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 53-3 BURNING, OPEN § 57-1
57:53
§ 57-1. Burning of certain materials prohibited.
For the health, safety and well-being of the inhabitants of the Township
of Middlesex, Butler County, Pennsylvania, it shall be unlawful to burn
trash, garbage, tires, shingles, railroad ties, plastic, chemicals or any other
materials of any nature or description that emit a noxious odor when burned
at any time within the boundaries of Middlesex Township, Butler County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 57-2. Conditions for burning of newspapers, leaves, branches and
paper products.
It shall be lawful to burn newspapers, leaves, branches and paper products
within the confines and boundaries of the Township, provided that the
following restrictions and regulations are met:
§ 57-3. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 65
A. Such burning must take place in excess of 25 feet from any building
and/or structure.
B. Such burning shall take place only on Monday through and including
Saturday and then only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to sunset,
prevailing time.
C. Burning shall be prohibited at any time on Sunday and/or holidays.
D. Such burning shall mandate adult supervision at all times; supervision
shall be within 100 feet of the burning. As used in this section, "adult"
shall include any responsible person 18 years of age or older.30
E. Any burning that becomes out of control of the supervising adult to the
degree that notification of the Fire Company and/or Police Department
is required shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
A. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District
Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of
a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each
section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.
B. All fines collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid to the
Township of Middlesex, Butler County, Pennsylvania.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 57-1 MIDDLESEX CODE § 57-3
65:54
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 84.
Grading, excavation and fill — See Ch. 89.
Impact fees — See Ch. 97.
Improvement design standards — See Ch.
101.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
150.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 57-3 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 57-3
65:55

ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
§ 65-1. Election to administer and enforce.
Middlesex Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 65-2. Adoption of standards.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401
to 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the building code of Middlesex Township.
§ 65-3. Methods of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within Middlesex Township
shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the Board
of Supervisors from time to time by resolution:
§ 65-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors of Middlesex Township in conformity with the requirements
of the relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time to time,
and for the purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and
administration is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities,
said Board of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the
participating municipalities.
§ 65-5. Effect on prior ordinances.
A. By the designation of an employee of the Township to serve as the
Township code official to act on behalf of the Township;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Township;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of the Township;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 65-1 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 65-5
65:57
§ 65-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Township for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this article and the code shall be established by the
Board of Supervisors by resolution from time to time.
A. All building code ordinances or portions or ordinances which were
adopted by the Township on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or
exceed the requirements of the code shall remain in full force and effect
until such time as such provisions fail to exceed the minimum
requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this article and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby amended to
conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Township not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 65-5 MIDDLESEX CODE § 65-6
65:58
ARTICLE II
Plumbing Code Modifications
[Added 4-18-2007 by Ord. No. 111]
§ 65-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE — The Uniform Construction Code which adopted the International
Plumbing Code regulations, and which is codified under 35 Pa.C.S.
§ 7210.101 et seq.
CONNECTION SPECIFICATIONS — The technical specifications as issued
by the International Plumbing Code and adopted by the Uniform
Construction Code for the purpose of defining the specifications for sanitary
sewer service line installations and/or connections.
SANITARY SEWER SERVICE LINE — All pipelines and facilities, as of
any particular time, used for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, situate in or adjacent to this
Township and owned or leased to this Township for operation and use.
TOWNSHIP — Township of Middlesex, Butler County, Pennsylvania, a
Pennsylvania municipal corporation, acting by and through its Board of
Commissioners or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its
authorized representatives.
§ 65-8. Authority.
§ 65-9. New technical specifications supersede and/or amend UCC
standards.
This Township's new technical specifications hereby supersede and/or
amend the Code as it applies to the technical requirements of the
connection specifications. The technical specifications of this new article
being equal to or exceeding the minimum requirements of the International
Plumbing Code, are further specified in the guidelines, specifications, and
drawings attached hereto as Exhibit A.31
A. The Township has adopted the Code for the purpose of maintaining
standards for construction within the Township.
B. The Code employs the International Plumbing Code for the purposes of
defining the connection specifications.
C. The Township is hereby authorized, under § 7210.503 of the Code, to
modify and/or amend the connection specifications.
31.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 65-7 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 65-9
65:59
Chapter 68
CURFEW
§ 68-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated unless a different meaning appears from the text:
MINOR — A person under the age of 18 years.
PARENT — Any natural parent of a minor as herein defined or a guardian
or any adult person responsible for the care and custody of a minor. When
used in this chapter, "parent" shall mean one or both parents.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, alley, sidewalk, park, playground,
public building, or vacant lot in the Township of Middlesex, Butler County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 68-2. Purpose.
This chapter prescribes, in accordance with prevailing community
standards, regulations for the conduct of all minor(s) on streets at night
for the protection of younger children in the Township of Middlesex, from
each other and from other persons on the streets during nighttime hours;
for the enforcement of parental control and responsibility for their children;
for the protection of the public from nocturnal mischief by all minor(s); and
for the reduction of the incident of juvenile criminal activity, for the good of
minor(s) and for the public good, safety and welfare.
§ 68-3. Curfew hours; exceptions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor to be in or remain in or upon any
public place within the Township of Middlesex, Butler County,
Pennsylvania, or in any enclosure or vehicle which is on or in close
proximity to any such public place, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. on the following day, except as follows:
(1) A minor when accompanied by a parent or guardian having legal
custody of such minor.
(2) A minor lawfully employed en route to or returning from their place
of employment.
(3) A minor who is a member of a volunteer fire company who is en
route to or returning from emergency duties as permitted by fire
company regulations.
(4) A minor going to or returning home from a church, school or
community sponsored function which they attended and for which
they possess a signed written statement by their parent dated that
day which refers to the event and the time that the minor shall be
going to or returning from the event.
§ 65-9 MIDDLESEX CODE § 68-3
68:60
§ 68-4. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for a parent to allow any minor to violate the restrictions
set forth in § 68-3.
§ 68-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 72
DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 72-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Paraphernalia Ordinance of the
Township of Middlesex."
§ 72-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for
the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
COCAINE SPOON — A spoon with a bowl so small that the primary use for
which it is reasonably adapted or designed is to hold or administer cocaine
and which is so small as to be unsuited for the typical, lawful uses of a
spoon. A cocaine spoon may or may not be merchandised on a chain and
may or may not be labeled as a "cocaine spoon" or "coke spoon."
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — Any drug, substance or immediate
precursor enumerated in Section 4 of the Act of April 14, 1972, P.L. 233,
No. 64, as amended, 35 P.S. § 780-104; being Section 4 of what is commonly
known as "The Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act" of
1972.32
B. No exceptions under this section shall apply to any minor under the
provisions of Subsection A(2), (3), and (4) unless said minor shall go to
or return from their place of residence and the event excepted by the
most direct route.
32.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq.
§ 68-3 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 72-2
72:61
MARIJUANA OR HASHISH PIPE — A pipe characterized by a bowl which is
so small that the primary use for which it is reasonably adapted or designed
is the smoking of marijuana or hashish, rather than lawful smoking tobacco,
and which may or may not be equipped with a screen.
PARAPHERNALIA or DRUG PARAPHERNALIA —
All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used,
intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting,
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of this chapter. It includes, but is not
limited to:
Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
(1)
Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances.
(2)
Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance.
(3)
Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances.
(4)
Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
(5)
Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances.
(6)
Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or
refining marijuana.
(7)
Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances.
(8)
Capsules, balloons, envelopes or other containers used, intended
for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances.
(9)
A.
§ 72-2 MIDDLESEX CODE § 72-2
72:62
Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for
use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
(10)
Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended
for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled
substances into the human body.
(11)
Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil into the human body, such as:
Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or
punctured metal bowls.
(a)
(b) Water pipes.
(c) Carburetion tubes and devices.
(d) Smoking and carburetion masks.
Roach clips: Objects used to hold burning material, such as a
marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to
be held in the hand.
(e)
(f) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
(g) Chamber pipes.
(h) Carburetor pipes.
(i) Electric pipes.
(j) Air-driven pipes.
(k) Chillums.
(l) Bongs.
(m) Ice pipes or chillers.
(12)
In determining whether an object is paraphernalia or drug
paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to
all other logically relevant factors, the following:
Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
(1)
Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the
object under any Township ordinance, state or federal law relating
to any controlled substance.
(2)
The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation
of this chapter.
(3)
(4) The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
B.
§ 72-2 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 72-2
72:63
PERSON — An individual, corporation, government or governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or
association.
PLACE OF DISPLAY — Any museum, library, school or other similar public
place upon which business is not transacted for profit.
PREMISES — A business establishment and the structure of which it is
a part and facilities and appurtenances therein and grounds, areas and
facilities held out for the use of patrons.
§ 72-3. Possession, manufacture and sale of drug paraphernalia.
(5) The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or
of anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom
he knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this
chapter; the innocence of an owner or of anyone in control of the
object, as to a direct violation of this chapter, shall not prevent a
finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use as
drug paraphernalia or paraphernalia.
(6)
Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use.
(7)
Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use.
(8)
(9) National and local advertising concerning its use.
(10)The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
(11)
The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
(12)
(13)Expert testimony concerning its use.
A. It is unlawful for any person to use or to possess with intent to use drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of this chapter.
B. It is unlawful for any person to deliver, sell, possess with intent to
deliver or sell or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell drug
paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal,
§ 72-2 MIDDLESEX CODE § 72-3
72:64
§ 72-4. Displays by police and other authorities permitted.
This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the display by police or
other police-sanctioned authorities of drug paraphernalia or paraphernalia
for educational or demonstrative use.
§ 72-5. Occupational exceptions.
The prohibitions contained in this chapter shall not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, paramedics,
technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical
laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists,
chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists or embalmers in the normal lawful
course of their respective businesses or professions, nor to common carriers
or warehousers or their employees engaged in the lawful transportation
of such paraphernalia, nor to public officers or employees while engaged
in the performance of their official duties, nor to persons suffering from
diabetes, asthma or any other medical condition requiring self injection.
§ 72-6. Declaration of intent.
This chapter is hereby declared to be an emergency measure necessary for
the immediate preservation of the public health, safety and welfare of the
Township of Middlesex, and for the further reason that sale and use of drug
paraphernalia is a presently existing and serious danger to youths and other
residents of the Township which requires immediate regulation.
§ 72-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of this chapter.
C. It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill or other publication any advertisement, knowing that the
purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale
of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
§ 72-3 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 72-7
72:65
Chapter 76
EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Company — See Ch. 15.
§ 76-1. Protection and emergency fees.
§ 76-2. Collection of fees.
A. The Middlesex Township Supervisors find that increasing costs of
providing adequate emergency and protection services, including
services resulting from extraordinary and dangerous occurrences and
hazardous material incidents and vehicle accidents and extrication,
seriously impairs the Middlesex Volunteer Fire Company's ability to
provide all necessary emergency and protection services.
B. In order to better protect the public health, safety and welfare and to
protect and preserve public funds and tax dollars, the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Middlesex, in keeping with Section 1803
of the Second Class Township Code (53 P.S. § 66803), hereby
establishes that the Middlesex Township Volunteer Fire Company adopt
a policy of reimbursement of expenses and costs incurred by the
Volunteer Fire Company in providing the services which they offer. The
schedule of reimbursement shall adequately reflect all emergency and
protection costs and expenses incurred and in no case shall be less than
the schedule set forth in § 76-3 below.
A. An officer designated by the Middlesex Volunteer Fire Company
rendering emergency and protection services shall collect all fees for
emergency and protection services and for other public safety. Such
fees may include and encompass all equipment, materials, maintenance
and overhead expenses and costs which shall constitute full
reimbursement to the Volunteer Fire Company for such services
actually rendered and as hereinafter authorized.
B. Within 30 days of the date of providing emergency protection services
or other public safety services as enumerated in § 76-3, the officer
designated by the Middlesex Volunteer Fire Company rendering the
service shall submit a bill for all costs, fees, charges and expenses
related to the provisions of such services to the owner or the property
owner's designated agent or representative, or manager of the fixed
facility or vehicle which caused the need for emergency and protection
services. All such bills shall be paid in full within 60 days of the receipt
thereof, and interest shall accumulate thereafter on any unpaid
balances at the rate of 10% per annum until paid.
§ 72-7 MIDDLESEX CODE § 76-2
76:66
§ 76-3. Fees authorized.
The following fees are hereby authorized:
§ 76-4. Enforcement.
The Township may enforce the provisions of this chapter by civil action
in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due
hereunder, plus attorney fees, or for any relief that may be appropriate.
Chapter 84
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 65.
Grading, excavation and fill — See Ch. 89.
Impact fees — See Ch. 97.
Improvement design standards — See Ch.
101.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 144.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
150.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
C. In addition, any bills, fines or penalties, including but not limited to
cleanup costs, fees or expenses that are imposed upon the Middlesex
Volunteer Fire Company by local, state and federal agencies and related
to the same situation or occurrence for which the Middlesex Volunteer
Fire Company responded, may be in the billing or may be billed
separately within 30 days of receipt and shall be paid as provided in
Subsection B above.
A. Standby response for utility service interruptions: $150.
B. Vehicle, airplane or rail service accident response, including
extrication: $150 per hour, per vehicle extrication fee; $250 per hour,
per victim.
C. Hazardous material spill response: $150 per hour, per vehicle; plus any
materials or supplies used.
§ 76-2 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 76-4
76:67

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 84-1. Authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,33 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of the Township does hereby
order as follows.
33.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 84-1 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-1
76:69

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 84-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 84-3. Applicability.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or development
anywhere within the Township unless a permit has been obtained from the
Floodplain Administrator.
§ 84-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions; repeal of prior
floodplain ordinance.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply. Ordinance No. 43
is expressly repealed by the enactment of this chapter.
§ 84-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 84-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the Township, its governmental
units, and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
§ 84-2 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-6
76:71
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 84-6 MIDDLESEX CODE § 84-6
76:72
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 84-7. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 84-8. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Township.
§ 84-9. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Township Manager is hereby appointed to administer and enforce
this chapter and is referred to herein as the "Floodplain Administrator."
The Floodplain Administrator may: A) fulfill the duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations, B) delegate duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical
personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees, or C)
enter into a written agreement or written contract with another agency
or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these
regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another
entity shall not relieve the Township of its responsibilities pursuant to
the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR
59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Chairman of the Board.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);34 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);35 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);36 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. 1344. No permit shall be issued until
this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
proposed cost of improvements or repairs and the pre-improvement
34.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
35.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
36.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 84-7 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-9
76:73
§ 84-10. Application procedures and requirements.
market value of the structure, so that a substantial improvement/
substantial damage determination can be made, in accordance with
FEMA's Substantial Improvement/Substantial Damage Desk Reference.
D. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any cumulative
substantial damage concerns can be addressed before the permit is
issued.
E. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
F. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
G. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of Supervisors for
whatever action it considers necessary.
H. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity, or for the
lifetime of the structure, all records associated with the requirements of
this chapter, including, but not limited to, finished construction
elevation data, permitting, inspection and enforcement.
I. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program as requested.
J. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain administrator/
manager.
K. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the latest revision thereof
as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 84-9 MIDDLESEX CODE § 84-10
76:74
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Township. Such
application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location, including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this chapter and all
other applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
§ 84-10 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-10
76:75
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
(1) inch being equal to one hundred (100) feet or less, showing the
following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC, or the latest revision
thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the effect of any proposed
development within a floodway area (See § 84-19A.) will not
increase the base flood elevation at any point.
(d) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an AE Area/District without floodway (See
§ 84-19B.) when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point within the Township.
§ 84-10 MIDDLESEX CODE § 84-10
76:76
§ 84-11. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 84-12. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
(e) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(f) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 84-25F, Storage, and § 84-26, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 84-25F and 84-26 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 84-26
during a base flood.
(g) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(h) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
Township, based upon a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 84-10 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-12
76:77
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 84-13. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 84-14. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard,
or similar document, which shall be displayed on the premises during the
time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
permit and the date of its issuance, and shall be signed by the Floodplain
Administrator.
§ 84-15. Start of construction.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The "actual start of construction" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request, and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
§ 84-12 MIDDLESEX CODE § 84-16
76:78
§ 84-16. Enforcement.
§ 84-17. Appeals.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will affect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the Township shall,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District
Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of
a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs of prosecution. In default of such payment, such
person shall be imprisoned in county prison for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation of this
chapter continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall
also constitute a separate offense. In addition to the said penalties, all
other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the
proper enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty
for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not
excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated, or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by
the Board of Supervisors to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
§ 84-16 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-17
76:79
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within thirty (30) days after the decision, determination
or action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code37 and
any other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.38
37.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
38.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 84-17 MIDDLESEX CODE § 84-17
76:80
ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 84-18. Identification.
§ 84-19. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of the Township classified as special flood hazard areas
(SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated August 2, 2018, and
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or
the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data
developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study; and
(2) Any community-identified flood hazard areas.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by the Township and declared to
be a part of this chapter.
A. The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the Township
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection regional office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
§ 84-18 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-19
76:81
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
(2) AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE
Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which
base flood elevations have been provided but no floodway has been
determined.
(a) No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development, shall be permitted in an
AE Zone without floodway, unless it has been demonstrated
through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed development, together with all other existing and
anticipated development, would not result in an increase in
flood levels of more than one foot within the entire Township
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection regional
office.
C. A Area/District.
(1) The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
base flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or
other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where
other acceptable information is not available, the base flood
elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site.
(2) In lieu of the above, the Township may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the Township. In the
absence of any of the above data or documentation, the Township
may require elevation of the lowest floor to be at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
D. The AO and AH Area/District shall be those areas identified as Zones
AO and AH on the FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are subject to
inundation by 1-percent-annual-chance shallow flooding where average
depths are between one and three feet. In Zones AO and AH, drainage
§ 84-19 MIDDLESEX CODE § 84-19
76:82
§ 84-20. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of
Supervisors where studies or information provided by a qualified agency
or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any
such change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained
from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such information becomes available, the Township
shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by
submitting technical or scientific data. See § 84-23B for situations where
FEMA notification is required.
§ 84-21. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Township, and any party
aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Board of
Supervisors. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 84-22. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the Township
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The Township shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
paths shall be established to guide floodwaters around and away from
structures on slopes.
E. Community-identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas where the
Township has identified local flood hazard or ponding areas, as
delineated and adopted on a "Local Flood Hazard Map" using best
available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood
of record, historic high-water marks, soils or approximate study
methodologies.
§ 84-19 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-22
76:83

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 84-23. General.
§ 84-24. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the Township,
and until all required permits or approvals have first been obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection regional office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When the Township proposes to permit the following encroachments:
any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within
the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone
AE without a designated floodway which will cause a rise of more than
one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or relocation of a
stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges), the
applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the FEMA Administrator's conditional approval of
map change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments,
the Township shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, the applicant
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 84-23 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-24
76:85
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 84-19C of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and ASCE
24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall
be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 84-19C of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have their lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
(4) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
§ 84-24 MIDDLESEX CODE § 84-24
76:86
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard.
All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the abovereferenced
standards. There should be a statement submitted with
the permit application and a statement submitted with the as-built
floodproofing certificate prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy.
(5) Any nonresidential structure that will be floodproofed must submit
the following to the Floodplain Administrator along with the
nonresidential floodproofing certificate and prior to the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy:
(a) An inspection and maintenance plan detailing the annual
maintenance of floodproofed components, ensuring that all
components will operate properly under flood conditions.
Components that must be inspected include at a minimum:
[1] Mechanical equipment such as sump pumps and
generators;
[2] Flood shields and closures;
[3] Walls and wall penetrations; and
[4] Levees and berms (as applicable).
(b) A flood emergency operation plan detailing the procedures to
be followed during a flooding event, and must include
information pertaining to how all components will operate
properly under all conditions, including power failures. The
design professional must produce the plan. An adequate plan
must include the following:
[1] An established chain of command and responsibility with
leadership responsibilities clearly defined for all aspects of
the plan.
[2] A procedure for notification of necessary parties when
flooding threatens and flood warnings are issued.
Personnel required to be at the building should have a
planned and safe means of ingress and should have no
other emergency response duties during a flood event.
Alternates should be assigned in the event that the
primary persons responsible are unable to complete their
assigned duties under the plan.
[3] A list of specific duties assigned to ensure that all
responsibilities are addressed expeditiously. The locations
§ 84-24 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-24
76:87
of materials necessary to properly install all floodproofing
components must be included in the list.
[4] An evacuation plan for all personnel or occupants, those
without duties for the flood emergency as well as those
with duties for implementing the plan. All possible ingress
and egress routes must be identified.
[5] A periodic training and exercise program to keep
personnel and occupants aware of their duties and
responsibilities. Training drills should be held at least once
a year and should be coordinated with Township officials.
[6] The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC)
and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or
the latest revision thereof as adopted by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa.
Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be
utilized, where they are more restrictive.
C. Space below lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space installed on two (2) separate walls.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures.
Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement, as defined in this chapter, must
comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause
§ 84-24 MIDDLESEX CODE § 84-24
76:88
§ 84-25. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any
exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
A. Fill.
(1) If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the building
line from all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(d) Be no steeper than one (1) vertical to two (2) horizontal feet
unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are
submitted to, and approved by, the Floodplain Administrator;
and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
§ 84-24 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-25
76:89
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damages," and the
"International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one (1) foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 84-26, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
§ 84-25 MIDDLESEX CODE § 84-25
76:90
§ 84-26. Development which may endanger human life.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three (3) feet above
the base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment.
(1) Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units, and
other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall
not be located below the regulatory flood elevation and shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(2) Ductwork shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation or floodproofed to remain water-resistant.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest revision
thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania: Sections
801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
revision thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
Sections R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,39
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
39.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 84-25 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-26
76:91
improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage
of any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be
used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more
than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the
production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances
shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following is a list of materials and substances
that are considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulfur and sulfur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
structure of the kind described in Subsection A above, shall be
prohibited within the area measured fifty (50) feet landward from the
top-of-bank of any watercourse.
C. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any
identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential
structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be elevated
§ 84-26 MIDDLESEX CODE § 84-26
76:92
§ 84-27. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) and letter of map revision
(LOMR). Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
§ 84-28. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
to remain completely dry up to at least one and one half (1 1/2) feet
above base flood elevation and built in accordance with §§ 84-23, 84-24
and 84-25.
D. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be built in accordance with §§ 84-23, 84-24
and 84-25, including:
(1) Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least one and one half (1 1/2) feet above base flood elevation;
and
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
(3) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992), or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Within any floodway area/district, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
B. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured fifty (50) feet landward from the
top-of-bank of any watercourse.
C. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least one and one half (1 1/2) feet above base flood elevation;
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
§ 84-26 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-28
76:93
§ 84-29. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. No variance shall be granted.
D. Equipment requirement:
(1) Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units, and
other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall
not be located below the regulatory flood elevation and shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral improvement.
(2) Ductwork shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation or floodproofed to remain water-resistant.
E. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's "Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405 shall apply.
F. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or the latest revision thereto as adopted by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and 34 Pa. Code, as amended,
where appropriate and/or applicable to units where the manufacturer's
standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were not established for
the proposed unit's installation.
§ 84-28 MIDDLESEX CODE § 84-29
76:94
ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Activities
§ 84-30. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,40 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
(4) Landfills.
(5) Cemeteries.
(6) The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
40.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 84-30 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-30
76:95

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 84-31. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 84-32 shall apply.
§ 84-32. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area district that would cause any increase in BFE.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within an AE Area/District without floodway that would, together with
all other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one (1) foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of fifty (50) percent
or more of its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement
and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa. Code,
as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or most recent
revision thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Within any Floodway Area/District (See § 84-19A.), no new construction
or development shall be allowed unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection regional
office.
F. Within any AE Area/District without floodway (See § 84-19B.), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured
fifty (50) feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless
the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection regional office.
G. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "cumulative substantial damage" shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 84-31 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-32
76:97

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 84-33. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Township Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request, grant relief from
the strict application of the requirements.
§ 84-34. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Township Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with the procedures contained in § 84-17
and the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodway area/district that would cause
any increase in the BFE.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that
would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one (1) foot at any point.
(3) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development which
may endanger human life (§ 84-26).
(4) Variances shall not be granted for recreational vehicles (§ 84-29) or
prohibited activities (Article VI).
(5) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(6) In granting any variance, the Township Zoning Hearing Board shall
attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(7) Whenever a variance is granted, the Township Zoning Hearing
Board shall notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(8) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township Zoning
Hearing Board shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
§ 84-33 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-34
76:99
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense; nor
[2] Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public,
or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(9) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Township Zoning Hearing Board. In addition,
a report of all variances granted during the year shall be included
in the annual report to FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one percent (1%) annual chance flood.
§ 84-34 MIDDLESEX CODE § 84-34
76:100
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 84-35. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 84-36. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year [also called the "100-year flood" or "one-percent
(1%) annual chance flood"].
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, and A1-30 that indicates
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two or more separate occasions during a
10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood
event, on average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the
structure before the damages occurred.
DECLARATION OF LAND RESTRICTION (NONCONVERSION
AGREEMENT) — A form signed by the property owner to agree not to
convert or modify, in any manner that is inconsistent with the terms of the
permit and these regulations, certain enclosures below the lowest floor of
elevated buildings and certain accessory structures. The form requires the
owner to record it on the property deed to inform future owners of the
restrictions.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
§ 84-35 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-36
76:101
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by the Township.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
Township.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
§ 84-36 MIDDLESEX CODE § 84-36
76:102
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the Township has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study but may include additional areas identified by the
Township. See §§ 84-18 and 84-19 for the specifics on what areas the
Township has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective start date of this floodplain
management chapter, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. Any construction started after December 1, 1983, and before the
effective start date of this floodplain management chapter, is subject to the
ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of
construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 84-36 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-36
76:103
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by the Township.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, Township, governmental unit, public utility
or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the Township's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated December 1,
1983, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
Township's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated December 1,
1983, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of one and one-half (1 1/2) feet. The freeboard safety
factor also applies to utilities and ductwork.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown
on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks/subdivisions and
substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such development is
located in all, or a designated portion of, a floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within twelve (12)
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 84-36 MIDDLESEX CODE § 84-36
76:104
months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension
is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The "actual start"
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation;
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading,
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before
the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures
which have incurred substantial damage or cumulative substantial damage,
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the Township,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
§ 84-36 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-36
76:105
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by the Township from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the Township's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 84-36 MIDDLESEX CODE § 84-36
76:106
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 84-37. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective immediately after adoption and shall remain
in force until modified, amended or rescinded by the Township of Middlesex,
Butler County, Pennsylvania.
§ 84-37 EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT § 84-37
76:107
Chapter 89
GRADING, EXCAVATION AND FILL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 65.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 84.
Impact fees — See Ch. 97.
Improvement design standards — See Ch.
101.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 134.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 144.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 147.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
150.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 89-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
persons and property and to promote the public welfare by preventing
excess erosion, hazardous rock and soil slippage, sediment production and
other soil and water management problems, and by regulating and
controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use location and
maintenance of grading, excavation and fill.
§ 89-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — A landowner who filed an application for a grading permit,
as defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of
1968, as amended,41 who has filed an application for development within
the Township.
ARCHITECT — A registered architect licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BEDROCK — Natural rock layer, hard or soft, in place at ground surface or
beneath unconsolidated surficial deposits.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of the Township.
BUILDING CODE — The officially adopted building code of the Township
and all subsequent amendments thereto.42
ENGINEER — A registered engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
41.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 65, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 84-37 MIDDLESEX CODE § 89-2
89:108
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity, including such processes as gravitational creep.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is cut into, disturbed, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new
location including the condition resulting therefrom.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING REPORT — A report prepared by a
registered professional geological engineer.
GRADE — The elevation of the existing or proposed ground surface at the
location of any proposed excavation or fill.
GRADING — An excavation or fill or a combination thereof.
GRADING ADMINISTRATOR — The Township Manager or his designated
representative.
GRADING PERMIT — Any permit required pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
HAZARD — Any danger or potential danger to life, limb or health, or any
adverse effect or potential adverse effect to the safety, use or stability of
property, waterways, public ways, structures, utilities and storm sewers,
including stream pollution.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — The floodplain area specifically
identified in Township zoning43 as being inundated by the one-hundred-year
flood. Included would be areas identified as floodway (FW), flood-fringe (FF)
and general floodplain (FA).
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Zoning.
§ 89-2 GRADING, EXCAVATION AND FILL § 89-2
89:109
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition); a lessee if the lessee is authorized
under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner; or other person
having a proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A landscape architect licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of occurring
each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
PERMIT HOLDER — Any landowner, agent of said landowner, or tenant with
the permission of said landowner who has been granted a grading permit
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
PERSON — A natural person, but also includes a partnership, corporation,
trust, association or any type of legal entity.
RETAINING WALL — A structure composed of concrete, steel, wood, or
other approved building material within the allowable stresses as specified
under the building code constructed for the purpose of supporting a cut or
filled embankment, or to retain or support the lateral pressure of earth or
other superimposed loads.
SECURITY — A bond, letter of credit or cash provided by the permit holder
to secure performance under this chapter.
SITE — A lot, tract or parcel of land, or a series of lots, tracts or parcels of
land which are adjoining and with respect to which grading work is to be
continuous and performed at the same time.
SLOPE — The upward or downward slant or inclination or degree of slant,
expressed either as a horizontal to vertical ratio or as a percentage of
vertical inclination from the horizontal.
SOIL CONSERVATION REPORT — A report, prepared by a registered
professional engineer, that includes a description of a site and topography,
drainage, cover, soils, soil limitations, erosion and sediment potential,
surface runoff changes and recommendations to minimize soil limitations,
erosion and sediment, and surface water disposal problems.
SOILS ENGINEER — A registered professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and having training and experience in
the branch of soils engineering.
The following activities shall not be considered a land development:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling, not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium; or
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
(2)
C.
§ 89-2 MIDDLESEX CODE § 89-2
89:110
SOILS SURVEY — The Survey for Butler County, Pennsylvania, and the
accompanying text, Soil Survey of Butler County, Pennsylvania, as prepared
by the USDA Soil Conservation Service, et al.
SOIL WASTE — Any and all parts or combination of ashes, garbage, refuse,
radioactive material, combustible demolition materials and industrial
wastes such as food processing wastes, wood, plastic, metal scrap, etc.
STEEP SLOPE — Any portion of any site which has a natural or finished
slope of 15% or more.
SURVEYOR — A registered professional surveyor licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP — Middlesex Township, a second class township located in
Butler County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The appointed engineer of the Township.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Manager of the Township.
TOWNSHIP SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT — The officially
adopted Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of the Township and
all subsequent amendments thereto.44
TOWNSHIP ZONING — The officially adopted Zoning Ordinance of the
Township and all subsequent amendments thereto.45
§ 89-3. Permit required.
No person shall commence or perform any grading, excavation, and/or
fill operations without first having obtained a grading permit from the
Township. A separate grading permit shall be required for each site as
follows.
§ 89-4. Grading, excavation and fill made on same site
One permit shall cover the grading, excavation, and any fill made on the
same site.
§ 89-5. Grading of large continuous parcel.
Only one permit shall be required for the grading of a large continuous
parcel of land for a major planned development, such as a planned
residential development or a planned commercial development, when the
standards for the grading of the entire parcel are satisfactory to and
approved by the grading administrator.
§ 89-6. Special approval for steep slopes.
No grading permit shall be issued for any site on which a steep slope is
located without zoning approval issued under Chapter 175, Zoning, and
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Zoning.
§ 89-2 GRADING, EXCAVATION AND FILL § 89-6
89:111
subdivision and land development approval issued under Chapter 150,
Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 89-7. Exceptions.
A grading permit will not be required, however, in any one of the following
situations, but in all other respects, the provisions of this chapter shall
apply:
§ 89-8. Application for permit.
Every applicant for a grading permit shall file a written application with
plans, specifications, and a soil conservation report with the grading
administrator in a form prescribed by the Township. Unless waiver is
granted by the grading administrator to one or more items, the application
shall:
A. An excavation which does not exceed four feet in vertical depth at its
deepest point measured from the natural ground surface or cover an
area of more than 1,000 square feet, provided that the surfaces of such
excavation do not have slope at any point steeper than two horizontal to
one vertical.
B. Fill which does not exceed four feet in vertical depth at its deepest point
measured from the natural ground surface and/or does not cover an
area of more than 1,000 square feet, provided that the surfaces of such
fills do not have a slope at any point steeper than two horizontal to one
vertical.
C. An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a
building, or a one-family dwelling, swimming pool, or underground
structure authorized by a building permit; and an excavation of a
driveway between a building site and the street. A permit is required
for an excavation of a driveway between the building site and the street
when, in the judgment of the grading administrator, extreme conditions
(such as excessive cut or fill) exist.
D. Soil excavated under the authorization of a properly issued building
permit which is stockpiled on the same site as the excavation.
E. Work performed or directed by the Township in a public street or alley
or in a Township park, playground or recreation area or on other public
property.
F. Where residential construction for a single-family house will result in an
excavation or fill, other than for a foundation, exceeding 100 cubic
yards or create a slope exceeding two horizontal to one vertical, then a
grading permit shall be required in addition to the building permit.
A. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block, tract and street address, or similar description which will readily
identify and definitively locate the proposed work.
§ 89-6 MIDDLESEX CODE § 89-8
89:112
B. State the estimated dates for the starting and completion of grading
work.
C. State the purpose for which the grading application is filed.
D. State whether or not a building, structure or other improvement, the
construction of which will require a building permit pursuant to the
provisions of the building code, is intended to be erected on the land on
which the grading is to be done.
E. Include plans and specifications prepared, signed and sealed by a
professional engineer, surveyor, architect or landscape architect, and
shall accurately portray and describe the site and proposed soil erosion
controls, if any. Plans shall be submitted in triplicate, one set of which
shall be of a reproducible nature, and shall include:
(1) The name, address and phone number of the applicant.
(2) The name, address and phone number of the owner of the land.
(3) The permission and approval of the owner of the property if the
applicant is an agent or tenant of the landowner, by affidavit.
(4) An accurate location by lot, block, tract, street address, a location
map or other similar information.
(5) A contour map showing the present contours of the land and the
proposed contours of the site after completion of the proposed
grading at two-foot intervals where the average slope is 15% or less
and at five-foot intervals where the average slope exceeds 15%.
(6) Cross-sections of the proposed cut or fill on fifty-foot intervals
which show the method of benching both cut and/or fill; provided,
however, that there shall be not less than two cross-sections for
each site.
(7) A plot plan showing the location of the grading boundaries, lot
lines, neighboring streets or ways, buildings, surface and
subsurface utilities and waterways, drainage patterns and
sufficient dimensions and other data to show all work.
(8) A description of the type and classification of the soil from the soil
survey, other standard surveys, or other methods.
(9) Details and location of any proposed drainage, structures and
pipes, walls and cribbing.
(10) Seeding locations and schedules, debris basins, diversion channels.
(11) A soil conservation report.
(12) If truck or trailer loads of soil are to be removed from or delivered
to the site, a description of truck travel routes must be approved by
§ 89-8 GRADING, EXCAVATION AND FILL § 89-8
89:113
§ 89-9. Responsibilities of grading administrator.
The responsibilities of the grading administrator shall be as follows:
§ 89-10. Expiration of permit; extension
the Township. Evidence of approval from a state or county agency,
where required, shall also be provided.
F. If proposed grading, excavation or fill is located entirely or partially
within any identified floodplain area, a document, certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, which states that the
proposed grading, excavation or fill has been adequately designed to
withstand the one-hundred-year flood elevations, pressure, velocities,
impact and uplift forces associated with the one-hundred-year flood and
that the plans adhere to the restrictions of this chapter. Such statement
shall include a description of the type and extent of measures which
have been incorporated into the design of the grading, excavation or
fill.
A. The grading administrator shall require that a geotechnical
engineering report be submitted by the applicant if the site is, has been,
or is likely to become hazardous to persons or property. The Coal
Resource Maps prepared by USGS, 1975, for the Greater Pittsburgh
Region (as well as the SCS Soil Survey for Butler County) shall be used
to locate hazardous areas. The report shall contain a detailed
description of the geological conditions of the site and shall include
conclusions and recommendations that will demonstrate the
relationship of the geological conditions to the proposed development,
including hazardous conditions, water resources, mineral resources
and environmental impact.
B. Where, due to special circumstances and conditions, compliance with
the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship, the
grading administrator may make such special reasonable exceptions
thereto, upon recommendation from the Township Engineer, as will not
be contrary to the public interest, and may impose such conditions as it
deems necessary to adequately protect the public interest.
A. Every grading permit shall expire by limitation and become null and
void if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced
within six months or is not completed within one year from the date of
issue, provided that the Township Manager may, if the permit holder
presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented
work being started or completed within the specified time limits, grant
a reasonable extension of time, and provided further that the
application for the extension of time is made before the date of
expiration of the permit.
B. Any physical changes from the original plan uncovered in the site
during the construction, such as surface water drainage, soil and
§ 89-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 89-10
89:114
§ 89-11. Denial of permit.
Where, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, the work as proposed by
the applicant is likely to endanger any property or person or any street or
alley or create hazardous conditions, the grading permit shall be denied.
In determining whether the proposed work is likely to endanger property
or streets or alleys or create hazardous conditions, the Township Engineer
shall give due consideration to possible saturation by rains, earth
movements, runoff surface waters and subsurface conditions such as the
stratification and faulting of rock aquifers, springs and the nature and type
of the soil or rock.
§ 89-12. Permit and fees.
§ 89-13. Performance security.
bedrock dislocations, alteration of groundwater discharge or any other
natural or man-made modification which would tend to adversely affect
the basis upon which the permit was issued, must be immediately
reported to the grading administrator by the permit holder. If the
circumstances dictate, the grading administrator shall revoke the
permit or otherwise modify the conditions upon which the permit was
initially issued.
A. Before issuing a grading permit, the grading administrator shall collect
a permit fee. Fees will be consistent with the appropriate and
applicable fee resolution adopted by the Board of Supervisors and as
may be amended from time to time.
B. Before issuance of a grading permit, the applicant shall post all
necessary performance security, in accordance with § 89-13 of this
chapter.
C. The applicant will be responsible for all costs associated with the
approval of the permit. Such costs shall include, but are not limited to,
inspection, engineering, legal, and administrative.
A. The applicant shall provide a written estimate of the cost to complete
the complete scope of grading and remedial work in order to comply
with this chapter, as prepared and certified by an engineer. The
Township, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer, may accept
or may refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown.
B. As a condition of grading approval for projects having an estimated cost
of $25,000 or more, the applicant shall post a security acceptable to the
Township in the amount of 110% of the estimated cost to perform the
grading and remedial work.
C. As a condition of grading approval for projects having an estimated cost
of less than $25,000, the applicant shall post a security acceptable to
§ 89-10 GRADING, EXCAVATION AND FILL § 89-13
89:115
§ 89-14. Inspections.
the Township in the amount of 50% of the estimated cost to perform the
grading and remedial work.
D. No security shall be required if security is posted for construction and/
or site improvements which already covers the cost of grading and
other control facilities.
A. Application for the permit by the applicant shall constitute consent to
enter the site for inspections at any time. The grading administrator
shall, when requested by the permit holder, make the inspections
hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work
which has been completed or notify the permit holder wherein the same
fails to comply with the provisions of this article. Where it is found by
inspection that the soil or other conditions are not as stated or shown in
the application, the grading administrator may refuse to approve
further work until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan
conforming to existing conditions.
B. Plans for grading work bearing the approval of the Township Engineer
shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the grading work
and until the work has been approved.
C. The permit holder shall notify the grading administrator in order to
obtain inspections in accordance with the following schedule and at
least 48 hours before the inspection is to be made. Before calling for
any inspection, the owner shall have the property line stakes set and
sufficient grade stakes set by a registered engineer or surveyor to
enable the grading administrator to verify the grading operation.
(1) Initial inspection: when work on the excavation or fill is about to be
commenced.
(2) Rough grading: when all rough grading has been completed.
(3) Drainage facilities: when drainage facilities which connect to or
shall become public facilities are to be installed and inspected
before such facilities are backfilled.
(4) Special structures: when excavations are complete for retaining
and crib walls when reinforcing steel is in place and before
concrete is poured.
(5) Final inspection: when all work, including the installation of all
drainage and other structures, has been completed.
D. If at any stage of the work the grading administrator shall determine by
inspection that the nature of the formation is such that further work as
authorized by an existing permit is likely to endanger property or
streets or alleys or create hazardous conditions, the Township may
require as a condition to allowing the work to be done that such
§ 89-13 MIDDLESEX CODE § 89-14
89:116
§ 89-15. Working conditions.
The following general working conditions will apply to all grading sites:
§ 89-16. Excavations.
Standards for excavations shall be as follows:
reasonable safety precautions be taken as the grading administrator
considers advisable to avoid such likelihood of danger. Safety
precautions may include but shall not be limited to specifying a flatter
exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities, berms,
temporary safety fencing, terracing, compaction or cribbing.
A. Dust control. During grading operations, necessary measures for dust
control will be exercised.
B. Cleanup. All soil washed or carried onto public streets during grading
operations shall be cleaned up immediately. Temporary driveway or
road surfaces shall be provided as soon as possible in accordance with
all local, state and federal laws. The owner of the property being graded
shall be responsible to protect and clean up lower properties of silt and
debris which have washed down onto the lower properties as a result of
the grading work on the higher property and to restore the property to
original condition.
C. Permit hours. The operation of heavy construction or excavation
machinery, including but not limited to bulldozers, high lifts, backhoes,
trucks, power shovels, pumps and jack hammers, and the operation of
equipment, such as saws and drills or any other type of machinery used
outside a structure, in conjunction with work requiring a building
permit, which causes a noise sufficient to disturb the peace and general
tranquility of the general public or any portion thereof, shall be
prohibited in the entire Township between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and all day Sunday and on
federally designated legal holidays.
A. Maximum slope steepness of a cut shall be two horizontal to one
vertical for minimizing erosion and landslide hazards. However, upon a
determination by a governmental review agency or a registered soils
engineer that the properties of the types of soil on the site to be graded,
as identified by the soil survey, other standard surveys, geological
surveys or core borings, require special consideration, then maximum
slopes may then be determined as follows:
(1) Landslide-prone soils or unstable rock formations where existing
slopes are less than 25% shall have proposed cut slopes no steeper
than are recommended by a registered soils engineer. A document
signed and sealed by said engineer shall be forwarded to the
Township prior to approval of the grading permit. Soil survey map
symbols for landslide-prone soils are:
§ 89-14 GRADING, EXCAVATION AND FILL § 89-16
89:117
§ 89-17. Fills.
Standards for fills shall be as follows:
(a) UGD Urban Land. Guernsey complex, gently sloping 0% - 8%
slope.
(b) UGD Urban Land. Guernsey complex, moderately sloping 8% -
25% slope.
B. Cut slopes which are steeper than those specified above may be allowed
under a grading permit, provided one or both of the following is
satisfied:
(1) The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently stable
to sustain a slope steeper than the slope.
(2) A retaining wall or other approved support designed, signed and
sealed by a professional structural engineer and approved by the
grading administrator is provided to support the face of excavation.
C. The bottom edge of final slopes shall be set back a minimum of five feet
from adjacent property lines in order to permit the normal rounding of
the edge without encroaching on the abutting property or street and to
allow for location of proper drainage facilities and protective devices.
D. Before commencing any excavation which will in any way affect an
adjoining property or structures thereon, the person making the
excavation shall notify in writing the owners of the adjacent property or
buildings not less than 30 days before such excavation is to be made
that the proposed excavation is to be started. Copies of all such notices
shall be supplied to the grading administrator.
E. The grading administrator may require an excavation to be made with a
cut slope flatter than those specified above if he finds the material in
which the excavation is to be made is unusually subject to erosion, or if
other conditions exist which, under applicable engineering practice,
make such flatter cut slope necessary for stability and safety.
Excavations adjacent to any footing, foundation or structure shall not
extend below the minimum angle of repose or natural slope of the soil
under the nearest point of same unless such footing, foundation or
structure is first properly underpinned or otherwise protected against
settlement.
A. No fill shall be made in the Township which creates a slope steeper than
two horizontal to one vertical. However, the Township, on the advice
and recommendation of a registered soils engineer, may impose
conditions requiring that a fill be constructed with an exposed surface
flatter than two horizontal to one vertical if the soils engineer states
that, under the particular circumstances involved, such flatter surface
is necessary for stability and for the safety of persons and property.
§ 89-16 MIDDLESEX CODE § 89-17
89:118
B. Whenever a fill is to be made of materials other than clean soil or earth,
the grading permit shall be subject to the following additional
limitations and requirements:
(1) The fill shall be completed within a reasonable length of time as
determined by the Township Engineer and specified on the grading
permit.
(2) Clean soil or earth shall be placed over the top and exposed
surfaces of the fill, including all embankments, planting and
seeding areas, to a minimum depth of six inches to effectively
conceal all materials used in the fill other than clean soil or earth.
Prior to spreading topsoil, the subgrade shall be scarified to a
depth of two inches to facilitate the bonding of the subsoil with the
topsoil. If the filling operation is intermittent, the Township
Engineer may require that the top and exposed surfaces of the fill
be so covered at the completion of each lift.
(3) No fill of any kind shall be placed over topsoil, trees, stumps or
other material which would create a nuisance, potential fire hazard
or sanitary problem such as decomposition which would attract
rodents, termites or other pests.
(4) Fill areas shall be prepared by removing organic material such as
vegetation and rubbish, and any other material determined by the
grading administrator to prevent proper compaction and stability.
C. Where fills are located so that earth movement may result in personal
injury or damage to adjacent property, streets, alleys or buildings, the
bearing value and stability of the material under proposed fills and
embankments shall be determined by subsurface investigation
performed by a soils engineer.
D. Rock may be incorporated into fills and embankments but only in layers
24 inches thick, maximum, as per the latest edition of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT) Specifications Publication
408, as amended, with voids filled and a blanket of compacted fill
separating one layer of rock from the next. Rock fill shall not be placed
near the bottom of foundations, building caissons and subsurface utility
installations. Suitable earth shall be reserved or provided to cover rock
fill under proposed seeded or planted areas.
E. No unsuitable material, including but not limited to the following, shall
be placed in fill areas: coal, boney, red-dog, expansive shale cinders,
wood or soil waste decomposable material.
F. On major fills or embankments, a toe bench shall be constructed below
the mantle under the toe of fill. A porous drain and a discharge pipe
shall be installed on the bottom and the back wall of the toe bench.
G. All fills and embankments shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements set forth in the latest edition of the Pennsylvania
§ 89-17 GRADING, EXCAVATION AND FILL § 89-17
89:119
§ 89-18. Retaining walls.
Standards for retaining walls shall be as follows:
Department of Transportation Specifications Publication 408, as
amended, and any special provisions as specified by a registered soils
engineer.
H. The bottom edge of final slopes shall be set back a minimum of five feet
from adjacent property lines in order to permit the normal rounding of
the edge without encroaching on the abutting property or street and to
allow for location of proper drainage facilities and protective devices.
I. Pursuant to a determination by the grading administrator that the
nature of a fill or embankment so warrants, a compaction test shall be
required at the end of each eight-inch lift, prior to the start of the next
lift of material.
J. Within any identified floodplain area, fill, if used, shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points.
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted.
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring or settling.
(4) Be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Township Engineer.
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
A. When the topographic natural condition of the property is such that a
ground slope of two horizontal to one vertical is not feasible, the
grading administrator may consider the submission of a grading plan
showing a retaining wall and ground slope combination that would be
aesthetically acceptable.
B. Criteria for the acceptance of such a combination shall as a minimum
provide the following:
(1) That the retaining wall(s) not exceed a height of six feet, except
where there is a showing of extraordinary circumstances.
(2) If the plan incorporates terracing, the gradient of the slope
between retaining walls shall not exceed two horizontal to one
vertical, and that the horizontal distance between walls be at least
equal to the height of the retaining wall.
§ 89-17 MIDDLESEX CODE § 89-18
89:120
§ 89-19. Drainage.
The standards for drainage control shall be as follows:
(3) Where a stable natural rock ledge is existing, as established by a
written statement from a registered professional soils engineer, a
similar design of rock ledge and ground slope combination may be
considered by the grading administrator.
C. When a retaining wall is constructed to satisfy the requirements of this
chapter and all other applicable codes (including, but not limited to the
Township zoning and building code), a building permit will not be
required in addition to the grading permit.
D. Retaining walls must be designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practice. The plans submitted for approval shall
include a description of proposed backfilling and subterranean
drainage facilities and bear the seal of a professional engineer.
E. Specifically, where a wall is replacing an exposed slope, the vertical
face of the wall shall be set back a minimum of five feet from adjacent
property lines. An exception to this requirement may be granted by the
grading administrator upon an application satisfactorily demonstrating
that such an exception is necessary to permit normal use of the
property, that is, for a sideline driveway, or other reasonable
consideration.
F. Guiderails or protective fencing that meet the requirements of the
building code are required to be installed where retaining wall heights
are three feet in height and higher, and in accordance with Chapter
175, Zoning.
A. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from
damaging the cut face of excavations and/or the sloping surface of fills
and/or adjacent properties. Interception and diversion facilities for
stormwater and surface water runoff, both above and below the cut
area during and after construction, shall be included in the design.
B. Drainage ditches shall be constructed prior to clearing or grading at the
toe and top of cut and fill slopes to divert the surface water to drainage
facilities such as storm sewers, street gutters or natural watersheds
during and after construction.
C. Drainage ditches with a grade of 5% or greater shall be paved with
concrete, bituminous material, brick, half pipe, rubble or other hard
surface material.
D. The grading administrator may approve methods and materials
recommended by governmental agencies, professional engineers and
architects, when they are more suitable to the site in preventing
damage. Private drainage facilities of any nature shall be at least
§ 89-18 GRADING, EXCAVATION AND FILL § 89-19
89:121
§ 89-20. Erosion and sedimentation control.
The standards for soil erosion and sedimentation control shall be as follows:
A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be prepared in
accordance with the provisions of Title 25, Environmental Resources,
Chapter 102 "Erosion Control," and approved by the Butler County
Conservation District (BCCD) prior to the commencement of any grading
or other regulated earth-disturbance activity, unless the Butler County
Conservation District determines that said plan is not required.
§ 89-21. Maintenance.
The standards for maintenance shall be as follows:
§ 89-22. General requirements.
General requirements shall be as follows:
designed to accommodate the largest size storm that would occur on
the average of every 10 years.
A. The owner of any property on which an excavation or fill has been made
shall maintain in good condition and repair the excavation or fill
permitted and also all retaining wall, cribbing, drainage structures,
fences, ground cover and any other protective devices as may be a part
of the permit requirements.
B. If at any time subsequent to the completion of the grading work the cut
face or fill slope shows evident signs of deterioration, erosion or other
evidence which might be detrimental to the properties above or below
the grading site, the Township, upon the recommendation of its
Engineer, may direct the property owner to take whatever necessary
remedial steps are deemed necessary to restore the grading area to a
safe condition and to do so in a reasonable period of time.
C. If after such notification the property owner has not made the
necessary repairs within the allotted time, the Township Manager may
direct that the required repairs be undertaken and the cost thereof
shall be borne by the property owner.
A. The owner of the property being graded shall notify the grading
administrator of the starting date of grading activity no later than 24
hours prior to the commencement of grading activity.
B. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be set back a minimum of five
feet, as established by the provisions of this chapter, from adjacent
property lines or street right-of-way lines in order to permit the normal
rounding of the edge without encroaching on the abutting property or
street.
C. The owner of the property being graded shall be responsible to protect
and clean up lower properties of silt and debris which have washed
§ 89-19 MIDDLESEX CODE § 89-22
89:122
down onto the lower properties as a result of the grading work on the
higher property and restore to original condition.
D. Proposed grading shall be accomplished so that existing stormwater
runoff flows are neither increased from predevelopment rates nor
concentrated at the point of release onto abutting properties.
E. Screening, buffering and landscaping shall be provided for all grading
activities as follows:
(1) In a land development, a minimum fifteen-foot buffer shall be
provided between the top or bottom edge of any slope area on the
land proposed to be graded and the adjacent property line. Existing
vegetation, such as trees, bushes and shrubs, shall remain
undisturbed. If none exist or existing vegetation is ineffective or not
hardy, natural screening shall be provided consisting of trees,
bushes or shrubs at least six feet in height, planted in the buffer
area in accordance with a plan to be approved by the Township.
(2) For all other grading activities, natural screening must be provided
between the proposed area to be graded and the adjacent property
line, consisting of trees, bushes, or shrubs at least six feet in height.
F. No grading, clear-cutting or denuding of the landscape shall be
permitted on any site, lot or parcel unless zoning approval for
development in accordance with Chapter 175, Zoning, and Chapter
150, Subdivision and Land Development, has been obtained.
G. No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made
to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be
affected by such action have been notified by the Township and until all
required permits and approvals have been obtained from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams
and Waterways Management.
H. In order to prevent the denuding of the landscape wherever
practicable, large trees and other natural features constituting
important physical, aesthetic and economic assets to existing or
impending development work shall be preserved.
I. All disturbed soil surfaces shall be stabilized by effective seeding or
other proper means prior to the first day of November of any year. Any
resultant noxious vegetation that results from improper planting or
maintenance of stabilized or partially stabilized soil shall be removed.
J. Within any FW (Floodway Zoning District) and within any floodway area
of any FA (General Floodplain Zoning District) as delineated in Chapter
175, Zoning, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Any new grading, excavation or filling that would cause any
increase in flood heights shall be prohibited.
§ 89-22 GRADING, EXCAVATION AND FILL § 89-22
89:123
§ 89-23. Violations and penalties.
§ 89-24. Additional remedy.
In case any work is performed by any person in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, the proper officers of the Township, in addition
to the other remedies prescribed by law, may institute, in the name of
the Township, any appropriate legal action or proceedings to prevent such
unlawful work and restrain or abate said violation.
(2) No new grading, excavation or filling shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams and Waterways
Management.
K. In order to protect hillsides exceeding 25% but not less than 40% in
slope, no more than 20% of the site area of the natural vegetative cover
may be disturbed unless a program for reforestation of the disturbed
areas that is over 20% of the site area is approved by the Township and
all necessary improvements are guaranteed by security in accordance
with § 89-13 of this chapter.
L. Grading and soil excavation are prohibited on any steep slope.
A. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any
grading, excavation or fill or cause the same to be done contrary to or in
violation of this chapter. Such violation shall be discontinued
immediately.46
B. When written notice of a violation of any of the provisions this chapter
has been served by the grading administrator on any person, such
violation shall be discontinued immediately.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result
thereof. In addition, any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a
violation of Chapter 175, Zoning. Whenever such person has been
notified by the grading administrator that he has committed such
violation of this chapter, each day that he shall continue such violation
after such notification shall constitute a separate offense, punishable by
a like fine or penalty.47
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 89-22 MIDDLESEX CODE § 89-25
89:124
§ 89-25. Appeals.
Any applicant may appeal a decision of the grading administrator to the
Zoning Hearing Board of the Township in accordance with the procedures
set forth in Chapter 175, Zoning, and the Municipalities Planning Code.48
Chapter 97
IMPACT FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 65.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 84.
Grading, excavation and fill — See Ch. 89.
Improvement design standards — See Ch.
101.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
150.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 162.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 97-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Middlesex Township Impact Fee
Program."
§ 97-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the Middlesex Township Impact
Fee Program, including a Transportation Capital Improvements Plan, to
ensure that the transportation system is available and adequate to support
existing volumes of traffic and traffic projected to be generated by new
growth and development. To advance this objective, the Middlesex
Township Impact Fee Program shall be based upon the imposition of an
impact fee payable to the Township at the time of building permit issuance.
Additionally, the program identifies existing deficiencies due to pass
through trips and future trip generation attributable to new development.
The program will provide a continuing generation of funds necessary for
the Township to initiate and complete capital transportation improvements
as needed in support of new growth and development. Such a program
will involve participation by developers as well as local, state and federal
governments. Through the Impact Fee Program, the Township is
establishing a process whereby future traffic needs can be addressed in a
timely manner and the impact of increased traffic volumes can be minimized
to the extent possible.
§ 97-3. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors hereby finds and declares that:
48.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 89-25 IMPACT FEES § 97-3
97:125
§ 97-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
following meanings unless another meaning is plainly intended:
A. The Township is committed to the provision of a transportation system
at service levels necessary to support residential and nonresidential
growth and development.
B. Transportation service levels will be provided by the Township utilizing
funds allocated via the capital budget, capital improvements programs
and impact fees.
C. The aggregation of development in the defined transportation service
areas intensifies the demand for transportation improvements designed
to accommodate traffic volumes at a "D" level of service for Township
intersections and a "C" level of service for Township road segments as
defined by the Transportation Research Board of the National Academy
of Science, which is the minimum acceptable level of service to
accommodate such development and the intensity thereof.
D. The development potential of properties in the defined transportation
service areas is reflected in the Roadway Sufficiency Analysis adopted
by Resolution No. 04-32 and the Township's Comprehensive Plan and is
implemented via Chapter 150, Subdivision and Land Development, and
Chapter 175, Zoning.
E. To the extent that new development in the transportation service areas
places demands upon the transportation system, those demands should
be satisfied by the establishment of an Impact Fee Program that
distributes the responsibility for financing the provision of such
transportation facilities among the Township, state and federal
governments, and developers.
F. The amount of the impact fee to be imposed shall be calculated in
accordance with the provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code, 53
P.S. § 10501-A et seq., as amended, and this chapter, applying the
engineering standards set forth in Trip Generation, 6th Ed. 1997 Vols.
1-3, Institute of Transportation Engineering, and any amendments or
future editions thereof.49
G. The Township hereby finds and declares that an impact fee imposed
upon new development, in order to assist in the financing of specified
major transportation capital improvements in the defined
transportation service areas, the demand for which has been quantified
through the application of land use assumptions provided by the Impact
Fee Advisory Committee appointed by the Board of Supervisors, is in
the best interest of the Township and its residents.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 97-3 MIDDLESEX CODE § 97-4
97:126
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit for the activities regulated under Chapter
65, adopting the Uniform Construction Code, including the following
activities:
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The overall policy guide for the physical manmade
change to improved or unimproved real estate of the Township of
Middlesex adopted by the Board of Supervisors as the Comprehensive Plan
of the Township of Middlesex either as a whole or in parts, consisting of
documents, maps, drawings and charts in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code and as amended from time to time. The
Township of Middlesex Comprehensive Plan includes but is not limited
to the Middlesex Township-Richland Township Joint Comprehensive Plan
adopted December 15, 2004, by the Board of Supervisors and designs or
plans or any studies or surveys emanating therefrom.
DEVELOPER — Any person who has legal title of land, agent of the legal
title or tenant with permission of the person who has legal title of land, who
makes an application for development.
IMPACT FEE — A fee, to be paid at building permit issuance, and calculated
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code, 53
P.S. §§ 10501-A to 10507-A, as amended, and this chapter.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Any commercial, industrial or residential or other
project which involves new construction, enlargement, reconstruction,
redevelopment, relocation or structural alteration and which is expected to
generate additional vehicular traffic within the transportation service area
of the municipality. New development also includes any change in use that
increases p.m. peak-hour trips generated by an improved development.
OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS — Those public capital improvements that are
not on-site improvements and that serve the needs of more than one
development.
ON-SITE IMPROVEMENTS — All improvements constructed on the
applicant's property or the improvements constructed on the property
abutting the applicant's property necessary for the ingress or egress to
the applicant's property and required to be constructed by the applicant
pursuant to any municipal ordinance including, but not limited to, the
Construct or alter a man-made object having a stationary location on
land or water;
A.
B. Construct an addition;
Demolish or move a man-made object having a stationary location on
land or water;
C.
D. Make a change of occupancy;
Install or alter any equipment regulated by the Uniform Construction
Code;
E.
F. Move a lot line which divides a lot from another lot or street.
§ 97-4 IMPACT FEES § 97-4
97:127
municipal building code, subdivision and land development ordinance,
planned residential development regulations and zoning ordinance.
PEAK-HOUR — The Township has identified the p.m. peak-hour, between
the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., as the relevant peak-hour period for
the calculation of impact fees.
TRANSPORTATION CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS — Those off-site
improvements that have a life expectancy of three or more years, not
including costs for maintenance, operation or repair.
TRANSPORTATION CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN — A plan adopted
by the Board of Supervisors of the Township prior to the enactment of
any impact fee ordinance for the purpose of identifying and planning for
transportation capital improvements. Specifically, the Impact Fee Advisory
Committee prepared or directed to be prepared a Transportation Capital
Improvements Plan dated November 2004, prepared by Herbert, Rowland
& Grubic, Inc., adopted as Resolution No. 04-32 of the Board of Supervisors
on December 15, 2004.
TRANSPORTATION SERVICE AREAS — Geographically defined areas of the
Township which, pursuant to Chapter 175, Zoning, and applicable district
regulations, have an aggregation of sites with development potential
creating the need for transportation improvements for such area to be
funded by impact fees. (See Exhibit A.50)
TRIP GENERATION RATES — Those rates of traffic for the p.m. peak-hour
of adjacent street traffic between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. as determined in
Trip Generation, 6th Edition 1997 Vols. 1-3, The Institute of Transportation
Engineers, and any amendments or future editions thereof.
UNIT COST PER TRIP — The dollar figure calculated by dividing the total
costs of the road improvements included in the adopted Transportation
Capital Improvement Plan within a given transportation service area
attributable to and necessitated by new development within the service
area divided by the number of anticipated p.m. peak-hour trips generated
by all new development consistent with the land use assumptions and
calculated in accordance with Trip Generation, 6th Ed. 1997 Vols. 1-3,
The Institute of Transportation Engineers, and any amendments and future
editions thereto.
§ 97-5. Applicability of impact fee and de minimus new
development.
A. This chapter shall be uniformly applicable to all new development that
occurs within a defined transportation service area.
B. This chapter shall not apply to de minimus new development. "De
minimus" is defined to be new development that results in a total of two
or less p.m. peak-hour trips including any preexisting p.m. peak-hour
trips. This subsection sets forth a threshold limit for the applicability of
50.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 97-4 MIDDLESEX CODE § 97-5
97:128
§ 97-6. Imposition of impact fee.
No building permit subject to this chapter shall be issued for a development
in a transportation service area unless the applicant has paid the impact fee
imposed by and calculated pursuant to this chapter.
§ 97-7. Calculation of impact fee.
§ 97-8. Additional impact fee.
this chapter and shall not be construed to provide a two-trip credit to
new development.
C. This chapter shall not apply to public schools, or buildings associated
therewith, or to the Township of Middlesex, Saxonburg Area Authority,
or any other Township agency or authority. Schools and local
government agencies serve an overriding public interest, warranting an
exemption from impact fees.
A. The unit cost per trip is derived from the Transportation Capital
Improvement Plan and may be amended as transportation needs dictate
and as directed by the Board of Supervisors.
B. The impact fee imposed by this chapter upon all new development shall
be determined by applying the unit improvement cost to the p.m. peakhour
trips generated by a project as identified in Trip Generation, 6th
Edition 1997 Vols. 1-3, The Institute of Transportation Engineers, and
any amendments or future editions thereof, or by a special
transportation study pursuant to § 97-10. To determine the fee for a
specific use, the p.m. peak-hour trip generation rate for the proposed
use shall be multiplied by the unit improvement cost rate in each
transportation service area.
C. If the development for which a building permit is sought contains a mix
of uses, the applicant must separately calculate the impact fee due for
each type of development.
A. Applicability. An additional impact fee shall be imposed upon new
developments that generate 1,000 or more p.m. peak-hour trips, net of
pass-by trips as defined by Trip Generation 6th Ed. 1997 Vols. 1-3,
Institute of Transportation Engineers, and any amendments or future
editions thereof. This section is in addition to the impact fee calculated
under this chapter.
B. Traffic study. An applicant for a new development that generates 1,000
or more p.m. peak-hour trips shall be required to perform a traffic
analysis of development traffic impact on highways, roads or streets
outside the transportation service area in which the new development
is located, but within the boundaries of the Township. Any highways,
roads or streets, or parts thereof, outside the transportation service
area that will accommodate 10% or more of the new development
§ 97-5 IMPACT FEES § 97-8
97:129
§ 97-9. Establishment of transportation service areas.
The Township has defined transportation service areas as shown on the
Transportation Service Area Map (see Exhibit A, attached hereto and
incorporated herein51) in accordance with the provisions of the
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 97-10. Special transportation study.
§ 97-11. Administration of impact fees.
traffic and 100 or more new p.m. peak-hour trips may be required to
be studied. The traffic study is to be conducted in accordance with
the Township requirements as determined by the Township Traffic
Engineer.
C. Mitigation. Applicants for new development that generates 1,000 or
more new p.m. peak-hour trips, less pass-by trips, will be required to
mitigate the traffic impact of the new development on the affected
roads, highways and streets per the traffic study to maintain the
predevelopment conditions.
A. Applicability of this section. The Board of Supervisors may permit or
require a new development to perform a special transportation study to
document actual trip generation from a particular use. The instances
when a special transportation study can or must be performed are
limited to instances where:
(1) The Township requests a special transportation study;
(2) No "R" value or fitted curve equation is provided for the use in the
most recent version of Trip Generation 6th Ed. 1997 Vols. 1-3, The
Institute of Traffic Engineers;
(3) The use is not represented in any amendments or future editions of
Trip Generation 6th Ed. 1997 Vols. 1-3, The Institute of Traffic
Engineers.
B. Guidelines for conducting a special transportation study. Special
transportation studies must be conducted in accordance with the
guidance in the most recent version of Trip Generation 6th Ed. 1997
Vols. 1-3, The Institute of Traffic Engineers. The new development is
responsible for all costs associated with the special transportation
study.
A. Collection of impact fee. Impact fees due pursuant to this chapter shall
be collected by the Township in the manner prescribed herein prior to
issuance of a building permit.
51.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 97-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 97-11
97:130
§ 97-12. Impact Fee Advisory Committee.
B. Establishment and maintenance of accounts. The Township Manager
shall establish interest-bearing trust fund accounts created solely for
impact fees and shall maintain records whereby impact fees collected
are segregated by transportation service areas. All interest earned shall
become the funds of that account. Impact fees generated from new
development may only be expended for transportation capital
improvements identified as being funded by impact fees under the
Transportation Capital Improvements Plan in a particular
transportation service area, except as provided in § 97-13.
C. Maintenance of records. The Township Manager shall maintain and
keep adequate financial records for each such account that will show
the source and disbursement of all revenues, that will account for all
moneys received and that shall ensure that the disbursement of funds
from each account will be used solely and exclusively for the provision
of projects specified in the Transportation Capital Improvements Plan
for the particular transportation service area.
D. Annual accounting. The Township will provide that an annual
accounting is made for any account containing impact fee proceeds and
earned interest. The accounting shall include the total funds collected,
the source for the funds collected, the total amount of interest accruing
on such funds and the amount of funds expended on specific
transportation improvements. Notice of the availability of the results of
the accounting will be included and published as part of the Township's
annual audit. A copy will also be provided to the Impact Fee Advisory
Committee.
A. Role of the Impact Fee Advisory Committee. The Impact Fee Advisory
Committee, or Advisory Committee, is a committee formed pursuant to
the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as amended,
to serve in an advisory capacity to the Board of Supervisors. The
Advisory Committee has as its duties:52
(1) To make recommendations, with respect to land use assumptions,
on the development of comprehensive road improvements and
impact fees;
(2) To make recommendations to approve, disapprove or modify a
capital improvement program by preparing a written report
containing these recommendations to the Township;
(3) To monitor and evaluate the implementation of a capital
improvements program and the assessment of impact fees and
report annually to the Township with respect to the same;
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 97-11 IMPACT FEES § 97-12
97:131
§ 97-13. Disbursement of impact fees for projects not listed on
Plan.
The Township may expend impact fees paid by an applicant on projects not
contained in the adopted Transportation Capital Improvements Plan if all of
the following criteria are met:
(4) To advise the Township of the need to revise or update the land use
assumptions, capital improvements program or impact fees;
(5) To conduct public hearings with respect to any recommendations
on land use assumptions in accordance with the requirements of
the chapter and the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101
et seq., as amended;
(6) To prepare or cause to be prepared a roadway sufficiency analysis
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as amended.
B. Review of transportation capital improvements or impact fees charge.
The Board of Supervisors may request, no more than annually, the
Advisory Committee to review and make recommendations on the
transportation capital improvements or impact fee charges based only
on:
(1) Subsequent new development which has occurred in the Township;
(2) Completion of capital improvements in the Transportation Capital
Improvements Plan;
(3) Unavoidable delays in construction of capital improvements
contained in the plan beyond the Township's control or
responsibility;
(4) Significant changes in the land use assumptions;
(5) Changes in the estimated costs of the transportation improvements
proposed which may be recalculated by applying the construction
cost index as published in the American City/County Magazine or
the Engineering News Record;
(6) Significant changes in the projected revenue from sources listed.
A. The applicant has provided written consent to use its collected impact
fees for specific transportation projects which are not included in the
Transportation Capital Improvement Plan;
B. The alternative transportation project, whether highway or multimodal,
has as its purpose the reduction of traffic congestion or the
removal of vehicle trips from the roadway network;
C. The Township amends its Transportation Capital Improvements Plan
components required by Section 504-A(e)(1)(vi) of the Municipalities
§ 97-12 MIDDLESEX CODE § 97-13
97:132
§ 97-14. Method of payment.
Payment of the impact fee shall be made by the new development prior to
the issuance of a building permit by the Township to the new development
for development on the applicable site.
§ 97-15. Credit against impact fee.
Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10504-A(e)(1)(vi), to provide replacement of
the collected impact fees transferred to transportation projects outside
the approved Transportation Capital Improvements Plan from sources
other than impact fees or developer contributions within three years
of completion of the alternative projects to which the transferred fees
were applied.
A. A traffic generator is entitled to a credit against the impact fee in the
amount of the fair market value of any land dedicated by the applicant
to the Township for future right-of-way, realignment or widening of any
existing roadways or for the value of any construction of road
improvements contained in the Transportation Capital Improvement
Plan which is performed at the applicant's expense. The amount of such
credit for any capital improvement constructed shall be the amount
allocated in the capital improvement program, including contingency
factors for such work. The fair market value of any land dedicated by
the applicant shall be determined as of the date of the submission of the
land development or subdivision application to the Township.
B. Any new development which performs, at its own expense, off-site
improvements as defined by this chapter shall be eligible for a credit
toward the impact fee otherwise due in the amount of the actual cost of
such off-site improvements as approved by the Township Engineer.
Such credit shall not exceed the amount of the impact fee. In order for a
new development to be eligible for this credit it must announce the
intent to perform off-site improvements during the subdivision or land
development approval process. The announcement must be in writing
and must set forth the off-site improvement project for which the traffic
generator is seeking credit. The traffic generator must enter into an
agreement with the Township prior to the issuance of any building
permit. The agreement must establish the estimated cost of the
improvement, the schedule for initiation and completion of the
improvement, guarantee that the improvement be completed to
Township and Pennsylvania Department of Transportation standards
and design criteria, and such other terms and conditions as deemed
necessary by the Township. The Township must review the
improvement plan, verify costs and time schedules, determine if the
improvement is an eligible improvement and determine the amount of
the applicable credit for such improvement to be applied to the
otherwise applicable impact fee prior to issuance of any building
permit. In no event may the Township provide a credit that is greater
than the applicable impact fee. If, however, the amount of the credit is
§ 97-13 IMPACT FEES § 97-15
97:133
§ 97-16. Refunds.
calculated to be greater than the amount of the impact fee due, the
new development may utilize such excess credit toward the impact fees
imposed on other building permits for development on the same site
and in the same ownership.
C. The Township may provide a credit against impact fees for the value of
any construction projects that are not contained in the adopted
Transportation Capital Improvements Plan which are performed at the
traffic generator's expense, if all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant has provided written consent to a credit of its
collected impact fees for specific transportation projects which are
not included in the Transportation Capital Improvements Plan;
(2) The alternative transportation project, whether highway or multimodal,
has as its purpose the reduction of traffic congestion or the
removal of vehicle trips from the roadway network;
(3) The Township amends its Transportation Capital Improvements
Plan components required by Section 504-A(e)(1)(vi) of the
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10504-A(e)(1)(vi), to
provide replacement of the credited impact fees transferred to
transportation projects outside the approved Transportation
Capital Improvements Plan from sources other than impact fees or
developer contributions within three years of completion of the
alternative projects to which the transferred fees were applied.
A. The payor of the impact fee may apply for a refund of appropriate share
of any such fee and any interest earned from the date of payment if:
(1) The Township has failed to commence any transportation service
area road improvements within three years of the scheduled
construction date set forth in the Transportation Capital
Improvements Plan.
(2) The new development for which impact fees were paid is not
commenced prior to the expiration of a building permit issued for
the new development within the time limits established by
applicable building codes; or the project for which a building
permit has been issued has been altered resulting in a decrease in
the amount of the impact fee due.
(3) If upon completion of any road improvements project the actual
expenditures are less than 95% of the costs allocable to the fee paid
within the transportation service area in which the road
improvement was adopted, the municipality shall refund to the
payer the pro-rata difference between the budgeted costs and the
actual expenditures, including interest from the date of payment.
§ 97-15 MIDDLESEX CODE § 97-16
97:134
§ 97-17. Interpretation.
The words and phrases of this chapter are to be construed in accordance
with the following rules:
(4) In the event that the Township terminates or completes an adopted
capital improvements plan for a transportation service area and
there remains at the time of termination or completion undisbursed
funds in the accounts established for that purpose, the Township
shall provide written notice by certified mail to those persons who
previously paid the fees which remain undisbursed of the
availability of said funds for refund of the person's proportionate
share of the fund balance. The allocation of the refund shall be
determined by generally accepted accounting practices. In the
event that any of the funds remain unclaimed following one year
after the notice, which shall be provided to the last known address
provided by the payer of the fees to the Township, the Township
shall be authorized to transfer any funds so remaining to any other
fund in the Township without any further obligation to refund said
funds.
B. The request for refund must be submitted to the Township Manager in
writing specifying the details and basis for the request for refund.
A. Definitions.
(1) First, words and phrases are to be interpreted as defined by this
chapter;
(2) Second, words and phrases that are not defined by this chapter are
to be interpreted as defined in Sections 107 and 502-A of the
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), 53 P.S. §§ 10107 and 10502-A,
as amended;
(3) Third, words and phrases that are not defined in this chapter or
Sections 107 and 502-A of the MPC are to be interpreted as defined
in Chapter 175, Zoning, and Chapter 150, Subdivision and Land
Development;
(4) Fourth, words and phrases that are not defined in this chapter,
Sections 107 and 502-A of the MPC, or in Chapter 175, Zoning, or
Chapter 150, Subdivision and Land Development, are to be given
their common, ordinary dictionary meaning within the context of
the sentence in which they are used.
B. Construction. The words, phrases and provisions of this chapter are not
to be interpreted in a way the results in an absurd construction of the
meaning, or in a way that causes one provision to contradict another.
§ 97-16 IMPACT FEES § 97-18
97:135
§ 97-18. Liberal construction.
The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to effectively
carry out the purposes that are hereby found and declared to be in
furtherance of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience.
§ 97-19. Retroactive application.
Impact fees may be imposed on new development for which an application
has been filed on or after the first publication of notice of the Township's
intent to adopt this chapter; provided, however, that such retroactivity does
not exceed 18 months after the adoption of the resolution that created the
Advisory Committee in connection herewith. In retroactive applications, the
per-trip fee may not exceed $1,000 or the actual calculated fee, whichever
is less.
Chapter 101
IMPROVEMENT DESIGN STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 65.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 84.
Grading, excavation and fill — See Ch. 89.
Impact fees — See Ch. 97.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 144.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 147.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
150.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 97-18 MIDDLESEX CODE § 97-19
97:136
ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
§ 101-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as and referred to as the "Middlesex Township
Improvement Design Standards."
§ 101-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
§ 101-3. Interpretation.
The Township shall be responsible for the administration, enforcement and
interpretation of this chapter.
§ 101-4. Applicability.
These regulations shall be applicable to the construction of all public and
private improvements in the Township.
§ 101-5. Construction of public and private improvements.
Public and private improvements constructed by any person or entity
including a developer shall be constructed in accordance with Article IV of
this chapter.
§ 101-6. Control of construction of public and private improvements
by developers.
A. Establish construction standards and specifications governing the
construction of public and private improvements in the Township.
B. Control the construction and installation of public and private
improvements in the Township by developers and public utility
companies.
C. Control the acceptance of public improvements.
D. Control the satisfactory completion of private improvements.
A. All construction of public and private improvements in the Township by
developers shall be conducted in accordance with this section of this
chapter.
B. Notice prior to start of work. In order that the Township may provide
proper inspection and emergency services during construction, the
developer shall file with the Township a Notice of Commencement in
form set forth in Article III not less than two days prior to start of work
and shall also submit the following:
§ 101-1 IMPACT FEES § 101-6
97:137
(1) Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the superintendent,
contractor and subcontractors and other responsible persons to be
contacted in case of emergencies.
(2) A general schedule of construction which is to be updated during
construction if changes are made.
C. Supervision and superintendence.
(1) The developer shall supervise and direct the work and be solely
responsible to see that the work is done in accordance with the
construction standards and specifications.
(2) The developer shall have available at all times while construction is
continuing a competent superintendent, who may be contacted
during an emergency. The superintendent will be the developer's
representative at the site and shall have authority to act on behalf
of the developer. All communications given to the superintendent
shall be as binding as if given to the developer. If the
superintendent is replaced, the developer shall give written notice
thereof to the Township immediately.
(3) The developer shall be fully responsible for the acts and omissions
of the contractors, subcontractors, persons and organizations
directly or indirectly in his employ.
D. Site appearance. The developer shall keep the site free from
accumulation of waste materials, rubbish and other debris resulting
from the work. At the completion of the work, the developer shall
remove all waste materials, rubbish and debris from and about the site
as well as all tools, construction equipment and machinery, and surplus
materials, and shall leave the site clean.
E. Parking. No construction vehicles, vehicles of construction employees,
equipment, materials or supplies shall encroach onto a public street. In
the case where there is a private street or proposed public street, not
yet accepted by the Township, the developer shall maintain an
eighteen-foot unobstructed clear path on such street for emergency
vehicle purposes.
F. Hours of construction. The operation of heavy construction or
excavation machinery, including but not limited to bulldozers, high-lifts,
backhoes, trucks, power shovels, pumps and jack hammers, and the
operation of equipment such as saws and drills or any other type of
machinery in conjunction with the construction of public and private
improvements, which causes noise sufficient to disturb the peace and
general tranquility of the general public shall be prohibited in the entire
Township between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Monday
through Saturday, and all day Sunday.
G. Dust control. The developer shall maintain the site so as to control the
dust. The developer shall employ measures necessary to control dust.
§ 101-6 MIDDLESEX CODE § 101-6
97:138
§ 101-7. Control of construction of utilities by public utility
companies.
A Township road occupancy permit is required for the installation of any
utilities within an existing public street in accordance with the procedures
and requirements set forth in the ordinances of the Township.
§ 101-8. Violations and penalties.
§ 101-9. Stop-work orders.
At the Township's direction the Township may require routine
maintenance of the site for dust control should, in the opinion of the
Township, the developer not maintain the site in a reasonable manner.
H. Responsibility for compliance. The developer shall have the sole
responsibility to comply with all federal, state, and local laws, and the
Township disclaims any duty to enforce any violation of such laws or
inform the developer of noncompliance.
A. It shall be unlawful for any developer or public utility company to
construct public or private improvements regulated by this chapter, or
cause the same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Notice of violation. The Township shall serve a notice of violation or
order on the developer or utility company responsible for the violation
of the provisions of this chapter or of the plans approved thereunder.
Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or
condition and the abatement of the violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District
Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of
a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each
section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.
D. Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the Township from instituting appropriate
action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate
a violation or to stop an illegal act.
A. Notice to stop work. Upon notice from the Township that work on the
installation of public or private improvements is being prosecuted
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, such work shall be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and shall
§ 101-6 IMPACT FEES § 101-9
97:139
§ 101-10. Procedure for acceptance of public improvements.
The procedure for acceptance of public improvements shall be in
accordance with Chapter 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 101-11. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended by action of the Supervisors; however, the
construction standards in Article IV of this chapter as they pertain to
any particular public improvement may be modified by motion of the
Supervisors upon recommendation of the Township Engineer and Township
Manager.
§ 101-12. Mediation of disputes.
be given to the developer, or to the person doing the work. The stopwork
order shall state the conditions under which the work may be
resumed.
B. Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or
about a work site after having been served with a stop-work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to the violations and
penalties set forth herein.
A. Should there arise any dispute between the developer or the Township
with regard to any provisions of this chapter, the developer and
Township may elect to use the provisions of this section to mediate such
dispute. Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The
appropriateness of mediation shall be determined by the particulars of
each case and the willingness of the parties to negotiate.
B. Parties agreeing to enter into mediation shall first enter into a written
mediation agreement containing at least the following minimum
provisions:
(1) Identification of the selected mediator who, at a minimum, shall
have a working knowledge of municipal zoning and subdivision
procedures, and engineering practices. The mediator shall have
demonstrated skills in mediation.
(2) Time frame in which the mediation will be conducted and
completed.
(3) Provisions for suspension of time limits, if necessary, for
applications subject to the same in regards to subdivision, land
development, planned residential development or other application
or procedures pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.53
53.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 101-9 MIDDLESEX CODE § 101-12
97:140
(4) Identification of all parties and affording them the opportunity to
participate.
(5) Subject to legal restraints determining whether the mediation
sessions or parts thereof shall be open to the public.
(6) Identification as to whether the results of such mediation shall be
binding upon the parties.
C. Funding for mediation shall be borne equally between the Township
and the developer.
D. Mediated solutions shall be in writing and signed by the parties, and
become subject to review and approval by the appropriate decision
making body when necessary.
E. No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the
final written mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in
any subsequent judicial or administrative proceedings.
§ 101-12 IMPACT FEES § 101-12
97:141

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 101-13. Definitions
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AS-BUILT PLAN — A drawing, signed and sealed by a registered surveyor
or registered engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, showing the final as-built location, elevation and/or depth,
size and materials of all completed public and private improvements as well
as all easements.
CARTWAY — That portion of the street right-of-way surfaced for vehicular
use.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at a street
intersection, defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of street lines.
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS — The construction standards for streets,
stormwater management facilities, sanitary sewer systems, pedestrian
circulation, driveways, parking areas, fire hydrants, guide rails, cable
television and other facilities as set forth in this chapter.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, not a public utility company, agent of such
landowner including the landowner's contractor or resident or
superintendent or tenant with permission of such landowner, who
constructs or causes to be constructed any public or private improvements
anywhere in the Township not under a contract.
DRIVEWAY — A private area used exclusively for circulation and ingress
and egress to a street by the owner or owners or visitors of the lot. All
driveways shall meet the requirements of this chapter.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A residential building containing one
dwelling unit occupied by one family and which is the only principal building
on the lot.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance which calls for immediate
action.
ENGINEER — The Township Engineer who is charged with the design and
inspection of the work, and with determining the quantities of materials and
labor to be paid for. During the execution of the work the "engineer" shall
also be interpreted to mean the assistant, inspector, or other representative
acting within the authority given. The Engineer is to be considered an agent
of the Township.
FINANCIAL SECURITY — Surety, in a form acceptable to the Township
Solicitor, in the form of cash, a certified check or irrevocable letter of credit
and restrictive or escrow account or set-aside agreement from a federalor
commonwealth-chartered lending institution, or a corporate performance
bond or a labor-and-material payment bond from a surety company
§ 101-13 IMPACT FEES § 101-13
97:143
authorized to conduct business in the commonwealth, which may be
classified as the following:
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any conditions), a lessee (if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner) or other persons having a
proprietary interest in the lot.
PARKING AREA — A public or private garage or a paved, open off-street
area other than a driveway or street with adequate means of access, which
meets the requirements of this chapter and which is used exclusively for the
parking of vehicles of occupants or visitors of the lot; however, a driveway
serving a single-family dwelling or which is for the exclusive use of an
individual dwelling unit in a residential building may be used as a parking
area.
PEDESTRIAN CONNECTION — An area of land providing a connection for
bicyclists and pedestrians between two streets or two lots.
PRIVATE IMPROVEMENT — A street, sidewalk, walkway, gutter, curb,
stormwater management facility, sanitary sewer, waterline, driveway,
parking area, street light, landscaping, street sign, traffic control device,
and other related facility, to be operated and maintained by a private entity,
but which must comply with this chapter, including temporary erosion
and sedimentation control or stormwater management method undertaken
during construction.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — A street, sidewalk, walkway, gutter, curb,
stormwater management facility, sanitary sewer, waterline, driveway,
parking area, street light, landscaping, street sign, traffic control device,
and other related facility, to be dedicated or maintained by the Township
which must comply with this chapter, including temporary erosion and
sedimentation control or stormwater management method undertaken
during construction.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY — Any company subject to the jurisdiction of
and control by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or franchised
cable television company.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — An area of land reserved or dedicated for use as a
street, bikeway, or other means of public or private transportation; or for an
electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm
sewer, or other special use. A right-of-way includes the entire area reserved
or dedicated for the use.
IMPROVEMENT SECURITY — A financial security which guarantees
the satisfactory completion of improvements required by this chapter.
A.
MAINTENANCE SECURITY — A financial security which guarantees
the structural functioning and integrity of improvements required by
this chapter for a specified period after their completion and
acceptance by the Township.
B.
§ 101-13 MIDDLESEX CODE § 101-13
97:144
SIDEWALK — A walk for pedestrians constructed to the standards set forth
in this chapter.
SPECIFICATIONS — Those portions of the contract documents consisting
of written technical descriptions of materials, equipment, construction
systems, standards and workmanship as applied to the work.
STREET — A public or private right-of-way deeded or dedicated for public
use by motor vehicles, bicycles and pedestrian travel, including an avenue,
boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, viaduct and any other
ways used by vehicular traffic, but not including driveways, parking areas
or walkways.
STREET EXCAVATION — Excavation of 18 inches or more performed within
public rights-of-way or easements within the Township.
SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of the Township.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middlesex, Butler County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP GRADING, FILL AND EXCAVATION — The officially adopted
Grading, Fill and Excavation Ordinance of the Township and all subsequent
amendments thereto.54
TOWNSHIP STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The officially adopted
Stormwater Management Ordinance of the Township and all subsequent
amendments thereto.55
UTILITY — A public service including but not limited to electric service, gas
service, and cable television service.
WALKWAY — A walk for pedestrians constructed to the standards set forth
in this chapter.
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Grading, Excavation and Fill.
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 144, Stormwater Management.
§ 101-13 IMPACT FEES § 101-13
97:145

ARTICLE III
Forms and Documents
§ 101-14. Incorporation of forms.
The following forms shall be utilized as specified in this chapter or other
ordinances of the Township.56
56.Editor's Note: The forms that originally followed this section have been included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 101-14 IMPACT FEES § 101-14
97:147

ARTICLE IV
Construction Standards for Public and Private Improvements
§ 101-15. Streets.
A. Street classifications.
(1) The following street classification system is hereby adopted for
streets in the Township:
(a) Arterial street.
(b) Collector street.
(c) Local residential street.
(2) The functional classification of streets is as specified in the
Township Comprehensive Plan.
(3) The functional classification of any street which is not specified in
the Township Comprehensive Plan shall be determined by the
Township Engineer consistent with the definitions for the street
classification system.
B. Street grading and paving standards
(1) Arterial streets. Grading, paving, curbing, underdrains, and berm
grading for arterial streets shall be done in accordance with
construction standards in Figure 401.2.1.57
(2) Collector streets. Typical section of paving, underdrains and berm
grading for collector roads shall be in accordance with the
construction standards in Figure 401.2.2. Geometric design shall
be in accordance with the appropriate design speed as determined
by the Township upon recommendation by the Township Engineer,
the design standards in Chapter 150, Subdivision and Land
Development, and this chapter.
(a) Collector streets. Inlet installation shall be in accordance with
plan view layout and construction standards in Figure
401.2.2.1.
(3) Local streets. Typical section of grading, paving, curbing,
underdrains and berm grading for local streets shall be in
accordance with the construction standards in Figure 401.2.4.58
(4) Materials. The base course and wearing surface of all streets shall
be constructed in accordance with the standards of this chapter,
and all materials used shall meet the latest Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation specifications. Subbase material
57.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
58.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
§ 101-15 IMPACT FEES § 101-15
97:149
containing slag will not be accepted. Additional base course depths
may be required as the Township Engineer may determine to be
necessary for the type of street that has been proposed.
(5) Subsurface drains. Permanent underdrains of a size and slope to be
determined by the engineer shall be installed on the upper or
higher side of all streets and in cut areas where they are necessary
to prevent the infiltration of water under the paved roadway. All
underdrains shall parallel the roadway as nearly as possible and
shall be in accordance with the construction standards in Figure
401.2.6.59
(6) Shoulders. Street shoulders shall be graded for the full width of the
right-of-way in accordance with this chapter and thoroughly
compacted by rolling all shoulders. Slopes shall be seeded to
prevent erosion.
(7) Utilities in streets. All utilities crossing streets shall be installed in
trenches backfilled and compacted with aggregate meeting
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation specifications and
approved by the Township Engineer, and all other utilities within
the right-of-way of streets shall be installed before paving is
completed.
(8) Trench repaving for bituminous paving. All pavement restoration in
bituminous pavement shall be constructed in accordance with the
construction standards in Figure 401.2.9.60
(9) Paving notch detail. New asphalt pavement shall meet existing
asphalt pavement in accordance with the construction standards in
Figure 401.2.10.
(10) Two-phase paving. When the bituminous paving is in a subdivision
or other land development being developed at that time and it is
anticipated that construction activity and heavy material hauling
will be taking place for an extended period of time. A skim coat of
either FB material or ID-2 wearing course the final wearing course
shall be applied at a time determined by the Township Engineer in
conjunction with the Township Manager.
(11) Curb ramps. The location and design of all curb ramps for access
by physically challenged persons shall be approved by the
Township Engineer. Such approval does not represent compliance
with the Accessibility Guidelines of the Americans with Disabilities
Act. Curb cuts in straight curbs shall be in accordance with the
construction standards in Figure 401.2.12.61
C. Street design criteria.
59.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
60.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
61.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
§ 101-15 MIDDLESEX CODE § 101-15
97:150
(1) All street classifications. Geometric design shall be in accordance
with AASHTO Standards and Table 1.
Table 1
Street Geometric Design, Clear Sight Triangles, Minimum
Sight Distance
Type
Arterial
Streets
Collector
Streets
Local
Streets
Clear sight triangle 500/30 400/30 250/25
Horizontal alignment
(minimum radii of center
line)
600 400 125
Reverse curves (minimum
transient)
300 150 75
Vertical curves (minimum
sight distance)
Per American Association of State
Highway Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) publication A Policy on
Geometric Design of Highways and
Streets, most recent publication.
Use of "lower range" tables is
acceptable.
(a) Clear sight triangle. No obstructions shall be located within
the right-of-way or lot which obscure visibility at the
intersection of two streets or of a street and a residential
driveway. A clear sight triangle shall be maintained free of any
obstructions. The sides of the clear sight triangle shall be
measured along the center line of the intersecting streets and
shall meet the minimum standards shown in Table 1. The clear
sight triangle shall be shown on the final plat for recording if it
is beyond the boundary of the right-of-way.
(b) Minimum sight distance. When a new street intersects an
existing street, the minimum sight distance at the intersection
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Table
1.
(c) Roadway design specifications. The minimum allowable street
grade shall be 1%. The maximum allowable street grade shall
be 10%. The minimum allowable length of vertical curve shall
be determined by the guidelines set forth in the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) publication A Policy on Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets (Green Book), most recent publication.
Use of the "lower range" tables is acceptable for calculating
vertical curve lengths.
§ 101-15 IMPACT FEES § 101-15
97:151
§ 101-16. Stormwater management.
(2) Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs shall meet the construction standards
shown in Figures 401.3.2(A) and 401.3.2(B),62 and Chapter 150,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(3) Pedestrian connections. When required by Chapter 150,
Subdivision and Land Development, to facilitate pedestrian and
bicycle travel, pedestrian connections shall provide a clear-sight
triangle at all ends as required by the Township Engineer.
(4) Barricade for dead-end streets. A barricade for dead-end streets in
accordance with the construction standards in Figure 401.3.463
shall be provided by the developer when required by the Township
Engineer.
(5) Pavement markings. All stop bars, transverse markings and
crosswalks shall be cold plastic. All longitude lines shall be Traffic
Zone Paint, Type II Waterborne.
A. Storm sewer pipe. A minimum fifteen-inch-diameter pipe shall be
installed for all Township and private storm sewers. The following is a
list of acceptable pipes for use in the Township:
(1) Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP), ASTM C76 Class III and Class IV.
(2) Corrugated polyethylene (PE) culvert pipe. AASHTO-M294 and
Type S.
(3) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe. AASHTO-M304.
(4) Corrugated galvanized steel pipe AASHTO-M245 Type I, AASHTOM246
and AASHTO-M218, Type C-10 mil coating on both surfaces.
(5) Corrugated aluminum alloy pipe AASHTO-N196, Type I.
(6) Corrugated aluminum alloy pipe-arch AASHTO-M196, Type I.
B. Storm inlets. Storm inlets in street paving shall conform to the
construction standards in Figure 402.2a,64 Type "M" Inlet Detail, when
used with asphalt wedge curbs. Storm inlets in street paving shall
conform to the construction standards in Figure 402.2b, Type "C" Inlet
Detail, when used with concrete curbs. Inlets shall be placed at all low
points, at street intersections and at points along both sides of the
street to ensure adequate drainage, but in no case shall the distance
between inlets along the street exceed 300 feet unless approved by the
Township Engineer. Inlets at street intersections shall be placed on the
tangent and not on the curved portion. Additional inlets shall be
62.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
63.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
64.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
§ 101-15 MIDDLESEX CODE § 101-16
97:152
constructed in areas as may be directed by the Township Engineer
during construction to provide for proper control of surface water.
(1) Inlet grates. All grates shall be bicycle safe and constructed of steel
and conform to the construction standards in Figure 402.2.1.65
(2) Top units. All tops shall be steel Type "M," unless otherwise
approved by the Township Engineer. Units shall be constructed and
conform to the construction standards in Figure 402.2.2.
(3) Ladder bars shall be installed in all inlets exceeding a depth of five
feet, and shall be in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Publication No. 72, Drawing RC-34. A poured
concrete invert shall be formed in the base of all inlets to provide
full drainage of the structure.
C. Storm manholes. All manholes, manhole frames and covers shall be
precast concrete constructed in accordance with the construction
standards in Figure 402.3a, Figure 402.3b, Figure 402.3c and Figure
402.3d.66 Manholes shall be installed at all changes in alignment and
grades of alignment and grades of storm sewers as may be directed by
the Township Engineer to provide for proper maintenance. If
maintenance is not a problem, pipe may be installed on a curve
provided the deflection angle of the pipe joint does not exceed the
manufacturers specifications. See Figure 402.3c for pipes under 48
inches in diameter and Figure 402.3d for pipes over 48 inches in
diameter. Inlets may be substituted for manholes where practical.
D. Maximum distance between structures. The maximum distance
between structures (inlets or manholes) shall be 300 feet unless
otherwise approved by the Township Engineer.
(1) Yard drains. Yard drains shall be precast concrete constructed in
accordance with the construction standards in Figure 402.4.1.67
The top unit may be substituted with Type "M" tops, if approved by
the Township Engineer.
(2) Special underdrains. Underdrains shall be installed in accordance
with the construction standards in Figure 402.4.2. The underdrain
type shall be directed by the Township Engineer.
E. Inlet connections. All connections to inlets shall be in accordance with
the construction standards in Figure 402.5.
F. Storm sewer lateral connection. All sewer lateral connections shall be
in accordance with applicable law. All sewer lateral connections shall be
located at manholes, catch basins, or at locations approved by the
Township Engineer. All storm sewer laterals or runs designed to collect
65.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
66.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
67.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
§ 101-16 IMPACT FEES § 101-16
97:153
and/or connect to individual residential lot roof drains shall be smoothlined
HDPE (High Density Polyethylene) pipe.
G. Standard design criteria.
(1) Storm sewer trench. All storm sewer pipe within a right-of-way
shall be installed in accordance with the construction standards in
Figure 402.7.1a, Typical Storm Trench Detail,68 where located
under all proposed pavements. Impervious area shall be installed in
accordance with the standard in Figure 402.7.1b.
(2) Cradles and reinforcements for sewers. All cradles and
reinforcements for sewers shall be approved by the Township
Engineer.
(3) Headwall/endwall. Concrete headwalls and splash aprons shall be
constructed in accordance with the construction standards in
Figure 402.7.3a, Standard Type D-W Endwall Detail, at the outfall
of all storm sewers. Where watercourses are piped and filled,
concrete headwall and splash aprons shall be constructed at both
ends of the pipe. Rip-rap shall be placed at end walls in accordance
with Figure 402.7.3b. Preformed end-sections are an acceptable
alternative with Township approval.
(4) Concrete encasement and anchors for sewers. All concrete
encasement and anchors for sewers shall be approved by the
Township Engineer. All storm sewers laid at slopes of 20% or
greater shall have concrete anchors installed in accordance with
the construction standards in Figure 402.7.4.69
(5) Connection for drop manholes. All connections for drop manholes
shall be approved by the Township Engineer.
(6) Storm sewer outfall channels and drainage swales. Permissible
velocities of various channel linings (vegetation, rock lined, rip-rap,
gabions) shall be in accordance with the most recent version of the
Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual published
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
Storm sewer outfall channels shall be trapezoidal or triangular
shape with side slopes not to exceed two horizontal: one vertical
(ratio). Storm sewer outfall channels shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 13 of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Design Manual Part 2 - Publication 13, Section 13.3,
titled Watercourse Erosion Protection. Where drainage swales or
open channels are used, they shall be suitably designed for ease of
maintenance.
68.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
69.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
§ 101-16 MIDDLESEX CODE § 101-16
97:154
(7) Springs. Any springs encountered during construction shall be
piped and connected to the storm sewer system or extended to a
natural watercourse as may be approved by the Township Engineer.
(8) Riprap. All riprap used for outlet protection, bank stabilization or
other means of protection shall be designed and installed in
accordance with specifications outlined in Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publications 408 and 72.
(9) Erosion and sedimentation control. Erosion and sedimentation
control measures shall be designed and used during construction
as per the approved plan from the Butler County Conservation
District and in accordance with details presented in the most
recent version of the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual published by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. The following measures shall also be
required by the Township in conjunction with the aforementioned
plan:
(a) Individual on-lot controls. Individual on-lot controls shall be
used for all residential lot development in accordance with the
construction standards in Figure 402.7.9.1.70
(b) Rock construction entrance. All individual residential lot
development shall employ a rock construction entrance for
vehicular access to the lot from paved roadways. The
construction entrance shall be installed in accordance with
details provided in the most recent version of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual.
(c) Slope stabilization. All cut or fill slopes that exceed 10 feet in
vertical height and a 3:1 (h:v) slope shall be stabilized with an
erosion control blanket to prevent slope erosion and promote
seed growth in accordance with the most recent version of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Erosion
and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual
requirements. A detail shall be included with the plans
specifying the type of blanket and installation procedures.
Slopes shall be redressed with topsoil prior to final
stabilization to promote optimum growth of vegetation.
(d) Energy dissipators. All energy dissipators such as riprap
aprons, plunge basins, etc., shall be designed based on outlet
velocities associated with the design storm for the subject
outfall pipe.
(10) Best management practices (BMP's). The use of practical
structural and nonstructural BMP's will be encouraged by the
Township in the design of site drainage systems and land
70.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
§ 101-16 IMPACT FEES § 101-16
97:155
§ 101-17. Sanitary sewer and public water system design standards.
All sanitary sewage facilities and all public water shall be constructed
in accordance with the construction standards and requirements of the
appropriate service provider.
§ 101-18. Pedestrian circulation.
§ 101-19. Driveways; access onto Township streets.
development. Design of such measures shall consider the
limitations of the site topography and soils, as well as identify
the benefits of proposed measures and maintenance requirements.
Technical requirements and limitations of BMP's are provided in
the Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for
Developing Areas.
A. Sidewalks (concrete). All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance
with the construction standards in Figure 404.1.71 Ramps for the
physically challenged shall be provided at intersections and crosswalks
in accordance with the construction standards in § 101-15B(11).
B. Walkways.
(1) Minimum width. Walkways shall be a minimum of four feet wide. In
parking lots they shall be an additional 30 inches wide or separated
by an additional 30 inches on each side where automobiles or other
vehicles may overhang the walkway.
(2) Height. Walkways in relation to parking lots and driveways shall be
raised to the same height as sidewalks in relation to streets.
C. Bikeways. Bikeways shall be a minimum width of six feet per travel lane
where adjacent to a street, or five feet per travel lane where not on a
street.
A. General requirements. All driveways shall be located, designed,
constructed, and maintained in such a manner as not to interfere or be
inconsistent with the design, maintenance and drainage of the street.
B. General location restrictions.
(1) Access driveways shall be permitted at locations in which:
(a) Sight distance is adequate to safely allow each permitted
movement to be made into or out of the access driveway;
(b) The free movement of normal highway traffic is not impaired;
(c) The driveway will not create a hazard; and
71.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
§ 101-16 MIDDLESEX CODE § 101-19
97:156
§ 101-20. Parking areas and driveways on lots.
(d) The driveway will not create an area of undue traffic
congestion on the highway.
(2) Residential driveway. Within the right-of-way of Township streets,
residential driveways shall be constructed in accordance with
Figure 405.2.5.72
C. Grade. Driveways shall be constructed to conform to the grade of the
finished shoulders. All descending or ascending grades of driveways
shall begin at the street right-of-way. No stormwater shall be permitted
to drain onto a Township street.
A. Minimum paving standards.
(1) For driveways and parking areas for single family: none.
(2) For all driveways and parking areas other than single family: shall
have an aggregate base course, a bituminous binder course and a
bituminous wearing course with sufficient structural strength to
carry anticipated wheel loads.
B. Parking area standards.
(1) Slopes.
(a) Maximum 5% cross slope (along length of vehicle).
(b) Maximum 7% longitudinal slope (perpendicular to vehicle).
(c) Minimum 1% cross slope or longitudinal slope.
(2) Concrete mountable curbs. When required, mountable curbs shall
be constructed to the construction standards in Figure 406.2.2.73
(a) Curb detail. When required, curbs shall be constructed to the
standard in Figure 406.2.2.1.
(3) Curb ramps. The location and design of all curb ramps for access by
physically challenged persons shall be in accordance with the
construction standards in Figure 401.2.13 and approved by the
Township Engineer. Such approval does not represent compliance
with the Accessibility Guidelines of the Americans with Disabilities
Act.
(4) Accessible parking sign. Parking spaces required or designated to
be accessible for the physically challenged shall be identified by the
installation of an accessible parking sign meeting the construction
standards in Figure 406.2.4.
72.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
73.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
§ 101-19 IMPACT FEES § 101-20
97:157
§ 101-21. Fire hydrants.
Where fire hydrants are required they shall be installed pursuant to
specifications of the appropriate public water service provider.
§ 101-22. Guide rails.
All guide rails shall be constructed in accordance with current PennDOT
criteria and in accordance with the construction standards in Figure
408.1.74
§ 101-23. Underground utility installation.
(5) Concrete curb and gutter. When required, concrete curb and gutter
shall be constructed to the construction standards in Figure
406.2.5.
A. General conditions.
(1) All street excavation within Township right-of-way or easements
shall require a road opening permit per the requirements of this
chapter and any other applicable ordinances of the Township.
(2) No street opening shall extend across more than half of the cartway
at a time. No street shall be closed at any time without prior
approval from the Township.
(3) Through-way traffic should be maintained whenever possible.
(4) Access to driveways and/or buildings located within the work zone
shall be maintained at all times.
(5) No more than 250 linear feet of excavation shall be opened at any
one time.
(6) Traffic control shall be maintained in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Highways Publication 203. The permittee shall
furnish and maintain such signs, barricades, lights and flag persons
as may be necessary to provide a safe and compliant work zone.
The Township may require a separate traffic control plan under
special circumstances.
(7) Provisions shall be made to accommodate stormwater runoff at all
times. The work shall not be permitted to interfere with the normal
flow of surface or subsurface water.
(8) Future maintenance shall be the responsibility of the permittee
during the first two years after completion.
B. Pavement cuts. Open cutting of any street is not permitted unless
authorized by the Township Engineer.
74.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
§ 101-20 MIDDLESEX CODE § 101-23
97:158
§ 101-24. Acceptance of public improvements.
(1) Cuts in the bituminous surface shall be a neat straight line the
entire length and width of the trench using a concrete saw. Cuts
through cement concrete shall be made to a sufficient depth to
enable the removal of the concrete in a clear straight break.
(2) All excavated material should be stored in such a manner as to not
interrupt pedestrian or automobile traffic. Pedestrian crosswalks
and sidewalks shall be kept clear at all times. Loose material shall
be promptly cleaned from the streets and sidewalks using
appropriate measures.
(3) Special backfill requirements may be set by the Township Engineer.
Backfill requirements will be determined at the time of application.
(4) Restoration of street.
(a) Temporary pavement shall consist of the appropriate
compacted backfill material and topped with not less than
eight inches of cold patch. The temporary pavement shall be
replaced with the permanent repair immediately upon suitable
weather conditions or the work is completed.
(b) Permanent repair shall be in accordance with the construction
standards in Figure 401.2.10.75
C. Opening of berm or yard areas.
(1) All work performed in areas other than the improved street surface
(asphalt or concrete) shall be performed in compliance with the
construction standards in Figure 409.3.1.76
(2) All disturbed yard areas shall be restored to original condition.
A. Monuments and markers.
(1) Monuments. Monuments shall be of precast reinforced concrete at
least four inches square and at least 30 inches in depth, with a
metal center plug. The actual survey point shall be indicated by a 1/
16 inch hole drilled in the metal plug. All developments shall be
required to place at least one new monument. All new
monumentation shall be tied to an existing Township monument
and locational information included on the as-built drawings.
Monuments shall be accompanied by a letter of certification from a
professional land surveyor.
(2) Markers. Markers shall be iron pins or pipes at least 1/2 inch in
diameter and not less than 20 inches in length, or other material
acceptable to the Township Engineer.
75.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
76.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
§ 101-23 IMPACT FEES § 101-24
97:159
§ 101-25. Traffic/regulatory and guidance signs.
All installations, locations and materials shall comply with Township and
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation standards.
B. Detection. Monuments and markers shall be detectable with
conventional ferrous metal or magnetic locators.
C. Submission requirements. No private or public improvements shall be
accepted by the Township until all required monuments have been set
and as-built drawings have been submitted and certified by a
professional land surveyor, three paper copies (24 inches by 36 inches),
one Mylar copy. All as-built drawings shall be submitted electronically
in accordance with the digital submission requirements. The following
language shall be included on all as-built drawings:77
(1) The professional land surveyor's certificate shall read as follows:
I, a registered professional surveyor of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, do hereby certify that this plan is prepared from a
field survey made on this day of ____________________, 20_____, and
it represents the location of buildings, driveways, parking areas,
landscaping and elevations of the stormwater detention basin and
its associated facilities as shown thereon by me for the owners or
agents.
(SEAL)
Registration No.
Date
D. As-built drawings. As-built drawings shall include, but need not be
limited to, the following items:
(1) All stormwater management facility(ies) as-built requirements are
referenced in Appendix A.78
(2) Commercial and residential requirements as set forth in Appendix
A.
A. Traffic/regulatory sign details and procedures.
(1) Stop signs;
(2) Speed limit signs (25 miles per hour, unless noted);
(3) No outlet signs;
(4) Yield signs;
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 101-24 MIDDLESEX CODE § 101-25
97:160
(5) Weight, size and load restrictions;
(6) Turning restrictions;
(7) Stopping, standing and parking restrictions;
(8) Hazardous grade speed limits;
(9) No passing zones;
(10) No turns on red restrictions;
(11) Removal of traffic hazards;
(12) School zones and school zone speed limits;
(13) Special speeds on bridges or elevated structures;
(14) Creation of one-way streets.
B. All traffic control signs (other than street name signs) must use the
following specifications.
(1) One sign per post.
(2) Must use easy erect channel.
(3) Ten-foot-long galvanized steel posts.
(4) Three-foot countersink posts.
(5) Breakaway hardware.
(6) Theft-proof nuts and bolts.
(7) All traffic control signs must be at least seven feet to the bottom of
the sign, and two feet to five feet behind the curb.
(8) Signs, when not at an intersection, should be placed between lots,
on lot lines.
(9) Arrows indicate flow of traffic.
C. Street name signs.
(1) The standard Township street sign will have the following
specifications:
(a) The street name shall appear on street name signs in capital
letters six inches high.
(b) Prefixes such as "North" shall be abbreviated to N.
(c) Suffixes such as "Drive" shall be abbreviated to DR.
(d) Prefixes and suffixes shall be four inches high.
§ 101-25 IMPACT FEES § 101-25
97:161
(e) The street name sign shall have 3M or equal white reflective
lettering, on 3M-3877 high-intensity green or equal green
background.
(f) Signs shall be mounted on nine-inch-wide extruded aluminum
blanks predrilled to accept vandal-proof hardware.
(g) Required length of sign shall be determined by the street
name.
(h) Post brackets and cross brackets for mounting the signs must
have a twelve-inch-long slot for securing the signs and also be
drilled to accept vandal-proof hardware.
(i) The vandal-proof hardware shall consist of bolts with a 12 pt
socket head.
(j) Sign post shall be galvanized, 10.5 feet by two-and-onequarter-
inch OD by two-foot ID round posts.
(2) Location:
(a) All street name signs should be located on the corner opposite
of where a stop sign will be;
(b) Posts must be embedded in 24 inches to 30 inches of concrete
and two feet to five feet behind the curbs.
(3) Developers may install "custom made" street name signs. The
specifications shall be as follows:
(a) Letter height must be six inches minimum for uppercase
letters and 4.5 inches for lowercase.
(b) Letter width must be 1 1/2 inches minimum.
(c) Letter stroke width must be 3/4 inch minimum.
(d) Letter color must be white or white reflective material.
(e) The background color must be contrasting from that of the
letters.
(f) All "custom made" street name signs shall be the responsibility
of the respective owners' association and shall be identified in
the owners' association documents. In the event that a "custom
made" sign, for any reason, may need to be replaced, it shall be
replaced in a reasonable amount of time or the Township may
replace it with a standard Township sign.
(4) Type of installation required:
(a) Four-way signs shall be installed at all intersections where at
least one of the connecting roads is a through way that leads to
§ 101-25 MIDDLESEX CODE § 101-25
97:162
§ 101-26. Street lighting.
§ 101-27. Street tree planting specifications.
Trees shall be of substantially uniform size and shape, and have straight
trunks. Trees shall be properly planted and staked and provision made by
the developer for regular watering and maintenance until the development
is complete, and Township acceptance of streets. Dead and dying trees shall
be replaced by the developer during the next planting season after the
initial planting. The following construction standards shall be used during
planting as approved by the Township Engineer:
§ 101-28. Site design guidelines.
The maximum allowable slope on an embankment shall be two horizontal
to one vertical (ratio). All embankments steeper than 2:1 shall require a
retaining system. Reference Chapter 89, Grading, Excavation and Fill.
another street. If one of the streets has no outlet, then only a
two-way sign shall be required.
(b) Two-way signs shall be installed at intersections where none of
the streets are through ways that lead to another street.
D. Final approval:
(1) All identification and traffic warning and regulatory signage must
be installed prior to the Township issuing any building permits.
(2) Financial security shall not be released for the streets until all
signage installations receive final approval from the Township.
(3) When all signs have been installed, the developer must request the
Township to review the installations. The Township will give written
acceptance/denial.
(4) All developers must purchase and install all signs on their own. The
Township will not order, pay for, receive, store or install any signs,
posts, etc., for the developer.
A. All street lighting shall be installed in compliance with Township
standards for work in Township rights-of-way.
B. All street lighting shall be hooded or directed, to the extent practical, to
shield the light from direct view from adjacent properties and streets.
A. Evergreen/deciduous tree planting, Figure 416.1.79
B. Shrub planting, Figure 416.2.
79.Editor's Note: Figures 401.2.1 through 416.2 are on file in the Township offices.
§ 101-25 IMPACT FEES § 101-28
97:163
Chapter 103
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Company — See Ch. 15 Emergency services reimbursement — See
Ch. 76.
§ 101-28 MIDDLESEX CODE § 101-28
97:164
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 10-20-2010 by Ord. No. 119]
§ 103-1. Use of fire insurance proceeds.
A. The Township Manager, or a designee of the Township Manager, shall
be responsible for carrying out the administrative duties set forth
herein unless otherwise specified.
B. No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter "insurer")
doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim
of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within
Middlesex Township, Butler County, where the amount recoverable for
the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500 unless
the insurer is furnished by the Township Manager with a certificate
pursuant to § 508(b) of the Insurance Company Law of 1921, as
amended by Act 98 of 1992 and Act 93 of 1994 (collectively the "Act"),
and unless there is compliance with the procedures set forth in Section
508(c) and 508(d) of the Act.
C. Where there are delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user
charges against the property ("municipal claims"), or there are
expenses which the Township has incurred as costs for removal, repair
or securing of a building or other structure on the property (collectively
"municipal expenses"), the Township Manager shall immediately render
a bill for such work, if not already done.
(1) Upon written request of the named insured specifying the
description of the property, the name and address of the insurer
and the date of receipt by the insurer of a loss report of the claim,
the Township Manager shall furnish a certificate within 14 days
after the request to the insurer either:
(a) Stating that there are no unpaid municipal claims or municipal
expenses against the property; or
(b) Specifying the nature and amount of such claims or expenses,
accompanied by a bill for such amounts.
(2) Taxes, assessments, penalties and user charges shall be deemed
delinquent for this purpose if a lien could have been filed for such
claims under applicable law. Upon receipt of a certificate and bill
pursuant to Subsection C of this section, the insurer shall transfer
to the Treasurer/Township Manager an amount from the insurance
proceeds sufficient to pay said sums prior to making payment to the
named insured, subject to the provisions of Subsection D hereof.
D. When all municipal claims and municipal expenses have been paid
pursuant to Subsection C of this section or when the Township Manager
has issued a Certificate described in Subsection C(1)(a) indicating that
§ 103-1 IMPACT FEES § 103-1
97:165
there are no municipal claims or municipal expenses against the
property, the insurer shall pay the claim of the named insured;
provided, however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured
and the insurer equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of
liability on all fire policies covering the building or structure, the
following procedures must be followed:
(1) The insurer shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
Township Manager, in the aggregate, $2,000 for each $15,000 of
such claim or fraction thereof.
(2) If at the time a loss report is submitted by the insured, such insured
has submitted to the insurer, with a copy to the Township, a
contractor's signed estimate of the cost of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure in an amount less than the
amount calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the
insurer shall transfer to the Township Manager from the insurance
proceeds the amount specified in the estimate. If there is more than
one insurer, the transfer of proceeds shall be on a prorated basis by
all insurers insuring the building or other structure.
(3) Upon receipt of the above-described portion of the insurance
proceeds, the Township Manager, shall do the following:
(a) Place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely as
security against the total municipal expenses anticipated by
the Township to be required in removing, repairing or securing
the building or structure as required by this article. Such costs
shall include, without limitation, any engineering, legal or
administrative costs incurred by the Township in connection
with such removal, repair or securing or any proceedings
related thereto;
(b) Mail to the named insured at the address received from the
insurer a notice that the proceeds have been received by the
Township and that the procedures under this subsection shall
be followed;
(c) After the transfer, the named insured may submit to the
Township a contractor's signed estimate of the cost of
removing, repairing or securing the building or other
structure, in which event the Township Manager shall, if such
estimate is deemed by the Township Manager to be
reasonable, return to the insured the amount of the funds
transferred to the Township in excess of that amount required
to pay the municipal expenses; provided, however, that the
Township has not commenced to remove, repair or secure the
building or other structure in which case the Township will
complete the work;
§ 103-1 MIDDLESEX CODE § 103-1
97:166
§ 103-2. Limits of liability.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to make an insurance company,
association or exchange liable for any amount in excess of proceeds payable
under its insurance policy or for any other act performed pursuant to this
article or to make the Township or any public official of the Township
an insured under a policy of insurance or to create an obligation to pay
delinquent property taxes or unpaid removal liens or expenses other than
as provided in this article.
§ 103-3. Insurance company rights reserved.
An insurance company, association or exchange making payment of policy
proceeds under this article for delinquent taxes or structural removal liens
or removal expenses incurred by the Township shall have full benefit of such
payment including all rights of subrogation and of assignment.
§ 103-4. Construal of provisions.
This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to deter
the commission of arson and related crimes, to discourage the
abandonment of property and to prevent urban blight and deterioration.
§ 103-5. Copy of provisions transmitted to state.
The Township shall transmit a certified copy of this article promptly to the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development.
§ 103-6. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or insurer who violates the
provisions of this article or who shall fail to comply with any of the
(d) Pay to the Township, for reimbursement to the Township
General Fund, the amount of the municipal expenses paid by
the Township;
(e) Pay the remaining balance in the fund without interest to the
named insured upon receipt of a certificate issued by the
Township Manager that the repair, removal or securing of the
building or other structure has been completed in accordance
with all applicable codes and regulations of the Township;
(f) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of
the Township to recover any deficiency in the amount of
municipal claims or municipal expenses recovered pursuant to
this article, or to insurance proceeds, by an action at law or in
equity to enforce the Township Codes or to enter into an
agreement with the named insured with regard to such other
disposition of the proceeds as the Township may deem
responsible.
§ 103-1 IMPACT FEES § 103-6
97:167
requirements hereof shall be sentenced upon conviction thereof to pay a
fine not greater than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day
in which an offense shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 103-6 MIDDLESEX CODE § 103-6
97:168
Chapter 115
NUISANCES
§ 115-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. The following words, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
hereby respectively ascribed thereto:
NUISANCE — Any use of property or conduct, or activity or condition
upon property within Middlesex Township that shall cause or result
in annoyance or discomfort beyond the boundaries of such property
which disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, taking into
consideration the location of the use or condition and the nature and
condition of the surrounding neighborhood. Specifically, the word
"nuisance" shall include but shall not be limited to the following:
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
Operating or permitting the operation of or playing of radios,
television sets, amplifiers, musical instruments, and other sound
devices which produces or amplifies sound which annoys a
reasonable person of normal sensitivities.
(1)
Operation of mechanically powered lawn mowers, tractors, power
tools, chain saws, or similar devices in a residential area between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day which
annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities.
(2)
Owning, possessing, controlling, or harboring any animal or fowl
which barks, bays, cries, squawks, or makes any other such noise
continuously and/or intermittently for an extended period which
annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities.
(3)
Using any property or operating any business or other activity so
as to permit or cause smoke (except as permitted in accordance
with Ordinance No. 52; amended by Ordinance No. O-99-12-6 and
codified in the Code of the Township of Middlesex as Chapter 57),
soot, cinders, dust, mud, dirt, acid, noxious or offensive fumes,
gases, or odors to be discharged into the air, or to be carried
off the premises, or to cause glare from lights, or other noise of
such character to annoy or disturb a reasonable person of normal
sensitivities beyond the premises from which the same shall
emanate.
(4)
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
§ 103-6 NUISANCES § 115-2
115:169
§ 115-2. Creation or maintenance prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to create, continue, cause, maintain, or
permit to exist, any nuisance within Middlesex Township.
§ 115-3. Removal or abatement; failure to comply.
Any person who shall create, continue, cause, maintain, or permit to exist
any nuisance at any place within Middlesex Township shall, after order from
the Board of Supervisors, or a designated representative to do so, including
police officers or the Code Enforcement Officer, remove or abate such
nuisance. If such person shall fail, neglect, or refuse to abate such nuisance
as ordered, the Board of Supervisors shall have authority, in person or by
its agents, including police officers or Code Enforcement Officer, and/or
other employees to cite such person for a violation of this chapter and/or to
remove or abate such nuisance.
§ 115-4. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
The Township at its discretion may enforce this chapter as follows:
Chapter 120
PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND CANVASSING
A. Civil enforcement. The Township may commence a civil proceeding
before a District Judge or an action in equity before the Court of
Common Pleas. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, for each and every such violation, pay a penalty of not
less than $100 or no more than the maximum penalty of $600 per
violation as permitted by Section 1601(c.1)(1) of the Second Class
Township Code, 53 P.S. § 66601(c.1)(1), as may be amended, following
adjudication by a District Judge or Judge of the Court of Common Pleas,
plus court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township.
Each day during which any person violates any provision of this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Criminal enforcement. The Township may file and commence a
summary offense proceeding. Any person who shall violate any
provision of this chapter shall, for each and every such violation, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 or no more than the
maximum penalty of $1,000 per violation as permitted by Section
1601(c.1)(2) of the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S.
§ 66601(c.1)(2), as may be amended, plus costs of prosecution,
following adjudication and conviction by a District Judge or Judge of the
Court of Common Pleas. Each day during which any person violates any
provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 115-2 MIDDLESEX CODE § 120-1
115:170
§ 120-1. Definitions; word usage.
The following words shall be construed to have the meanings set forth
below; and, throughout this chapter, the singular shall include the plural,
and the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter:
CANVASS — The practice of going from dwelling unit to dwelling unit to:
MERCHANDISE OR SERVICES — Any goods or services, including, but not
limited to, magazines, periodicals, books, orders or contracts for services,
home improvements or alterations.
REGISTRANT — Any solicitor or peddler required to apply for a registration
certificate under this chapter and shall include all agents and employees of
the solicitor.
SOLICIT OR PEDDLING — The practice of going from dwelling unit to
dwelling unit advertising, promoting, selling, causing to be sold, offering
for sale or taking orders for present or future delivery of merchandise or
services. Solicit, or peddling does not include a series of licensed entries
on private property (e.g., milkman making normal deliveries) or any activity
within the definition of "canvass" set forth above.
TOWNSHIP — The municipal government or the land within the
geographical boundaries of Middlesex Township, Butler County,
Pennsylvania, depending upon the context.
§ 120-2. Permit required.
No person shall solicit or peddle in the Township without first having
obtained a permit from the Township Manager, or his or her delegate. A
permit or registration for individuals engaging in canvassing shall not be
required.
§ 120-3. Permit application; background check; permit
nontransferable.
Each person desiring to engage in soliciting or peddling shall first make
application to the Township one week prior to engaging in such soliciting
or peddling. Such application shall be provided by the Township and shall
contain the following information verified by oath or affirmation for each
applicant: what he/she desires to solicit for; the days, dates of the
Conduct surveys for research purposes (other than those conducted by
an agency of the state or federal government);
A.
B. To make analyses, to take opinion polls, to compile rating data;
To advance or advocate religious, political causes, other issues of public
concern, and proselytizing or seeking contributions with regard
thereto; and
C.
To conduct any similar work which, by its nature, involves door-to-door
to place-to-place activity, including distribution of circulars.
D.
§ 120-1 NUISANCES § 120-3
115:171
registrant's soliciting or peddling; his/her name, home address, a statement
as to whether he/she has been convicted of a criminal offense, and, if so,
the date of conviction and disposition; the make, model, year, color, and
registration of the vehicle, if any, he/she will use; a copy of a current driver's
license. Signature denotes authorization to conduct a criminal history
inquiry. The Township will conduct a criminal history background check
based on information received and following that, if all information is in
order, will issue to the applicant a permit. Such permit may not be
transferred from one person to another.
§ 120-4. Fees.
The following fees will be charged for the issuance of a permit, and will
accompany the registrant's solicitor's identification badge and a copy of this
chapter:
§ 120-5. Standards of conduct.
A. Application fee: $15 to cover administrative costs and any criminal
history check required; and
B. Solicitor's fee: $50 per month or any part thereof; $10 per person,
whichever is greater.
A. Every person engaged in soliciting or peddling within the confines of
the Township shall, in the conduct of his or her activities, comply with
the following standards of conduct:
(1) The principal registrant shall carry the permit at all times when in
the Township and shall exhibit it to any Township citizen or resident
or Township official upon request.
(2) Every person must prominently display on his/her outermost
garment an identification badge, which signifies authorization to
solicit or peddle within the Township for a specified period.
(3) Every person shall not allow any other individual to have
possession of his identification card and shall immediately report
its loss to the Township. He shall not cause or permit his
identification card to be altered or defaced in any way.
B. Every person engaged in canvassing, soliciting or peddling within the
confines of the Township shall, in the conduct of his or her activities,
comply with the following (or additional, as applied to solicitors and
peddlers) standards of conduct:
(1) All canvassers, solicitors or peddlers shall respect and comply with
any "No Solicitation" or "No Soliciting" sign erected or displayed on
private property within the Township. Individuals and/or
organizations which fail to comply with such signs may be subject
to civil and/or criminal trespass actions.
§ 120-3 MIDDLESEX CODE § 120-5
115:172
§ 120-6. Appeals.
In the event an application for a permit to solicit or peddle is disapproved
by the Township Manager or delegate, the applicant may, within five days of
the denial, appeal the decision to the Township Board of Supervisors which
shall set a time and place for a hearing. This hearing shall be held within
30 days after appeal is taken by applicant, at which hearing the applicant
will be given the opportunity to present reasons why the permit should be
issued. The decision of the Township Board of Supervisors shall be made
within 10 days of the appeal hearing, and shall be final.
§ 120-7. Prohibitions.
§ 120-8. Revocation of permit.
The Township Manager may revoke the permit for any of the following
causes:
(2) All canvassers, solicitors or peddlers shall not enter or attempt to
enter any dwelling without the invitation or permission of the
occupant and shall immediately leave any premises upon request of
the occupant.
(3) Every person shall conduct himself/herself at all times in an orderly
and lawful manner.
A. Hours. No person shall canvass, solicit or peddle before 9:00 a.m. or
after 8:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday. This restriction shall apply
both to all persons to whom a permit has been issued and to those
engaged in canvassing who are not required to obtain a permit.
B. List. No person shall solicit or peddle in the Township without first
obtaining from the Township Manager or his or her delegate a list of all
residences and dwelling units in the Township where the owner/
occupant of the residence or dwelling unit has notified the Township in
writing that they do not wish to be visited on his/her premises at any
time by any person performing any canvassing and/or soliciting or
peddling activity. Any such written notice from an owner/occupant to
the Township may be revoked in writing at any time by such owner/
occupant. The list shall also be made available to canvassers to obtain
at the option of the canvasser(s).
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his/her business as solicitor, peddler, or transient merchant
or itinerant vendor;
C. Any violation of this chapter;
D. Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude; or
§ 120-5 NUISANCES § 120-8
115:173
§ 120-9. Exemptions.
The terms of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 120-10. Violations and penalties.
E. Conducting his/her business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner
as to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
general public.
A. Persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such
articles, and the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the acts of
merchants or their employees in delivering goods in the regular course
of business, nor shall the terms of this chapter be held to include or
apply to any farmer or truck gardener who shall vend, sell or dispose of
or offer to sell, vend or dispose of the products of the farms or garden
occupied and cultivated by him; nor shall it apply to any manufacturer
or producer in the sale of bread, bakery or dairy products, meat and
meat products or milk or milk products; nor shall it apply to any person
who is delivering gasoline, kerosene or other heating and/or cooking
fuels to a residence. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be held to
prohibit any sale required by statute or by order of any court, or to
prevent any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
B. In addition, this chapter shall not apply to boys or girls 19 years of age
or younger who take orders for and deliver newspapers, greeting cards,
candy and the like, or who represent the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts or
similar organizations and take orders for and deliver cookies and the
like, or who are members of a school, church or other charitable or civic
organization.
C. Any person who works for an organization which has been registered
with the Pennsylvania Department of State, as required by Act No. 337,
approved August 9, 1963, known as the "Solicitation of Charitable
Funds Act," 10 P.S. § 160-1 et seq.,80 shall not have to register with the
Township, but such organization shall cause notice to be given to the
Township that such person will be soliciting in the Township; any such
person shall carry an appropriate identification card issued by the
organization for which he or she works.
D. Persons who are acting as representatives of accredited war veterans
organizations.
A. Civil enforcement. The Township may commence a civil proceeding
before a District Judge or an action in equity before the Court of
Common Pleas. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, for each and every such violation, pay a penalty of not
less than $100 or no more than the maximum penalty of $600 per
80.Editor's Note: The Solicitation of Charitable Funds Act was repealed by Act of April 30,
1986, P.L. 107, No. 36. See now the Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act, 10
P.S. § 162.1 et seq.
§ 120-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 120-10
115:174
Chapter 128
RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 155.
§ 128-1. Purpose.
The Township of Middlesex recognizes a need for registration of residential
units within the Township in order to ensure appropriate identity of various
residents of the Township for registration and taxation purposes. The
Township recognizes that the most efficient system to provide for these
rental occupants' registration is to require the landlord to file periodic
notices with the Township identifying its residential lessees.
§ 128-2. Registration requirements.
No person shall hereafter occupy, allow to be occupied or let to another
person for occupancy any residential rental unit within the Township of
Middlesex unless said landlord/lessor notifies the Township within 30 days
after said occupancy of the name, address and number of a person(s)
occupying each specific unit. The registration shall contain the following
minimum information:
violation as permitted by Section 1601(c.1)(1) of the Second Class
Township Code, 53 P.S. § 66601(c.1)(1), as may be amended, following
adjudication by a District Judge or Judge of the Court of Common Pleas,
plus court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township.
Each day during which any person violates any provision of this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Criminal enforcement. The Township may file and commence a
summary offense proceeding. Any person who shall violate any
provision of this chapter shall, for each and every such violation, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 or no more than the
maximum penalty of $1,000 per violation as permitted by Section
1601(c.1)(2) of the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S.
§ 66601(c.1)(2), as may be amended, plus costs of prosecution,
following adjudication and conviction by a District Judge or Judge of the
Court of Common Pleas. Each day during which any person violates any
provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Name, address and telephone number of the property owner;
B. Name, address and telephone number of the designated local property
manager, if the property owner lives outside the Township and has a
property manager;
§ 120-10 RENTAL OCCUPANCY REPORTS § 128-2
128:175
§ 128-3. Registration time period.
A registration for each residential unit shall be filed by January 30 of each
calendar year and then throughout the year whenever there is a change of
occupants as set forth above. All registrations under this chapter shall be
forwarded to the Township within 60 days after enactment hereof for the
first year.
§ 128-4. Fees.
No fee shall be charged for this registration.
§ 128-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 134
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer and Water Authority — See Ch. 7, Art. I.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 65.
Grading, excavation and fill — See Ch. 89.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 144.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
150.
Water — See Ch. 168.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
C. The street address of the rental property; and
D. The name, address and place of employment of the tenant(s) and all
other occupants of the unit who are over the age of 17 or employed.
§ 128-2 MIDDLESEX CODE § 128-5
134:176
ARTICLE I
Individual and Community Sewage Systems
[Adopted 1-12-1976 by Ord. No. 31]
§ 134-1. Title.
This article may be known and may be cited as the "Middlesex Township
Sewage Systems Ordinance."
§ 134-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ALTERNATIVE INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — A privately owned
mechanical sewage treatment plant (package treatment plant), serving a
single lot and preengineered and designed to meet the standards set forth
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for the
collection and treatment of sewage and/or the disposal of the discharge of
the effluent on the same lot or into the waters of the commonwealth.
BUILDING SEWER — The piping carrying liquid wastes from a building to
the treatment tank or retention tank.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system whether publicly or privately
owned for the collection of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature
from two or more lots, three or more equivalent single-family dwellings or
commercial or industrial structures as may be deemed necessary by the
Township Sewer and Water Authority and Township Planning Commission.
The system shall consist of a satisfactorily engineered mechanical sewage
treatment plant meeting the standards set forth by the Department of
Environmental Protection and shall provide for the treatment and/or
disposal of the sewage or industrial waste on one or more of the lots or at
any other site or into the waters of the commonwealth.
DISTRIBUTION BOX — A watertight receptacle which receives the liquid
from the treatment tank and provides outlets for connection to the
absorption field.
HOLDING TANK SYSTEM — A watertight receptacle and piping which
receives and retains sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate
ultimate disposal of the sewage at another site. Holding tanks include the
building sewer and retention tank to which sewage is conveyed by a watercarrying
system.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system of piping, tanks or other
facilities including the building sewer, treatment tank, distribution box and
tile field, serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage into the
soil.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any liquid, gaseous, radioactive, solid or other
substance, not sewage, resulting from any manufacturing or industry, or
from any establishment as herein defined, and mine drainage, silt, coal mine
§ 134-1 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 134-2
134:177
solids, rock, debris, dirt and clay from coal mines, coal collieries, breakers
or other coal processing operations. "Industrial waste" shall include all such
substances whether or not generally characterized as waste.
LAGOON SYSTEM — Known as a "waste stabilization pond" or "oxygen
contact stabilization pond" consisting of a shallow impoundment intended
to treat sewage by natural aerobic decomposition.
LOT — A part of a subdivision or a parcel of land used as a building site
or intended to be used for building purposes, whether immediate or future.
Whenever a lot is used for a multiple-family dwelling or contains more than
one single-family dwelling, the lot shall be deemed to have been subdivided
into an equivalent number of single-family residential lots for purposes of
providing adequate sewage facilities.
PERSON — Includes any individual, association, public or private
corporation, for profit or not for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate,
department, board, bureau or agency of the commonwealth, political
subdivision, municipality, district, authority or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing a penalty or imposing
a fine or imprisonment, the term "person" shall include the members of
an association; partnership or firm and the officers of any local agency or
municipal, public or private corporation for profit or not for profit.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any and all persons with an interest in real estate
including equitable and legal interests.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation or which constitutes pollution under the Act
of June 22, 1937, known as "The Clean Streams Law," as amended.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The duly appointed official of
Middlesex Township who reviews permit applications, conducts such
investigations and inspections as are necessary and issues permits.
TILE FIELD or SEEPAGE BED — An area in which open-jointed or
perforated piping is placed in gravel trenches and then covered with earth.
May herein also be called the "absorption field." It is the area through which
the liquid from a treatment tank seeps into the soil.
TOWNSHIP — Middlesex Township, Butler County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP SECRETARY — The Secretary to the Middlesex Township Board
of Supervisors.
TREATMENT TANK — A watertight tank designed to retain sewage long
enough for satisfactory bacterial decomposition of the solids to take place.
It includes the following:
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives sewage and
is designed and constructed to provide for sludge decomposition and
A.
§ 134-2 MIDDLESEX CODE § 134-2
134:178
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, ponds, springs and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface and underground water, or any of their parts,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
§ 134-3. General requirements for individual, alternative individual
and community sewage systems.
It shall be unlawful for any property owner or other person to:
to separate solids from the liquid through a period of detention before
allowing the liquid to be discharged to an absorption field.
AEROBIC SEWAGE TREATMENT TANK — Any unit incorporating, as a
part of the treatment process, a means of introducing air and oxygen
into the sewage held in a storage tank or tanks so as to provide
aerobic biochemical stabilization during a detention period prior to its
discharge to an absorption field.
B.
A. Install or repair, replace, or enlarge any sewage system within the
Township without first obtaining a valid permit issued by the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer.
B. Install or repair, replace, or enlarge any sewage system within the
Township contrary to any conditions or requirements imposed by the
Township Sewage Enforcement Officer at the time of issuance of a
permit.
C. Begin construction or installation of a building for which any sewage
system is to be used without first obtaining a permit.
D. Construct an individual sewage system with an absorption field less
than 500 square feet in area.
E. Construct an individual sewage system with an absorption field closer
than:
(1) One hundred feet from a water well or spring;
(2) Fifty feet from streams, natural watercourses, or waters of this
commonwealth;
(3) Fifteen feet from property boundary lines;
(4) Twenty-five feet from water service lines or piping.
F. Construct a sewage system of the lagoon type.
G. Construct a sewage system when the single-family dwelling, multiplefamily
dwelling, planned residential development, commercial or
industrial building can be feasibly and legally served from the
Township-operated public community sewage system.
§ 134-2 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 134-3
134:179
§ 134-4. New construction requirements for individual sewage
systems.
The following are new construction requirements for individual sewage
systems, single-family or duplex dwellings, including residential mobile
homes not in a mobile home park. All construction shall be in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 73 of the regulations of the Sewage Facilities
Act81 and as amended with the following exceptions and/or additions:
H. Refuse to connect to the Township-operated public community sewage
system if connection is feasibly and legally made available to him.
A. All individual sewage systems hereafter constructed shall have a
treatment tank of not less than 1,000 gallons' capacity and meet all
other standards set forth in the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act of
January 24, 1966, as amended, except as noted below:
(1) The building sewer leading from the dwelling to the treatment tank
shall be cast iron pipe or pipe of equivalent strength and durability,
laid with watertight joints with a uniform fall of at least 1/4 inch per
foot, with no turns or bends in excess of 45°.
(2) The system shall have a distribution box of sufficient size and
capacity to accommodate the absorption field, and shall be
connected to the retention tank with not less than four-inch
diameter T.C. tile or pipe of equivalent strength and durability laid
with watertight joints.
(a) The distribution box shall have a cemented watertight bottom,
and be so constructed that the inlet from the retention tank is
one inch above the level of the outlets to the absorption field,
and the floor or bottom of said box shall be four inches to six
inches below the outlets, providing a settling pocket.
(b) Each box shall be provided with a concrete removable top or
lid.
B. Alternative individual sewage systems may be constructed or installed
with approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and a favorable recommendation by the Sewer and Water
Authority and the Township Planning Commission.
(1) Where an alternative individual sewage system is used, it shall be
set back from property lines a distance equal to those described for
buildings in the various zones in Chapter 175, Zoning.
(2) Alternative individual sewage system shall be screened from
adjacent residentially developed properties so as not to be visible
from those properties. Screening shall take the form of a
continuous hedge which, when mature, is at least five feet high, or
81.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 134-3 MIDDLESEX CODE § 134-4
134:180
§ 134-5. New construction requirements for community sewage
systems.
The following are new construction requirements for community sewage
systems, planned residential developments and mobile home parks as
defined in Chapter 175, Zoning:
a line of evergreen trees at least three feet high when planted
that will grow together when mature, or a wood or metal fence
at least five feet high and at least 50% of the area of which
shall be of solid or opaque materials. Screening may also be in
the form of a structure similar in architecture and design to the
other structures on the properties it is serving and which covers
or surrounds the entire sewage system which may be visible from
adjacent properties. A favorable recommendation by the Planning
Commission is required prior to the installation of any screening.
A. Individual sewage systems using a treatment tank, distribution box and
tile field shall not be permitted to serve as a sewage system in planned
residential developments or mobile home parks.
B. Community sewage systems. Planned residential developments or
mobile home parks shall be served by a community sewage system
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
and favorably recommended by the Township Sewer and Water
Authority and Township Planning Commission.
C. Changes in plan. Modifications, extensions or additions to a planned
residential development or mobile home park shall not be approved
until the size and capacity of the previously approved sewage system
have been analyzed and favorably recommended or approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection and the Sewer and Water
Authority and the Township Planning Commission. Such changes in the
disposal system, if required, shall be treated as new construction, and
the permit herein described shall be required.
D. Setbacks and screening. Community sewage systems shall be set back
from property lines a distance equal to those described in Chapter 175,
Zoning, for structures within a planned residential development and for
mobile homes within a mobile home park, respectively. Community
sewage disposal systems shall be screened from adjacent residentially
developed properties so as not to be visible from those properties.
Screening shall take the form of a continuous hedge which, when
mature, is at least five feet high or a line of evergreen trees at least
three feet high when planted that will grow together when mature, or a
wood or metal fence at least five feet high at least 50% of the area of
which shall be solid or opaque materials. Screening may also be in the
form of a structure similar in architecture and design to the other
structures on the properties it is serving and which covers or surrounds
the entire community sewage system which may be visible from
§ 134-4 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 134-5
134:181
§ 134-6. New construction requirements for sewage systems for
commercial and industrial structures.
The following are new construction requirements for sewage systems for
commercial and industrial structures as defined in Chapter 175, Zoning:
adjacent properties. A favorable recommendation by the Planning
Commission is required prior to the installation of any screening.
A. Individual sewage system. Systems using a treatment tank, distribution
box and tile field may be permitted upon a favorable recommendation
by the Township Planning Commission. Treatment tanks, distribution
boxes and absorption fields shall be constructed according to § 134-4
and shall meet the requirements set forth in the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act of January 24, 1966, and as amended.82
B. Alternative individual sewage systems. If an individual sewage system
is not permitted, commercial and industrial structures shall be served
by an alternative individual sewage system approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and favorably
recommended by the Sewer and Water Authority and the Township
Planning Commission.
C. Holding tank system. If it is not feasible to construct an individual
sewage system or an alternative individual sewage system due to
topography, soil conditions or other land features, commercial and
industrial structures may be served by a holding tank system approved
by the Middlesex Township Planning Commission and the Sewage
Enforcement Officer with prior review by the Middlesex Township
Sewer and Water Authority.
D. Changes in plan. Modifications, extensions, or additions to a
commercial or industrial structure which increase the demand on the
capability of the previously approved sewage system shall not be
approved until the size and capacity of the previously approved sewage
system has been analyzed and favorably recommended or approved by
the Department of Environmental Protection, the Township Sewer and
Water Authority and the Middlesex Township Planning Commission.
Such changes in the disposal system, if required, shall be treated as
new construction, and the permit herein described shall be required.
E. Setbacks and screening. Where an alternative individual sewage
system is used, it shall be set back from property lines a distance equal
to those described in Chapter 175, Zoning, for buildings within a
commercial or industrial zone, respectively. Alternative individual
sewage systems shall be screened from adjacent residentially
developed properties so as not to be visible from those properties.
Screening shall take the form of a continuous hedge which, when
mature, is at least five feet high, or a line of evergreen trees at least
82.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 134-5 MIDDLESEX CODE § 134-6
134:182
§ 134-7. Permits.
three feet high when planted that will grow together when mature, or
a wood or metal fence at least five feet high and at least 50% of the
area of which shall be of solid or opaque materials. Screening may also
be in the form of a structure similar in architecture and design to the
other structures on the properties it is serving and which covers or
surrounds the entire sewage system which may be visible from adjacent
properties. A favorable recommendation by the Planning Commission is
required prior to the installation of any screening.
A. Application for a permit to install any type of individual or community
sewage system shall be in writing on forms provided by the Township,
signed by the property owner and shall include the following (as
applicable):
(1) The Planning Module for Land Development and/or similar
information as required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act
and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
(2) Legal description of the property on which the proposed
installation or alteration is to take place.
(3) Plot plan of land showing location of any proposed or existing
buildings.
(4) A copy of all plans and specifications for proposed treatment plant
bearing the seal of a professional engineer, registered to practice in
Pennsylvania. Plans shall show specific locations and details of all
buildings, operating equipment and piping systems necessary for
the proposed plant.
(5) Soil absorption test information, soil profile description and
percolation test report.
(6) Location of water supply facilities, existing or proposed.
(7) Location of any waters of this commonwealth within the property
boundaries and within 50 feet of any portion of the proposed
sewage system.
(8) Such other items including Department of Environmental
Protection permits and approvals as may be required by the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and this article.
(9) The fee for processing the application and supervision of the
installation which shall be set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
B. Application for permits for an individual sewage system shall be
submitted to the Sewage Enforcement Officer who shall issue or deny a
permit within seven days from receipt of the completed application.
§ 134-6 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 134-7
134:183
§ 134-8. Revocation of permits.
A permit may be revoked by the Board of Supervisors at any time for any
one or more of the following reasons, which shall be incorporated into the
written revocation:
C. Application for permits for a community sewage system or an
alternative individual sewage system shall be submitted to the
Township Secretary who shall forward copies of the complete
application to the Township Sewer and Water Authority and the
Township Planning Commission. The Sewer and Water Authority and
the Township Planning Commission shall recommend approval or denial
of the permit within 45 days of receipt of the application by the
Township Secretary. Upon receipt of the recommendation for approval
by the Township Sewer and Water Authority and the Township Planning
Commission, the Township Secretary shall inform the Sewage
Enforcement Officer to proceed with the application under the
provisions of this article. The Sewage Enforcement Officer shall issue or
deny a permit within seven days from receipt of the application from the
Township Secretary. Should the Township Sewer and Water Authority
and the Township Planning Commission recommend denial of a permit
the applicant shall be informed by the Township Secretary within seven
days after receipt of the recommendation.
D. The Sewage Enforcement Officer shall grant or deny the permit
depending upon whether or not the proposed installation or alteration
conforms to the standards of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act,
the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act, Rules and Regulations of the
Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and rules and regulations issued pursuant to this article.
E. The Sewage Enforcement Officer shall deny a permit to any person or
property owner if the sewage from the single-family dwelling, multiplefamily
dwelling, planned residential development, or commercial or
industrial building can be feasibly and legally discharged into the
Township-operated public community sewage system.
A. Failure of the installation to meet the requirements of this article or of
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act and as amended.83
B. Soil or geological conditions which are uncovered during construction
which would preclude safe and proper operation of the installation.
C. Failure of the system to adequately protect the public health and
prevent pollution.
83.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 134-7 MIDDLESEX CODE § 134-9
134:184
§ 134-9. Appeals.84
Any property owner aggrieved by the granting or denial of a permit under
this article shall have the right within 30 days after receipt of notice of
the denial or granting to request a hearing before the Township Board
of Supervisors. Revocation of a permit shall occur only after notice and
opportunity of hearing has been given to the permittee. The Board of
Supervisors shall hold a hearing within 15 days after receipt of such
request. The hearing procedure shall be governed by the Local Agency Law,
2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 and 751 et seq., as may be hereinafter amended.
§ 134-10. Enforcement officer.
The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Sewage
Enforcement Officer who shall be approved by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors. Remuneration of the Sewage Enforcement Officer shall be
determined and set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 134-11. Violations and penalties.
§ 134-12. Conflict with other ordinances.
It is the express intention of Middlesex Township that this article be read
in conjunction with all other ordinances of the Township and where there
is conflict in provisions thereof, such interpretation shall be given to all
A. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the
defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each
section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense. All fines are to be paid to the Township of Middlesex.
B. A violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a nuisance
and shall be abatable in the manner provided by law.
C. Nothing in this article shall be construed as stopping the Township from
proceeding in courts of law of equity to abate nuisances forbidden
under this article or abate nuisances under existing law. Nothing in this
article shall in any way abridge or alter rights of actions or remedies
now or hereafter existing in equity or under the common law or
statutory law, criminal or civil.
D. All actions hereunder shall be prosecuted in the name of Middlesex
Township.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 134-9 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 134-12
134:185
ordinances read in conjunction as to produce a reasonable result consistent
with the intention of the Board of Supervisors in enacting such ordinances.
§ 134-12 MIDDLESEX CODE § 134-12
134:186
ARTICLE II
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 12-18-2002 by Ord. No. 87]
§ 134-13. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements and procedures
for the use and maintenance, by permit only, of holding tanks designed to
receive and retain sewage as an interim measure from property located
in Middlesex Township, pending construction of permanent public sewage
facilities under the proposed sewerage system and facilities project.
Further, it is declared that the purpose of this article is to establish
requirements and procedures for the protection, benefit and preservation of
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of Middlesex Township.
§ 134-14. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage conveyed by a water-carrying system and is designed and
constructed to facilitate the ultimate disposal of the sewage at another site.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for habitation or occupancy or use
by human beings or animals, from which structure sewage shall or may be
discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in Middlesex Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals,
any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the public
health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic water
supply or recreational use.
TOWNSHIP — Middlesex Township, Butler County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The person officially
appointed by the Township of Middlesex Board of Supervisors to fulfill
the functions ordained by the Township and all other applicable laws and
regulations regarding the regulation of sewage collection and disposal.
§ 134-15. Rights and privileges granted.
The Township is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the
Township the establishment of control and methods of holding tank use, and
the sewage disposal and sewage collection and transportation therefrom.
The Township shall require that all holding tanks be installed, used and
§ 134-13 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 134-15
134:187
maintained only in conformity with permits for same issued by the Township
in conformity herewith.
§ 134-16. Rules and regulations.
§ 134-17. Rates and changes.
The Township shall have the right and power to fix, alter, change and collect
rates, assessments, and other charges for holding tank use, and sewage
disposal, collection, and transportation therefrom, in the area served by its
facilities at reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable law.
§ 134-18. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges.
The Township shall be responsible for the following:
A. The Township is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules
and regulations concerning holding tank use, and sewage disposal,
collection, and transportation therefrom, which it may deem necessary
from time to time to effect the purposes herein.
B. All such rules and regulations adopted by the Township shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the
Township and all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations
of administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the
direction and control of the Township and the disposal thereof shall be
made only at such a site or sites as may be approved by the Department
of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The Township, at its discretion, will receive, review and retain pumping
receipts from the permitted holding tanks.
C. The Township, at its discretion, will complete and retain annual
inspection reports for each permitted holding tank.
D. The Township will maintain the permitted holding tank in conformance
with this or any ordinance of the Township, the provisions of any
applicable law, and the rules and regulations of the Township and any
administrative agency of the commonwealth.
E. The Township may enter into agreements, with the owner of any
improved property, proposing the use of holding tanks. Such agreement
may contain conditions imposed on the owner by the Township with
respect to construction, usage, payment of fees, posting of security, and
maintenance of the holding tank, provided that the ultimate
responsibility of maintenance of the holding tank is that of the
Township.
§ 134-15 MIDDLESEX CODE § 134-19
134:188
§ 134-19. Permits and requirements.
Prior to the construction or installation of a holding tank, the Township shall
require an application for permit be submitted to the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer. The Township Sewage Enforcement Officer shall be
authorized to issue a permit for a holding tank only upon the findings that
all of the following conditions have been met:
§ 134-20. Notification and remedy of violations.
A. All applications for construction and installation of holding tanks shall
be made to and permits issued by the Township; and
B. Public sewage facilities shall be constructed to the improved property
at such time they are extended, so that such will eliminate the need for
the continued use of the holding tank; and
C. The structures served by the holding tank on the improved property
shall be a part of the public sewage system and subject to the payment
of applicable rates to the Township; and
D. The Township has sufficient resources (including financial resources) to
ultimately construct the permanent sewage facilities to the improved
property within the time permitted for use of the holding tank; and
E. The Township is exercising due diligence in the construction of the
public facilities; and
F. The construction of the holding tank(s) meets the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Protection and more specifically the Pa.
Code Title 25, Chapters 71 and 73, as they relate to holding tanks; and
G. The application is not in violation of any other statutes, ordinances,
rules and regulations of the commonwealth, Butler County, Middlesex
Township, their agencies, departments and boards; and
H. The maintenance and disposal of the sewage from the holding tanks
meets the approval of the Township and the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection; and
I. The approval of the requested permit would be in the best interests of
the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of Middlesex Township
as determined by the Township; and
J. That all holding tanks permitted shall be discontinued and the structure
on the improved property served by the holding tank shall be connected
to the public sanitary sewer system within 60 days of the public sanitary
sewer service being made available.
A. Upon finding of the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer that any
provision of this article has been violated; or that the terms of any
issued permit have been violated; or that the use of the holding tank is
creating a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of
§ 134-19 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 134-20
134:189
§ 134-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
§ 134-22. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violations of
any provision of this article shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated
by the Township by seeking appropriate equitable or legal relief from a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 134-23. Tank cleaning contract and bonding.
In accordance with the Sewage Facilities Act of 1966, as amended, the
Township will require a holding tank cleaner contract and require the tank
owner to post a bond with the Township in the amount of $1,000. Said bond
shall be forfeited to the Township on the occurrence of either or both of the
following:
Middlesex Township or to the environment, the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer shall so notify the Township and the use of the
holding tanks shall immediately cease and the Township shall take all
steps required by this article to remedy the use of the system or to
remove it entirely.
B. The Township shall have the right to contract for the proper disposal of
any sewage, to abate any nuisance or danger to the healthy, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of the Township or to the environment and to
remove the system. All costs of same incurred by the Township shall be
chargeable to and paid by the required surety.
A. In the event said holding tank is not maintained according to the terms
of this contract, the Township shall use said bond to maintain the
holding tank according to the terms of this contract.
B. In the event said the holding tank is removed by the Township either by
consent of the owner or as the result of court action, said bond shall be
used by the Township to pay for the cost of said removal and for any
legal costs incurred by the Township.
§ 134-20 MIDDLESEX CODE § 134-23
134:190
ARTICLE III
Mandatory Connection
[Adopted 4-20-2005 by Ord. No. 103]
§ 134-24. Purpose.
The Township of Middlesex has updated its Act 537 Plan to provide for
public sanitary sewage within the Township of Middlesex. The Township
has delegated to the Saxonburg Area Authority the right and power to
provide public sanitary sewage service. As part of the development of a
public sanitary sewage system, the Township has determined the mandatory
connection to the public sanitary sewage system is required in order to
assure the economic viability of the public sanitary sewer system. This
article is to provide for the mandatory connection to the public sanitary
sewer system, to provide for the abandonment and destruction of existing
privy vaults, cesspools and septic tanks and to provide penalties for failure
to comply with this article.
§ 134-25. Definitions; word usage.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — The Saxonburg Area Authority.
AUTHORITY INSEPCTOR — The person appointed or employed by the
Saxonburg Area Authority to inspect public sewers, water lines, building
sewers and all other connections between occupiable homes or other
buildings and the public sewers and water lines.[Amended 3-21-2007 by
Ord. No. 110]
BUILDING — A man-made structure attached to or into the ground
enclosing or covering a volume of space, and intended to shelter or contain
people, animals, businesses and activities associated with any of
them.[Added 3-21-2007 by Ord. No. 110]
BUILDING DRAIN or HOUSE DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal
piping of a drainage system which receives the sewage inside the walls of a
building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning five feet outside the
inner face of the building wall.[Amended 3-21-2007 by Ord. No. 110]
BUILDING SEWER — That part of the drainage system that extends from
the end of the building drain and conveys the discharge to the public
sanitary sewer.[Added 3-21-2007 by Ord. No. 110]
OCCUPIABLE — A building designed for human occupancy in which
individuals congregate for any purpose and which is equipped with means
of egress and plumbing facilities for water to be used by the occupants of
the building.[Added 3-21-2007 by Ord. No. 110]
PERSON — Individual, partnership, association, company, corporation,
municipality, municipal authority or political subdivision, or any agency of
the federal or state government. The term includes the officers, employees
§ 134-24 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 134-25
134:191
and agents of any partnership, association, company, corporation,
municipality, municipal authority or political subdivision, or any agency of
the federal or state government.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER — A sanitary sewer maintained and operated by
the Saxonburg Area Authority.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
stormwater, surface waters, and groundwaters are prohibited.[Amended
3-21-2007 by Ord. No. 110]
SEWAGE — A combination of water-carried wastes from the residence,
business and commercial buildings, apartments, institutions and industrial
establishments. Sewage shall not include industrial waste, which shall be
pretreated prior to placement into the public sanitary sewer system.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT or SEWAGE TREATMENT WORKS — Any
arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SHALL — Mandatory.[Added 3-21-2007 by Ord. No. 110]
STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER — A sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and polluted industrial
wastes.85
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middlesex.
§ 134-26. Connection required within specific time. [Amended
3-21-2007 by Ord. No. 110]
A. Within 60 days after the passage of this article, the owner or owners of
all occupiable buildings located on premises accessible to a public
sanitary sewer shall connect, or cause to be connected, the building or
buildings with the public sanitary sewer to which the property is
accessible. For purposes of discerning accessibility, it shall be
presumed that any building located within 150 feet of a public sanitary
sewer is accessible to such sanitary sewer.
B. As public sanitary sewers are laid and provided in other and additional
areas of the Township of Middlesex, the owners of all occupiable
buildings accessible to such public sanitary sewers so laid and
constructed shall, within 60 days, connect or cause to be connected any
occupiable buildings with the sanitary sewer to which the property
becomes accessible.
85.Editor's Note: The former definition of "suspended solids," which definition immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 3-21-2007 by Ord. No. 110.
§ 134-25 MIDDLESEX CODE § 134-27
134:192
§ 134-27. Abandonment of privies, privy vaults, cesspools and septic
tanks. [Amended 3-21-2007 by Ord. No. 110]
When connection has been made with the public sanitary sewer, the owner
or owners of such property shall forthwith abandon any and all privies,
privy vaults, cesspools and septic tanks then existing on said premises and
shall use them no longer. Such abandoned privies, privy vaults, cesspools
and septic tanks shall have pumped from them all sewage, septage or other
waste and shall cause them to be filled with sand or other acceptable
material. Any and all connection or connections with the occupiable
building which was served by any privy, privy vaults, cesspools and septic
tanks shall be broken and destroyed in such a manner that sanitary sewage
can no longer enter therein.
§ 134-28. Prohibition against use of privies, privy, vaults, cesspools,
and septic tanks.
§ 134-29. Compliance with rules and regulations required.
All connections to the sewer lines that are part of the public sanitary sewer
system of the Township of Middlesex shall be made in accordance with
the rules and regulations adopted by the Authority. Any abandonment of
any existing privy, privy vault, cesspool or septic tank or other disposal,
receptacle or structure shall be made in accordance with rules and
regulations adopted by the Authority.
§ 134-30. Prohibition of stormwater into sanitary sewage system.
[Amended 3-21-2007 by Ord. No. 110]
A. From and after the passage of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to erect or construct any privy, privy vault,
cesspool or septic tank, or any other type of disposal receptacle or
structure in, on or under any premises accessible to any public sanitary
sewer in the Township of Middlesex.
B. From and after the passage of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person to connect with any privy, privy vault, cesspool, septic tank or
any other type of disposal, receptacle or structure to any public sanitary
sewer in the Township of Middlesex.
C. From and after the passage of this article, it shall be unlawful in areas
where public sanitary sewers have been provided and where the owner
or owners of premises have connected with the public sanitary sewer,
or are by this article duly bound to do so, to connect the occupied
building with a privy, privy vault, cesspool, septic tank or any other type
of disposal, receptacle or structure.
A. No basement seepage, groundwater drainage, foundation drain or
storm drain or any other nonsewage source of water shall be
discharged into the sanitary sewer system, and all applicants desiring
connection to the public sanitary sewage system shall certify that no
§ 134-27 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 134-30
134:193
§ 134-31. Provision of connection materials.
Each user of the public sanitary sewer system, before connections are made
thereto, shall provide the necessary piping, venting and connections as
required by the rules and regulations of the Authority.
§ 134-32. Cross-connections prohibited.
No cross-connections shall be made between the sanitary sewer system and
the potable water system whereby vacuums or back siphonage could permit
sanitary waste to enter the potable water system. No cross-connections
shall be made between the sanitary sewage system and the storm drains or
storm sewers.
§ 134-33. Inspectors. [Amended 3-21-2007 by Ord. No. 110]
The Authority and Township, and their agents and employees, shall be
permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, sampling, testing and retesting in accordance with rules and
regulations adopted by the Authority.
§ 134-34. Violations and penalties.
groundwater, seepage drains, foundation drains or storm drains are
or shall be connected to the public sanitary sewage system. After
connection to the sewer is made, the applicant shall maintain the house
system in such a manner that no such seepage, groundwater drainage,
foundation drains or storm water drains enter the sanitary sewage
system.
B. No downspouts, roof drainage or surface or area drainage shall be
connected into the public sanitary sewage system, and before
attachment to the sewer system, the property owner or applicant for
service shall remove such connections and adequately and rightly plug
his system to prevent the entrance of the downspouts, roof or surface or
area drainage into the public sanitary sewer system. After connection to
the sewer system, no downspouts, roof drainage or surface or area
drainage shall be connected to the sewer lateral, any part of the
plumbing system that discharges to the public sanitary sewer system or
any part of the public sanitary sewage system.
A. If the owner or owners of any occupied building or buildings shall
neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this article, the
Township of Middlesex may serve a written notice upon said owner or
owners, or upon the tenant or party in possession of the premises if the
owner or owners cannot be found on said premises, requiring said
owner or owners to comply in every respect with the provisions of this
article within 30 days after the service of such notice, and if the owner
or owners shall neglect or refuse to comply with the notice, the
Township of Middlesex may perform or cause to be performed such
work and labor, and furnish or cause to be furnished such material as
§ 134-30 MIDDLESEX CODE § 134-34
134:194
may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this article at the
cost and expense of the owner or owners, together with 10% in addition
thereto. All charges and expenses incident to such connection by the
Township of Middlesex, which sum shall be collected from said owner
or owners, for the use of the Township of Middlesex as debts are by law
collectible or the said Township of Middlesex may, by the proper officer,
file a municipal claim or lien therefor against said premises as provided
by the Act or Acts of Assembly.
B. In addition to any penalty hereinabove prescribed, any person violating
any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $500, and in default of payment thereof, be
sentenced to undergo an imprisonment of not less than five days nor
more than 30 days.
C. In addition to any of the penalties set forth above, any person who fails
to connect to the public sanitary sewer as required under this article,
and such failure to connect continues for a space of 30 days after
written notice to do so, shall become liable for the monthly minimum
charge for sanitary sewer service, and such charge shall continue
regardless of whether service has been established to the property.
§ 134-34 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 134-34
134:195
Chapter 140
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 57.
§ 140-1. Title.
The short title of this chapter shall be the "Middlesex Township Recycling
Ordinance," and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 140-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases when used in
this chapter shall have, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the
meanings given to them in this section:
ALUMINUM CANS (clean, nonaerosol and empty) — All aluminum beverage
and food containers and some pet food containers.
BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Empty food or beverage containers consisting of
ferrous sides and bottom and an aluminum top.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including, but not limited to,
stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers, theaters
and mobile home parks.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored in whole or in part
by a mandated municipality, or conducted within a mandated municipality
and sponsored privately, which include but are not limited to fairs, bazaars,
socials, picnics and organized sporting events that will be attended by 200
or more individuals per day.
COMPOSTING — A controlled microbial degradation of organic waste to
produce a relatively nuisance-free product of potential value as a soil
conditioner.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Any structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a building
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one family.
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Empty steel or tin food or beverage containers.
Expressly excluded are foil trays, and other types of aluminum are not
acceptable for curbside collection (i.e., auto batteries, appliances, assorted
metals and wide range of other materials). Paper on allowable ferrous
containers need not be removed.
§ 134-34 MIDDLESEX CODE § 140-2
140:196
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Labels on allowable glass recyclables need not be removed. Expressly
excluded are noncontainer glass, plate glass, blue glass, porcelain and
ceramic products, broken glass, drinking glass, light bulbs, ceramic mugs
and window glass. These items may be safely discarded with regular trash.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Any bond, copier, letterhead or
mimeograph paper typically sold as "white ledger" paper; and computer
paper.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
processing or manufacturing, including but not limited to factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or facility
engaged in services including, but not limited to, hospitals nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings
and similar materials, but not including grass clippings.
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
Expressly excluded, however, are all other paper products of any nature
whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENCE — Any occupied residential structure having
two or more dwelling units per structure, including without limitation
apartments, townhouses, condominiums, and cooperatives.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any facility or building owned or
operated by a local government or county government, local government
or county government authority, state government or agency or federal
government or agency.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other materials, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
in the Solid Waste Management Act86 from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or
air pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated
commingled recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint and
distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions,
containing advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly
excluded, however, are newspapers which have been soiled.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, enterprise, municipality, municipal authority or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and
86.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 140-2 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 140-2
140:197
duties. In any provision of this chapter prescribing a fine, imprisonment or
penalty, or any combination of the forgoing, the term "person" shall include
the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having
officers and directors.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers
coded as No. 1 PET and No. 2 HDPE are acceptable. Due to the large variety
of types of plastic, the recycling regulations may stipulate specific types
of plastic which may be recycled. Labels on allowable recyclable plastic
containers need not be removed.
PRIVATE COLLECTOR/HAULER — A person providing collection, hauling
and disposal services for municipal waste and/or commingled recyclable
materials on a private contract basis under contract with, or licensed by,
Middlesex Township.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials specified by the municipality
to be recycled. This list of materials, as specified in the recycling
regulations resulting from this chapter, are designated in § 140-4 hereof and
may be revised from time to time as deemed necessary by the municipality
subject to marketability. Notice to Middlesex Township residents of said
chapter amendments regarding recyclable amendments shall be the
responsibility of the licensed private contractor/hauler, to be clearly shown
on the next billing cycle statement.
RECYCLING — The commingling, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through
combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials other than
a fuel for the operation of energy. It shall be prohibited to separate
recyclables in any manner whatsoever. All allowable recyclable materials
shall be commingled in authorized recycling container(s). Separation of
allowable recyclable materials shall result in private collector/hauler
refusing to pick up recyclables.
RESIDENCE — Any occupied single-family or multifamily dwelling having
up to four dwelling units per structure from which a municipal or private
hauler collects solid waste. This shall include mobile homes located in
parks, if applicable.
§ 140-3. Establishment of program.
There is hereby established a program requiring the separation from
municipal waste of recyclable materials and leaf waste generated at
residences, multifamily residences, commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments and community activities.
§ 140-4. Separation of recyclables and placement for disposal.
It shall be the duty of every owner of property and every person occupying
a dwelling unit, premises or place of business within the Township where
municipal waste is generated and accumulated, by his/her own expense
§ 140-2 MIDDLESEX CODE § 140-4
140:198
and cost, except as otherwise specified in this chapter, to provide and keep
at all times a sufficient number of containers as established by regulation
to hold all municipal waste accumulated between intervals of collection
of such waste by an authorized collector; and to insure the sanitary and
legal disposal of such waste in accordance with this chapter and all other
Township, state and federal applicable laws and regulations.
A. Residences. Designated recyclable materials generated at residences
shall be placed at the curb separated from municipal waste and
commingled in appropriate container for collection at such times and
dates and from such containers as may be established by regulation.
Recyclable materials shall be collected at least once per month.
Designated recyclable materials for residences are:
(1) Aluminum, bimetal and ferrous containers which have been rinsed
of all prior contents and may be crushed to save space. Labels need
not be removed from aluminum, bimetal and ferrous containers.
(2) Unbroken clear, green and brown glass food and beverage
containers which must be rinsed of all prior contents and the lids
and rings discarded with regular trash. Labels need not be
removed from containers.
(3) Empty plastic containers and beverage containers coded as No. 1
PET and No. 2 HDPE which have been rinsed of all prior contents.
Labels need not be removed from containers.
B. Multifamily residences. Designated recyclable materials generated at
multifamily residences shall be placed in appropriate container
separated from municipal waste. Collection receptacles of sufficient
size for recyclable materials shall be placed in easily accessible
locations, such as storage areas or areas where municipal waste is
presently collected. It shall be prohibited to separate recyclables in any
manner whatsoever. All allowable recyclable materials shall be
commingled in appropriate recycling container(s). Separation of
allowable recyclable materials shall result in private collector/hauler
refusing to pick up recyclables. Recyclable materials shall be stored in
accordance with State Fire Code regulations and all federal, state and
local health and safety laws and ordinances until collection. Recyclable
materials shall be collected at least once per month. Designated
recyclable materials for multifamily residences are:
(1) Aluminum, bimetal and ferrous containers which have been rinsed
of all prior contents and may be crushed to save space. Labels need
not be removed.
(2) Unbroken clear, green and brown glass food and beverage
containers which must be rinsed of all prior contents and the lids
and rings discarded with regular trash. Labels need not be
removed.
§ 140-4 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 140-4
140:199
(3) Empty plastic containers and beverage containers coded as No. 1
PET and No. 2 HDPE which have been rinsed of all prior contents.
Labels need not be removed from containers.
C. Commercial, municipal and institutional establishments and community
activities. The owners/operators of commercial, municipal or
institutional establishments, or sponsors/organizers of community
activities, shall separate and commingle designated recyclable
materials from municipal waste. Commingled recyclable materials shall
be placed in appropriate containers. Collection receptacles shall be
placed in all buildings, in all floors and wings thereof, in each office and
in all areas where food is served or consumed, including without
limitation cafeterias, lunch rooms, fast-food areas and vending machine
rooms. Recyclable materials shall be stored in accordance with State
Fire Code regulations and all federal, state and local health and safety
laws and ordinances until collection. Recyclable materials shall be
collected at least once a month.
(1) Designated recyclable materials for commercial, municipal or
institutional establishments and community activities are:
(a) Aluminum, bimetal and ferrous containers which have been
rinsed of all prior contents and may be crushed to save space.
Labels need not be removed.
(b) Unsoiled high-grade office paper and unsoiled corrugated
paper.
(2) Exemption. Owners/operators of commercial, municipal or
institutional establishments may obtain an exemption from the
requirements of this chapter if those persons or establishments
otherwise provide for recycling high-grade office paper, aluminum,
corrugated paper, leaf waste and any other materials that such
establishments are required to recycle. To qualify for an exemption
under this subsection, commercial, institutional and municipal
establishments must provide written documentation to the
Township on or before January 30 for the previous calendar year.
This documentation shall be in the form of one of the following:
(a) Copies of weight receipt, statements, or a report from the
provider of recycling collection services, which consolidate
such information and identifies the amount of each material
collected and marketed.
(b) A report from the provider of recycling collection services
which identifies the amount of each material collected and
marketed. The type and weight of recyclables generated by an
individual establishment may be approximated based upon a
representative sample of its source-separated materials.
Where recyclables from several establishments are collected in
the same vehicle, an individual establishment's contribution to
the load may be apportioned. Only the weight of materials
§ 140-4 MIDDLESEX CODE § 140-4
140:200
§ 140-5. Exclusions.
marketed for recycling purposes can be credited to an
establishment.
(c) A report from the provider of waste collection services that
identifies the type and weight of each recyclable material
collected and marketed in cases where recyclables are
commingled with the establishment's waste. The type and
weight of recyclables generated by an individual establishment
may be approximated based upon a representative sample of
its waste. Where materials from several establishments are
collected in the same vehicle, and individual establishment's
contribution to the load may be apportioned. Only the weight
of materials marketed for recycling purposes can be credited
to an establishment.
A. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit any person not
regularly engaged in the business of collecting municipal waste from
hauling his own municipal waste on an irregular or unscheduled basis
to a state-permitted disposal facility or to the disposal facility as
designated by the Township in accordance with the regulations of the
disposal facility. To qualify for an exemption under this subsection,
persons must provide written documentation to the Township on or
before January 30 for the previous calendar year. This documentation
shall be as follows: Copies of weight receipt or statements, or a report
from the provider of recycling collection services, which consolidate
such information and identifies the name and address of individual,
commercial, municipal or institutional establishment, and amount of
each material collected and marketed. The type and weight of
recyclables generated by an individual may be approximated based
upon a representative sample of its source-separated materials.
B. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a farmer from carrying out
normal farming operations, including composting or spreading of
manure or other farm-produced agricultural waste, not otherwise
prohibited or regulated for land application.
C. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to anything but the storage,
collection, transportation and disposal of municipal waste and do not
apply, therefore, to hazardous or residual waste as defined by the
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act87 and its amendments. All
hazardous or residual waste must be disposed of in compliance with
applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
87.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 140-4 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 140-6
140:201
§ 140-6. Leaf waste.
Persons shall separate leaf waste from other municipal waste generated
within the municipality. No leaf waste shall be placed for collection unless
the leaf waste is to be composted.
§ 140-7. Private collectors and haulers.
A. All municipal waste and commingled recyclable materials and leaf
waste accumulated at residences, multifamily residences, commercial,
institutional and municipal establishments, and at community activities
shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of only by private collectors/
haulers under contract with, or licensed by, the municipality. When
approval by the municipality, commercial, institutional or municipal
establishments may collect, convey and dispose of municipal waste and/
or commingled recyclable material generated by said establishment.
B. All licensed private collectors/haulers shall be required to file with the
municipality quarterly reports. Additionally, an annual report must be
filed and shall be due January 30 for the previous calendar year.
Required reports shall identify all solid waste and commingled
recyclable material collection and separation activities performed by
the licensee within the municipality during the previous calendar year
at each commercial, institutional or municipal establishment and
community activity which shall include the following information:
(1) Type and amount of compostable materials collected within the
reporting period.
(2) Type and amount of recyclable material collected within the
reporting period.
(3) Type and amount of all solid waste, compostable and recyclable
materials collected within the reporting period.
(4) Name, address and telephone number of private collector.
(5) Current and updated name and address listing of all Middlesex
Township customers.
C. All licensed private collectors/haulers shall secure a permit from
Middlesex Township annually. Fee for the annual permit shall be as set
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors and shall
expire on January 30 of each calendar year. Permits shall not be issued
by Middlesex Township unless all items in Subsection B have been
provided to the Township.88
D. Materials specified by the municipality to be recycled, as designated in
§ 140-4 hereof, may be revised from time to time as deemed necessary
by the municipality subject to marketability. Upon notice of recycled
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 140-6 MIDDLESEX CODE § 140-7
140:202
§ 140-8. Recycling containers.
§ 140-9. Violations and penalties.
material amendments from Middlesex Township, it shall be the
responsibility of the licensed private contractor/hauler to notify
Middlesex Township residents of said amendments through the licensed
contractor's/hauler's next billing cycle statements.
A. Recycling containers shall be purchased by Middlesex Township from
Butler County who, in turn, has awarded a bid to the lowest responsible
supplier.
B. Middlesex Township shall distribute and supply one recycling container
per household participating in mandated curbside recycling.
C. The recycling container supplied by Middlesex Township must remain
with the household in the event the original property owner receiving
the recycling container vacates.
D. Additional recycling containers may be purchased from Middlesex
Township upon availability and at current municipal cost.
E. New dwellings constructed subsequent to Middlesex Township's
compliance to municipal waste management and succeeding
distribution of recycling containers shall be required to purchase same
from Middlesex Township upon availability and at current municipal
cost.
A. Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the
terms or provisions of this chapter, or of any regulation promulgated
pursuant hereto, pertaining to the separation, storage, collection,
transportation or disposal of recyclable materials or municipal waste
shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a
District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be
guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment
thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. No prosecutions hereunder shall be
instituted for offenses less than 90 days from the effective date of this
chapter.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person who violates this chapter by
collecting or picking up, or causing to be collected or picked up,
without the appropriate municipal permit/license, recyclable material,
shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a
District Justice under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be
guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not
§ 140-7 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 140-9
140:203
§ 140-10. Alternative collection of recyclable materials.
Any person may donate or sell recyclable materials to individuals or
organizations that are licensed or authorized by the municipality in its
recycling regulations. These materials must either be delivered to the
individual's or organization's site or they may be placed at the curb for
collection by said individual or organization on days not indicated as
recyclable material collection days by the municipality. Said individuals
or organizations may not collect recyclable materials on or immediately
preceding (within 24 hours) a regularly scheduled curbside collection day.
more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment
thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense.
C. In addition to the foregoing penalty, the Township may require the
owner or occupant of a property to remove any accumulation of solid
waste deemed a health and/or safety hazard and, should said person fail
to remove such solid waste after five days following official written
notice, the Township may cause the solid waste to be collected and
disposed of with the cost for such action to be charged to the owner or
occupant of the property in a manner provided by law. Owners,
landlords and agents for owners or landlords who comply with this
chapter shall not be liable for the noncompliance of tenants and/or
occupants of their property.
D. Collection by unauthorized persons. It shall be a violation of this
chapter to collect recyclable materials unless such collection firm,
person or corporation is licensed by the County of Butler or is
authorized by the Township as provided for in this chapter.
Unauthorized collection of recyclable materials from one or more
residential, commercial, institutional or municipal establishments on
one calendar day shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as provided in the Subsections A and B.
E. Failure to separate recyclables. It shall be a violation of this chapter for
any person to mix recyclable material with other wastes for collection
and disposal purposes.
§ 140-9 MIDDLESEX CODE § 140-10
140:204
Chapter 144
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 84.
Impact fees — See Ch. 97.
Improvement design standards — See Ch.
101.
Nuisances — See Ch. 115.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 134.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 147.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
150.
Water — See Ch. 168.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 140-10 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 140-10
140:205

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 144-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Middlesex Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 144-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of Middlesex Township finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge, threatens public health and safety, and increases nonpoint
source pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare,
and the protection of the people of Middlesex Township and all the
people of the Commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
C. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns; accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of streambeds and stream banks, thereby elevating sedimentation);
destroying aquatic habitat; and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy
metals, and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted
through loss of recharge.
D. Stormwater is an important water resource which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater issues.
F. Federal and state regulations require certain townships to implement a
program of stormwater controls. These townships are required to
obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm
sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES).
§ 144-1 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-2
140:207
§ 144-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
Middlesex Township, Butler County, by minimizing the harms and
maximizing the benefits described in § 144-2 of this chapter through
provisions intended to:
§ 144-4. Statutory authority.
G. Nonstormwater discharges to Township separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth.
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of the
commonwealth.
B. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems
close to their source, by regulating activities that cause these problems.
C. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
D. Maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality, and to otherwise protect water resources.
E. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
F. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams and prevent
scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, with a minimum
of structures and a maximum use of natural processes.
H. Provide procedures, performance standards, and design criteria for
stormwater planning and management.
I. Provide proper operations and maintenance of all temporary and
permanent stormwater management facilities and best management
practices (BMPs) that are constructed and implemented.
J. Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.
K. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program in
MS4 permanent urbanized areas to address nonstormwater discharges
into Middlesex Township separate storm sewer system.
A. Primary authority: Middlesex Township is empowered to regulate these
activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Stormwater Management
Act", and Sections 1601 and 2704 of the Second Class Township Code.89
89.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 144-2 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-4
140:208
§ 144-5. Applicability.
§ 144-6. Repealer.
Any ordinance, ordinance provision(s), or regulation of Middlesex Township
inconsistent with any of the provision(s) of this chapter is hereby repealed
to the extent of the inconsistency only. Furthermore, and specifically,
Ordinance No. 90, enacted April 16, 2003, codified as Chapter 144 of the
Township Code, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with this
chapter.
B. Secondary authority: Middlesex Township also is empowered to
regulate land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act
of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.90
A. In Middlesex Township, all regulated activities and all activities that
may affect stormwater runoff, including land development and earth
disturbance activity, are subject to regulation by this chapter.
B. Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing state law and implementing
regulations. This chapter shall operate in coordination with those
parallel requirements; the requirements of this chapter shall be no less
restrictive in meeting the purposes of this chapter than state law.
C. Regulated activities are any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff. Regulated activities include, but are
not limited to, the following listed items:
(1) Earth disturbance activities.
(2) Land development.
(3) Subdivision.
(4) Construction of new or additional impervious or semi-pervious
surfaces.
(5) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(6) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(7) Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
(8) Installation of stormwater BMPs.
D. See § 144-12 of this chapter for exemption/modification criteria.
90.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 144-4 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-7
140:209
§ 144-7. Conflict with other provisions.
Approvals issued and actions taken pursuant to this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to comply with or to secure required
permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable codes,
laws, rules, statutes, or ordinances. To the extent that this chapter imposes
more rigorous or stringent requirements for stormwater management, the
specific requirements contained in this chapter shall be followed.
§ 144-8. Duty of persons engaged in development of land.
Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any
landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of land
which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such
measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety,
or other property. Such measures also shall include actions as are required
to manage the rate, volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater
runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property,
and water quality.
§ 144-9. Township liability disclaimer.
A. Neither the granting of any approval under this chapter, nor the
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or with any condition
imposed by a Township official hereunder, shall relieve any person from
any responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting
therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon
the Township for damages to persons or property.
B. The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater management
facilities shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of
any kind by the Township, or by an official or employee thereof, of the
practicability or safety of any structure, use or other plan proposed, and
shall create no liability upon or cause of action against such public
body, official or employee for any damage that may result pursuant
thereto.
§ 144-7 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-9
140:210
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 144-10. Word usage; definitions.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural; and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any
other similar entity.
(4) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
(5) The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended,
designed, maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or
maintained."
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of human activity and natural processes at
a rate greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — Activities associated with agriculture
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops, tillage,
land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops,
or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation
measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not
considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result
of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another;
changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed
an application for approval to engage in any regulated activities at a
project site within the Township.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
§ 144-10 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-10
140:211
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: "non-structural" or "structural."
Non-structural BMPs are measures referred to as operational and/
or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs are
measures that consist of a physical device or practice that is installed to
capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs include, but are
not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from large-scale
retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to small-scale underground
treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low-impact design,
bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian
or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured
devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent appurtenances to
the project site.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward
cutting of small channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by
moderate to large floods.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank used for storing
rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Butler County Conservation District.
The Butler County Conservation District has the authority under a
delegation agreement executed with the Department of Environmental
Protection to administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations
promulgated under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works that carries a stream
and/or stormwater runoff under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semifluid.
DESIGNEE — The agent of this Township and/or agent of the governing
body involved with the administration, review or enforcement of any
provisions of this chapter by contract or memorandum of
understanding.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a twenty-five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in
the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see
"return period."
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate.
§ 144-10 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-10
140:212
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, or
other entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that
undertakes any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE - (SITE) — The specific tract of land for which a
regulated activity is proposed. Also see "project site."
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of
the lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that all
overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed toward it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management
facility designed to convey stormwater runoff and shall include streams,
channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management, drainage,
or conveyance purposes.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch,
pipe, swale, channel, or similar depression into which surface water
flows.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land
development, agricultural plowing or tilling, timber harvesting
activities, road maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the
moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth
materials.
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water,
wind, ice, or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan
which is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality,
which satisfies Pa. Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter
93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior
to the proposed construction. If the initial condition of the site is
undeveloped land and not forested, the land use shall be considered
as "meadow" unless the natural land cover is documented to generate
lower curve numbers or Rational "C" Coefficient.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
§ 144-10 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-10
140:213
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams,
rivers, and other waters of the commonwealth.
FLOOD FRINGE — The remaining portions of the one-hundred-year
floodplain outside of the floodway boundary.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of
Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration
Flood Hazard Boundary, mapped as being a special flood hazard area.
Included are lands adjoining a river or stream that have been or may
be inundated by a one-hundred-year flood. Also included are areas that
comprise Group 13 soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) Technical Manual for
Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to
time by PADEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the one-hundred-year-frequency flood. Unless otherwise
specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and
flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA
maps or studies have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-yearfrequency
floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that
the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet landward from the top
of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge.
The space is required as a safety margin in a tank, pond or basin.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HEC-HMS MODEL CALIBRATED — (Hydrologic Engineering Center
Hydrologic Modeling System) A computer-based hydrologic modeling
technique adapted to the watershed(s) in Butler County for the Act
167 Plan. The model has been calibrated by adjusting key model input
parameters.
GRADE — A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground
specified in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
(1)
GRADE — DE — To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of
embankment or bottom of excavation.
(2)
§ 144-10 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-10
140:214
HIGH QUALITY WATERS — Surface water having quality which
exceeds levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and
wildlife and recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pa. Code Title
25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93 Water Quality Standards
93.4b(a).
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary
widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into one of four HSGs (A, B, C, and
D) according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for
bare soil after prolonged wetting. The Natural Resource Conservation
Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture defines
the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United
States and their group classification. The soils in the area of interest
may be identified from a soil survey report from the local NRCS office
or the County Conservation District.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surface
(or areas) include, but is not limited to, roofs, additional indoor living
spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, parking
or driveway areas, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any surface
areas proposed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed
to be impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff
into the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench, etc.).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the
diversion end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through
which water may flow.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) —
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(a) A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among
two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of,
or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups, or other features;
(b)
(1)
(2) Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.91
(3)
91.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 144-10 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-10
140:215
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — An approach to land
development that uses various land planning and design practices and
technologies to simultaneously conserve and protect natural resource
systems and reduce infrastructure costs. LID still allows land to be
developed, but in a cost-effective manner that helps mitigate potential
environmental impacts.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Butler County Act 167
watershed hydrologic model(s).
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may include
closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) — The federal government's system for issuance of permits
under the Clean Water Act, which is delegated to PADEP in
Pennsylvania.
NOAA ATLAS 14: — Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States,
Atlas 14, Volume 2, United States Department of Commerce, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland
(2004). NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at Internet address
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water
body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from
discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service [previously Soil
Conservation Service (SCS)].
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows
with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to,
natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals,
and pipes not under pressure.
OUTFALL —
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake,
tidewater, or artificial drain.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(1) Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain;
"Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where the
Township's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the
commonwealth.
(2)
§ 144-10 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-10
140:216
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of impervious parking
areas as temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during
rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Middlesex
Township.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, or discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pennsylvania Code § 92.1.
PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD (PMF) — The flood that may be
expected from the most severe combination of critical meteorological
and hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area.
The PMF is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP)
as determined on the basis of data obtained from the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the Township are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to
perform the work required by the chapter.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate
peak flow.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land, which has
previously been developed.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,
Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.92
92.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. 691.1 et seq.
§ 144-10 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-10
140:217
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of predevelopment peak rate of
runoff from a site or subwatershed area to which the post-development
peak rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT — Those subwatershed areas in which postdevelopment
flows must be reduced to a certain percentage of
predevelopment flows as required to meet the plan requirements and
the goals of Act 167.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored
and not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released
from the basin at some time after the end of the storm.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface Waters of this
Commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For
example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected
to recur on the average once every 25 years; or stated in another way,
the probability of a 25-year storm occurring in any one given year is
0.04 (i.e., a four-percent chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A vegetated area bordering perennial and
intermittent streams and wetlands, that serves as a protective filter to
help protect streams/wetlands from the impacts of adjacent land uses.
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is
used to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design
storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road right-of-way, such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches, and other similar activities. Road maintenance
activities that do not disturb the subbase of a paved road (such as
milling and overlays) are not considered earth disturbance activities.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating
controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
RUNOFF CAPTURE VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured
(retained) and not released into surface waters of the commonwealth
during or after a storm event.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.
§ 144-10 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-10
140:218
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin
located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material
transported by stormwater runoff.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge, or any other
introduction of sediment into waters of the commonwealth occurring
from the failure to properly design, construct, implement or maintain
control measures and control facilities in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled
with loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the ground.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, Township streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin,
even layer - not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called curve number (CN).
SPILLWAY (EMERGENCY) — A depression in the embankment of a
pond or basin, or other overflow structure, that is used to pass peak
discharges greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
pond or basin.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.93
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure
based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow
equals the change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of
storage volume and depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm
"event" occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years.
See also "return period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Runoff from the surface of the land resulting from
precipitation, snow, or ice melt.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates
higher concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals, or toxicants than
are found in typical stormwater runoff.
93.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. 691.1 et seq.
§ 144-10 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-10
140:219
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Any structure, natural
or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction,
conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to,
detention and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes and
infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The Butler County
Stormwater Management Plan for managing stormwater runoff in
Butler County as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act
167) and known as the "Stormwater Management Act."94
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN (SWM SITE PLAN) — The
plan prepared by the applicant or his representative indicating how
stormwater runoff will be managed at the project site in accordance
with this chapter.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a
regulated waters of the commonwealth.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means, into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or
building or lot development, provided; however, that the subdivision
by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than
10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any
residential dwellings, shall be exempt (Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 24795).
SUBWATERSHED AREA — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed
for which stormwater management criteria has been established in the
Stormwater Management Plan.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a
point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total
of overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TOWNSHIP — Middlesex, Butler County, Pennsylvania.
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as
a stream or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
94.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
95.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 144-10 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-10
140:220
WATERSHED — Area drained by a river, watercourse, or other surface
water, whether natural or artificial.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas. (The term includes but is not limited
to wetland areas listed in the State Water Plan, the United States
Forest Service Wetlands Inventory of Pennsylvania and a wetland area
designated by a river basin commission. This definition is used by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency and the United States
Army Corps of Engineers.)
§ 144-10 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-10
140:221

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 144-11. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless specifically exempted in § 144-12.
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the Township issues
written approval of a SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(3) The SWM site plan shall demonstrate that adequate capacity will
be provided to meet the volume and rate control requirements, as
described under §§ 144-14 and 144-15 of this chapter.
(4) The SWM site plan approved by the Township, shall be on site
throughout the duration of the regulated activities.
B. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code (including, but not limited to, Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment
Control) and the Clean Streams Law.96 Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as
amended and updated.
C. For all regulated activities, stormwater BMPs shall be designed,
installed, implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law,97
conform to the state water quality requirements, meet all requirements
under the Stormwater Management Act98 and any more stringent
requirements as determined by the Township.
D. The Township may, after consultation with PADEP and the Conservation
District, approve measures for meeting the state water quality
requirements other than those in this chapter, provided that they meet
the minimum requirements of, and do not conflict with state law,
including, but not limited to, the Clean Streams Law.
E. All regulated activities shall include, to the maximum extent
practicable, measures to:
96.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. 691.1 et seq.
97.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. 691.1 et seq.
98.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 144-11 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-11
140:223
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes,
existing native vegetation and woodlands.
(b) Create, maintain, or extend riparian buffers and protect
existing forested buffers.
(c) Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas
whenever feasible.
(d) Minimize the creation of impervious surfaces and the
degradation of waters of the commonwealth and promote
groundwater recharge.
(e) Protect natural systems and processes (drainageways,
vegetation, soils, and sensitive areas) and maintain, as much as
possible, the natural hydrologic regime.
(f) Incorporate natural site elements (wetlands, stream corridors,
mature forests) as design elements.
(g) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(h) Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction.
(i) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of the commonwealth.
(j) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible and decentralize and manage
stormwater at its source.
F. Impervious areas.
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development, even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For developments taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
G. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding, or other harm will result from the
concentrated discharge.
§ 144-11 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-11
140:224
(1) The applicant must provide an easement for proposed concentrated
flow across adjacent properties to a drainage way or public right-ofway.
(2) Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
H. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
I. Where watercourses traverse a development site, drainage easements
(with a minimum width of 20 feet and include the one-hundred-year
water surface) shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the
placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may adversely
affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement. Also,
maintenance, including mowing of vegetation within the easement may
be required, except as approved by the appropriate governing
authority.
J. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainage ways
shall be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 105 through the joint permit application process, or, where
deemed appropriate by PADEP, through the general permit process.
K. Any stormwater management facilities or any facilities that constitute
water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls, or stream
enclosures, etc.) that are regulated by this chapter, that will be located
in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth (including wetlands),
shall be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 105 through the joint permit application process, or, where
deemed appropriate by PADEP, the general permit process. When there
is a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility
of the applicant or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be
classified as wetlands; otherwise, approval to work in the area must be
obtained from PADEP.
L. Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105
concerning dam safety.
M. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
will be located on or discharged onto state highway rights-of-ways shall
be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT).
§ 144-11 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-11
140:225
§ 144-12. Exemptions/modifications.
N. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., are encouraged, where soil
conditions and geology permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need
for detention facilities.
O. Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the site, made as
shallow as practicable, and located to maximize use of natural on-site
infiltration features while still meeting the other requirements of this
chapter.
P. The design of facilities over karst shall include an evaluation and
implementation of measures to minimize adverse effects.
Q. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers,
or roadside ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where it is advantageous to do so. When it is
more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then
the Township shall permit it on a case-by-case basis.
R. Applicants are encouraged to use low-impact development practices to
reduce the costs of complying with the requirements of this chapter and
the state water quality requirements.
S. When stormwater management facilities are proposed within 1,000 feet
of a downstream township, the Developer shall notify the downstream
Township and provide a copy of the SWM plan, if requested, for review
and comment.
A. Under no circumstance shall the applicant be exempt from
implementing such measures as necessary to:
(1) Meet state water quality standards and requirements;
(2) Protect health, safety, and property;
(3) Meet special requirements for high quality (HQ) and exceptional
value (EV) watersheds.
B. The applicant must demonstrate that the following BMPs are being
utilized to the maximum extent practicable to receive consideration for
the exemptions:
(1) Design around and limit disturbance of floodplains, wetlands,
natural slopes over 15%, existing native vegetation, and other
sensitive and special value features.
(2) Maintain riparian and forested buffers.
(3) Limit grading and maintain nonerosive flow conditions in natural
flow paths.
(4) Maintain existing tree canopies near impervious areas.
§ 144-11 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-12
140:226
(5) Minimize soil disturbance and reclaim disturbed areas with topsoil
and vegetation.
(6) Direct runoff to pervious areas.
C. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed development/
additional impervious area will not adversely impact the following:
(1) Capacities of existing drainageways and storm sewer systems.
(2) Velocities and erosion.
(3) Quality of runoff if direct discharge is proposed.
(4) Existing known problem areas.
(5) Safe conveyance of the additional runoff.
(6) Downstream property owners.
D. An applicant proposing regulated activities may be eligible for
exemption from rate control, volume control, or stormwater
management site plan requirements in this chapter according to the
following table:
Table 144-12.1 - Exemptions and Submission Requirements
New Impervious
Area1, 2
(square footage) Applicant Must Provide
0 < 2,500 No submission is required
2,500 < 5,000 Documentation of new impervious surfaces3
5,000 and greater Rate controls, volume controls & SWM site
plan
NOTES:
1 New impervious area since the date of adoption of this chapter.
2 Gravel in existing condition shall be considered pervious and gravel
in proposed condition shall be considered impervious.
3 The Small Project Stormwater Management Application included in
Appendix E99 shall be used to document new impervious surfaces.
E. Single-family residential activities.
(1) Single-family residential activities are exempt from these
requirements, provided the construction:
(a) Complies with § 144-11G and § 144-12A, B and C;
99.Editor's Note: Appendix E is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 144-12 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-12
140:227
(b) Has building set back 75 feet from downstream property lines;
and
(c) Driveways:
[1] Runoff must discharge onto pervious surface with a gravel
strip or other spreading device;
[2] No more than 1,000 square feet of paved surface may
discharge to any one point.
[3] The length of flow on the pervious surface must exceed the
length of the paved surface flow.
(2) The Township can require more information or require mitigation
of certain impacts through installation of stormwater management
BMPs if there is a threat to property, health, or safety.
F. An applicant proposing regulated activities, after demonstrating
compliance with § 144-12A, B or C, may be exempted from various
requirements of this chapter if documentation can be provided that a
downstream man-made water body (i.e., reservoir, lake, or man-made
wetlands) has been designed or modified to address the potential
stormwater flooding impacts of the proposed development.
G. The purpose of this section is to ensure consistency of stormwater
management planning between local ordinances and NPDES permitting
(when required) and to ensure that the applicant has a single and clear
set of stormwater management standards to which the applicant is
subject. The Township may accept alternative stormwater management
controls under this section provided that:
(1) The Township, in consultation with the PADEP (or delegated
authority), determines that meeting the volume control
requirements (See § 144-14) is not possible or places an undue
hardship on the applicant.
(2) The alternative controls are documented to be acceptable to PADEP
(or delegated authority) for NPDES requirements pertaining to
post-construction stormwater management requirements.
(3) The alternative controls are in compliance with all other sections of
this chapter, including but not limited to §§ 144-11D and 144-12A to
C.
H. Agricultural activities are exempt from the rate control and SWM site
plan preparation requirements of this chapter, provided the activities
are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter
102.
I. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the rate
and volume control requirement and SWM site plan preparation
requirement of this chapter, provided the activities are performed
§ 144-12 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-12
140:228
§ 144-13. Waivers.
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102. It should be
noted that temporary roadways are not exempt.
J. The Township may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the Township believes may pose
a threat to public health, safety, property or the environment.
A. The provisions of this chapter are the minimum standards for the
protection of the public welfare.
B. All waiver requests must meet the provisions of § 144-13G and H.
(1) Waivers shall not be issued from implementing such measures as
necessary to:
(a) Meet state water quality standards and requirements.
(b) Protect health, safety, and property.
(c) Meet special requirements for high quality (HQ) and
exceptional value (EV) watersheds.
(2) The Township will then consider waivers in accordance with
§ 144-11D.
C. If an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the governing body of
the Township that any mandatory provision of this chapter is
unreasonable or causes unique or undue unreasonableness or hardship
as it applies to the proposed project, or that an alternate design may
result in a superior result within the context of §§ 144-2 and 144-3 of
this chapter, the governing body of the Township upon obtaining the
comments and recommendations of the Township Engineer may grant a
waiver or relief so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest is secured; provided that such waiver will not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter.
D. The applicant shall submit all requests for waivers in writing and shall
include such requests as a part of the plan review and approval process.
The applicant shall state in full the facts of unreasonableness or
hardship on which the request is based, the provision or provisions of
the Ordinance that are involved, and the minimum waiver or relief that
is necessary. The applicant shall state how the requested waiver and
how the applicant's proposal shall result in an equal or better means of
complying with the intent or purpose and general principles of this
chapter.
E. The Township shall keep a written record of all actions on waiver
requests.
F. The Township may charge a fee for each waiver request, which shall be
used to offset the administrative costs of reviewing the waiver request.
§ 144-12 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-13
140:229
The applicant shall also agree to reimburse the Township for reasonable
and necessary fees that may be incurred by the Township Engineer in
any review of a waiver request.
G. In granting waivers, the Township may impose reasonable conditions
that will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards or requirements that are to be modified.
H. The Township may grant applications for waivers when the following
findings are made, as relevant that:
(1) The waiver shall result in an equal or better means of complying
with the intent of this chapter.
(2) The waiver is the minimum necessary to provide relief.
(3) The applicant is not requesting a waiver based on cost
considerations.
(4) Existing down-gradient stormwater problems will not be
exacerbated.
(5) Runoff is not being diverted to a different drainage area.
(6) Increased flooding or ponding on off-site properties or roadways
will not occur.
(7) Potential icing conditions will not occur.
(8) That increase of peak flow or volume from the site will not occur.
(9) Erosive conditions due to increased peak flows or volume will not
occur.
(10) Adverse impact to water quality will not result.
(11) Increased one-hundred-year floodplain levels will not result.
(12) Increased or unusual Township maintenance expenses will not
result from the waiver.
(13) The amount of stormwater generated has been minimized to the
greatest extent allowed.
(14) Infiltration of runoff throughout the proposed site has been
provided where practicable and predevelopment groundwater
recharge protected.
(15) Peak flow attenuation of runoff has been provided.
(16) Long-term operation and maintenance activities are established.
(17) The receiving streams and/or water bodies will not be adversely
impacted in flood-carrying capacity, aquatic habitat, channel
stability and erosion and sedimentation.
§ 144-13 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-14
140:230
§ 144-14. Volume controls.
A. The low-impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual
and in Appendix B100 of this chapter shall be utilized for all regulated
activities to the maximum extent practicable.
B. Stormwater runoff volume controls shall be implemented using the
Design Storm Method or the Simplified Method as defined below. For
regulated activity areas equal or less than one acre that do not require
hydrologic routing to design the stormwater facilities, this chapter
establishes no preference for either method; therefore, the applicant
may select either method on the basis of economic considerations, the
intrinsic limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures
associated with each methodology, and other factors.
(1) The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable
to any sized regulated activity. This method requires detailed
modeling based on site conditions.
(a) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume
when compared to the predevelopment total runoff volume for
the two-year/twenty-four-hour storm event.
(b) For hydrologic modeling purposes:
[1] Existing nonforested pervious areas must be considered
meadow (good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic
calculations.
[2] Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present
within the proposed project site, shall be considered
meadow (good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic
calculations for redevelopment.
(2) The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) is independent of
site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm Method is
not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated activities
greater than one acre or for projects that require detailed design of
stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(a) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches
of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(b) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow,
i.e. it shall not be released into surface waters of the
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration.
(c) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
100. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 144-14 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-14
140:231
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(d) Actual field infiltration tests at the location of the proposed
elevation of the stormwater BMPs are required. Infiltration
tests shall be conducted in accordance with the BMP Manual.
Notification of the Township shall be provided to allow
witnessing of the testing.
(3) In cases where it is not possible or desirable to use infiltrationbased
best management practices to partially fulfill the
requirements in either § 144-14B(1) or (2), the following procedure
shall be used:
(a) At a minimum, the following documentation shall be provided
to justify the decision to not use infiltration BMPs:
[1] Description of and justification for field infiltration/
permeability testing with respect to the type of test and
test locations.
[2] An interpretive narrative describing existing site soils and
their structure as these relate to the interaction between
soils and water occurring on the site. In addition to
providing soil and soil profile descriptions, this narrative
shall identify depth to seasonal high-water tables and
depth to bedrock, and provide a description of all
subsurface elements (fragipans and other restrictive
layers, geology, etc.) that influence the direction and rate
of subsurface water movement.
[3] A qualitative assessment of the site's contribution to
annual aquifer recharge shall be made, along with
identification of any restrictions or limitations associated
with the use of engineered infiltration facilities.
[4] The provided documentation must be signed and sealed by
a professional engineer or geologist.
(b) The following water quality pollutant load reductions will be
required for all disturbed areas within the proposed
development:
Pollutant Load Units
Required
Reduction
Total suspended solids
(TSS)
Pounds 85%
Total phosphorous (TP) Pounds 85%
Total nitrate (NO3) Pounds 50%
§ 144-14 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-14
140:232
§ 144-15. Rate controls.
§ 144-16. Sensitive areas; stormwater hotspots.
(c) The performance criteria for water quality best management
practices shall be determined from the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, most current
version.
C. The applicable worksheets from the BMP Manual must be used in
calculations to establish volume control.
A. Lands contained within Butler County that have not had release rates
established under an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan:
(1) Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the
predevelopment discharge rates for the one year, two-year, tenyear,
twenty-five-year, fifty-year, and one-hundred-year storms.
B. Lands contained within Butler County that have had release rates
established under an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan:
(1) The post-development peak discharge rates shall be in accordance
with the approved release rate map for the following watersheds
(See Appendixes101 for the Release Rate Map):
(a) Connoquenessing Creek Watershed.
A. Sensitive areas and water-quality sensitive developments as defined
below which require special consideration with regard to stormwater
management.
(1) "Sensitive areas" are defined as those areas that, if developed, have
the potential to endanger a water supply. These areas consist of the
delineated one-year zone of contribution and direct upslope areas
tributary to the water supply wells. The Township may update the
sensitive area boundaries based on new research or studies as
required.
(2) "Stormwater hotspots" are defined as a land development project
that has a high potential to endanger local water quality, and could
potentially threaten groundwater reservoirs. The Township
Engineer will determine what constitutes these classifications on a
case-by-case basis. The PADEP wellhead protection contaminant
source list shall be used as a guide in these determinations.
Industrial manufacturing site and hazardous material storage
areas must provide NPDES SIC codes.
B. Performance standards.
101. Editor's Note: The Appendixes are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 144-14 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-16
140:233
(1) The location of the boundaries of sensitive areas is set by drainage
areas tributary to any public water supply. The exact location of
these boundaries as they apply to a given development site shall be
determined using mapping at a scale which accurately defines the
limits of the sensitive area. If the project site is within the sensitive
area (in whole or in part), two-foot contour interval mapping shall
be provided to define the limits of the sensitive area. If the project
site is adjacent to but within 500 linear feet of a defined sensitive
area, a five-foot contour interval map defining the limits of the
sensitive area shall be included in the stormwater management
plan to document the site's location relative to the sensitive area.
(2) Stormwater hotspots may be required to prepare and implement a
stormwater pollution prevention plan and file notice of intent as
required under the provision of the EPA Industrial Stormwater
NPDES permit requirements.
(3) Stormwater hotspots must use an acceptable pre-treatment BMP
prior to volume control and/or rate control BMPs. Acceptable
pretreatment BMPs for these developments include those based on
filtering, settling, or chemical reaction processes such as
coagulation.
§ 144-16 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-16
140:234
ARTICLE IV
Erosion and Sedimentation Standards
§ 144-17. Erosion and sedimentation requirements during earth
disturbance activities.
A. The applicant shall meet requirements as contained in 25 Pa. Code
Chapters 92 and 102 as required and applicable as follows:
(1) The implementation and maintenance of erosion and sediment
control BMPs.
(2) Development of written plans.
(3) Submission of plans for approval.
(4) Obtaining erosion and sediment control and NPDES permits.
(5) Maintaining plans and permits on site.
B. Evidence of any necessary plan or permit approval for earth
disturbance activities from PADEP or the Butler County Conservation
District must be provided to Middlesex Township as part of any final
plan submission.
C. A copy of the approved erosion and sediment control plan and any other
permit, as required by PADEP or the Butler County Conservation
District, shall be available at the project site at all times if required
under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
§ 144-17 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-17
140:235

ARTICLE V
Protected Watershed Standards
§ 144-18. Protected watershed requirements.
A. For any regulated activity within a protected watershed (high quality or
exceptional value), the applicant shall meet requirements as contained
in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 as required and applicable.
B. Existing resources and site analysis plan: shall be prepared to provide
the developer and the Township with a comprehensive analysis of
existing conditions, both on the proposed development site and within
500 feet of the site. Conditions beyond the parcel boundaries may be
described on the basis of existing published data available from
governmental agencies and from aerial photographs. The Township
shall review the plan to assess its accuracy, conformance with Township
ordinances, and likely impact upon the natural and cultural resources
on the property. The following information shall be required:
(1) Complete current perimeter boundary survey of the property to be
subdivided or developed prepared by a registered surveyor,
showing all courses, distances, and area and tie-ins to all adjacent
intersections.
(2) A vertical aerial photograph enlarged to a scale not less detailed
than one inch equals 400 feet, with the site boundaries clearly
marked.
(3) Natural features, including:
(a) Contour lines at intervals of not more than two feet. (Ten-foot
intervals are permissible beyond the parcel boundaries,
interpolated from United States Geological Survey published
maps.) Contour lines shall be based on information derived
from a topographic survey for the property, evidence of which
shall be submitted, including the date and source of the
contours. Datum to which contour elevations refer and
references to known, established benchmarks and elevations
shall be included on the plan.
(b) Steep slopes in the following ranges: 15% to 25%, 25% and
greater. The location of these slopes shall be graphically
depicted by category on the plan. Slope shall be measured over
three or more two-foot contour intervals.
(c) Areas within the floodway, flood fringe, and approximated
floodplain.
(d) Watercourses, either continuous or intermittent and named or
unnamed, and lakes, ponds or other water features as depicted
on the United States Geological Survey Quadrangle Map, most
current edition.
§ 144-18 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-18
140:237
(e) Wetlands and wetland margins.
(f) Riparian buffers.
(g) Soil types and their boundaries, as mapped by the USDA
Natural Resource Conservation Service, including a table
listing the soil characteristics pertaining to suitability for
construction and, in unsewered areas, for septic suitability.
Alluvial and hydric soils shall specifically be depicted on the
plan.
(h) Existing vegetation, denoted by type, including woodlands,
hedgerows, tree masses, tree lines, individual freestanding
trees over six inches DBH, wetland vegetation, pasture or
croplands, orchards, permanent grass land, old fields, and any
other notable vegetative features on the site. Vegetative types
shall be described by plant community, relative age, and
condition.
(i) Any identified Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory (PNDI)
site conflicts.
(j) Geologic formations on the tract, including rock outcroppings,
cliffs, sinkholes, and fault lines, based on available published
information or more detailed data obtained by the applicant.
(4) Existing man-made features, including:
(a) Location, dimensions, and use of existing buildings and
driveways.
(b) Location, names, widths, center-line courses, paving widths,
identification numbers, and rights-of-way of existing streets
and alleys.
(c) Location of trails that have been in public use (pedestrian,
equestrian, bicycle, etc.).
(d) Location and size of existing sanitary sewage facilities.
(e) Location and size of drainage facilities.
(f) Location of water supply facilities, including wellhead
protection areas.
(g) Any easements, deed restrictions, rights-of-way, or any other
encumbrances upon the land, including location, size, and
ownership.
(h) Site features or conditions such as hazardous waste, dumps,
underground tanks, active and abandoned wells, quarries,
landfills, sandmounds, and artificial land conditions.
§ 144-18 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-18
140:238
(5) Total acreage of the tract, the adjusted tract area, where
applicable, and the constrained land area with detailed supporting
calculations.
C. Stormwater management system concept plan. A written and graphic
concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater
management system shall be prepared and include:
(1) Preliminary selection and location of proposed structural
stormwater controls;
(2) Location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as
grass channels, swales, and storm drains;
(3) Location of floodplain/floodway limits;
(4) Relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and
drainages.
(5) Preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications,
such as bridge or culvert crossings.
D. Consultation meeting. Prior to any stormwater management permit
application submission, the landowner or developer shall meet with the
Township for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the postdevelopment
stormwater management system to be utilized in the
proposed project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time
of the preliminary plan or other early step in the development process.
The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development
stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project,
as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential
ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design
engineering is commenced.
E. All proposed regulated activities within a protected watershed shall
utilize, to the maximum extent possible, Low-Impact Development
Practices as contained in Appendix B.102
(1) The SWM plan and report shall address the following:
(a) Design using nonstructural BMPs.
[1] Lot configuration and clustering.
[a] Reduced individual lot impacts by concentrated/
clustered uses and lots.
[b] Lots/development configured to avoid critical natural
areas.
[c] Lots/development configured to take advantage of
effective mitigative stormwater practices.
102. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 144-18 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-18
140:239
[d] Lots/development configured to fit natural
topography.
[2] Minimum disturbance.
[a] Define disturbance zones (excavation/grading) for the
site and individual lots to protect maximum total site
area from disturbance.
[b] Barriers/flagging proposed to protect designated nondisturbance
areas.
[c] Considered mitigative practices for minimal
disturbance areas (e.g., soil restoration).
[d] Considered reforestation and revegetation
opportunities.
[3] Reduce impervious coverage.
[a] Reduced road width.
[b] Reduced driveway lengths and widths.
[c] Reduced parking ratios and sizes.
[d] Utilized porous surfaces for applicable features.
[4] Stormwater disconnected from impervious area.
[a] Disconnected drives/walkways/small impervious areas
to natural areas.
[b] Use rain barrels and/or cisterns for lot irrigation.
(b) Apply structural BMP selection process that meets runoff
quantity and quality needs.
[1] Manage close to source with collection with conveyance
minimized.
[2] Consistent with site factors (e.g., soils, slope, available
space, amount of sensitive areas, pollutant removal
needs).
[3] Minimize footprint and integrate into already disturbed
areas/other building program components (e.g., recharge
beneath parking areas, vegetated roofs).
[4] Consider other benefits such as aesthetic, habitat,
recreational and educational benefits.
[5] BMPs selected based on maintenance needs that fit owner/
users.
[6] BMPs sustainable using a long-term maintenance plan.
§ 144-18 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-18
140:240
ARTICLE VI
Riparian Buffer Standards
§ 144-19. (Reserved)
§ 144-19 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-19
140:241

ARTICLE VII
Design Criteria
§ 144-20. Design criteria for stormwater management and drainage
facilities.
A. General design guidelines.
(1) Stormwater shall not be transferred from one watershed to
another, unless:
(a) The watersheds are subwatersheds of a common watershed
which join together within the perimeter of the property;
(b) The effect of the transfer does not alter the peak rate discharge
onto adjacent lands; or
(c) Easements from the affected landowner(s) are provided.
(2) Consideration shall be given to the relationship of the subject
property to the drainage pattern of the watershed. A concentrated
discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property shall be within an
existing watercourse or confined in an easement or returned to a
predevelopment flow type condition.
(3) Innovative stormwater BMPs and recharge facilities are
encouraged (e.g., rooftop storage, drywells, cisterns, recreation
area ponding, diversion structures, porous pavements, holding
tanks, infiltration systems, in line storage in storm sewers, and
grading patterns). They shall be located, designed, and constructed
in accordance with the latest technical guidance published by
PADEP, provided they are accompanied by detailed engineering
plans and performance capabilities and supporting site specific
soils, geology, runoff and groundwater and infiltration rate data to
verify proposed designs. Additional guidance from other sources
may be accepted at the discretion of the Township Engineer. (A preapplication
meeting is suggested.)
(4) All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage systems
and areas of surface water concentration shall be maintained in
their existing condition unless an alteration is approved by the
appropriate regulatory agency.
(5) The design of all stormwater management facilities shall
incorporate sound engineering principles and practices. The
Township shall reserve the right to disapprove any design that
would result in the continuation or exacerbation of a documented
adverse hydrologic or hydraulic condition within the watershed, as
identified in the plan.
(6) The design and construction of multiple-use stormwater detention
facilities are strongly encouraged. In addition to stormwater
§ 144-20 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-20
140:243
management, facilities should, where appropriate, allow for
recreational uses including ball fields, play areas, picnic grounds,
etc. Consultation with the Township, and prior approval are
required before design. Provision for permanent wet ponds with
stormwater management capabilities may also be appropriate.
(a) Multiple-use basins should be constructed so that potentially
dangerous conditions are not created.
(b) Water quality basins or recharge basins that are designed for a
slow release of water or other extended detention ponds are
not permitted for recreational uses, unless the ponded areas
are clearly separated and secure.
(7) Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter
105 concerning dam safety.
B. Stormwater management facility design considerations. All stormwater
management facilities shall meet the following design requirements:
(1) No outlet structure from a stormwater management facility, or
swale, shall discharge directly onto a Township or state roadway
without approval from the Township or PennDOT.
(2) The top, or toe, of any slope shall be located a minimum of 10 feet
from any property line.
(3) The minimum horizontal distance between any stormwater holding
facility shall be 25 feet. The lowest floor elevation of any structure
constructed immediately adjacent to a detention basin or other
stormwater facility shall be a minimum of two feet above the onehundred-
year water surface elevation.
(4) Stormwater management facility bottom (or surface of permanent
pool) elevations must be greater than adjacent floodplain
elevations (FEMA or HEC-RAS analysis). If no floodplain is defined,
bottom elevations must be greater than existing ground elevations
50 feet from top of stream bank in the facility's vicinity.
(5) Basin outflow culverts discharging into floodplains must account
for tailwater. Tailwater corresponding to the one-hundred-yearfloodplain
elevation must be used for all design storms, or the
applicant may elect to determine flood elevations of the adjacent
watercourse for each design storm. The floodplain is assumed to be
50 feet from top of stream bank in areas where a floodway is not
designated, or no other evidence is provided.
(6) The invert of all stormwater management facilities and
underground infiltration/storage facilities shall be located a
minimum of two feet above the seasonal high groundwater table.
§ 144-20 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-20
140:244
The invert of stormwater facilities may be lowered if adequate
subsurface drainage is provided. Flows from underdrains need not
be accounted for in volume or rate control calculations.
(7) Whenever possible the side slopes and basin shape shall be
amenable to the natural topography. Vertical side slopes and
rectangular basins shall be avoided whenever possible.
(8) Exterior slopes of compacted soil shall not exceed 3:1, and may be
further reduced if the soil has unstable characteristics.
(9) Interior slopes of the basin shall not exceed 3:1.
(10) Unless specifically designed as a volume control facility, all
stormwater management facilities shall have a minimum slope of
2% extending radially out from the principal outlet structure.
Facilities designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs may have a
bottom slope of zero.
(11) Impervious low-flow channels are not permitted within stormwater
management facilities.
(12) Unless specifically designed as a volume control or water quality
facility, all stormwater management facilities must empty over a
period of time not less than 24 hours and not more than 72 hours
from the end of the facility's inflow hydrograph. Infiltration tests
performed at the facility locations and proposed basin bottom
depths, in accordance with the BMP Manual, must support time-toempty
calculations if infiltration is a factor.
(13) Energy dissipators and/or level spreaders shall be installed at
points where pipes or drainageways discharge to or from basins.
Discharges to drainage swales shall be dissipated, or piped, to an
acceptable point.
(14) Landscaping and planting specifications must be provided for all
stormwater management basins and be specific for each type of
basin.
(a) Minimal maintenance, saturation tolerant vegetation must be
provided in basins designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs.
(15) A safety fence may be required, at the discretion of the Township,
for any stormwater management facility. The fence shall be a
minimum of four feet high, and of a material acceptable to the
Township. A gate with a minimum opening of 10 feet shall be
provided for maintenance access.
(16) Principal outlet structures: The primary outlet structure shall be
designed to pass all design storms (up to and including the onehundred-
year event) without discharging through the emergency
spillway. All principal outlet structures shall:
§ 144-20 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-20
140:245
(a) Be constructed of reinforced concrete or an alternative
material approved by the Township Engineer. When approved
for use, all metal risers shall:
[1] Be suitably coated to prevent corrosion.
[2] Have a concrete base attached with a watertight
connection. The base shall be sufficient weight to prevent
flotation of the riser.
[3] Provide a trash rack or similar appurtenance to prevent
debris from entering the riser.
[4] Provide an anti-vortex device, consisting of a thin vertical
plate normal to the basin berm.
(b) Provide trash racks to prevent clogging of primary outflow
structure stages for all orifices.
(c) Provide outlet aprons and shall extend to the toe of the basin
slope at a minimum.
(17) Emergency spillways. Any stormwater management facility
designed to store runoff shall provide an emergency spillway
designed to convey the one-hundred-year post-development peak
rate flow with a blocked primary outlet structure. The emergency
spillway shall be designed per the following requirements:
(a) The top of embankment elevation shall provide a minimum one
foot of freeboard above the maximum water surface elevation.
This is to be calculated when the spillway functions for the onehundred-
year post-development inflow, with a blocked outlet
structure.
(b) Avoid locating on fill areas, whenever possible.
(c) The spillway shall be armored to prevent erosion during the
one-hundred-year post-development flow, with a blocked
primary outlet structure.
[1] Synthetic liners or riprap may be used, and calculations
sufficient to support proposed armor must be provided. An
earthen plug must be used to accurately control the
spillway invert if riprap is the proposed armoring material.
Emergency spillway armor must extend up the sides of the
spillway, and continue at full width to a minimum of 10 feet
past the toe of slope.
(d) Township Engineer may require the use of additional
protection when slopes exceed 4:1 and spillway velocities
might exceed NRCS standards for the particular soils involved.
§ 144-20 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-20
140:246
(e) Any underground stormwater management facility (pipe
storage systems) must have a method to bypass flows higher
than the required design (up to a one-hundred-year postdevelopment
inflow) without structural failure, or causing
downstream harm or safety risks.
(18) Stormwater management basins: Design of stormwater
management facilities having three feet or more of water depth
(measured vertically from the lowest elevation in the facility to the
crest of the emergency spillway) shall meet the following additional
requirements:
(a) The maximum water depth within any stormwater
management facility shall be no greater than eight feet when
functioning through the primary outlet structure.
(b) The top of embankment width shall be:
[1] For embankments up to four feet, width shall be at least six
feet;
[2] For embankments between four and six feet, width shall be
at least eight feet;
[3] For embankments over six feet, width shall be at least 10
feet.
(c) A ten-foot wide access to the basin bottom must be provided
with a maximum longitudinal slope of 10%.
(d) Berms shall be constructed using soils that conform to the
unified soil classification of CH, MH, CL or ML. Soils used shall
be tested to determine their density analysis per ASTM 698.
The embankments will be constructed in a maximum of six-inch
lifts. The lifts will each be compacted to a density at least 98%
of it's the maximum dry density. Each layer of compacted fill
shall be tested to determine its density per ASTM 2922 or
ASTM 3017. One test per 50 cubic yards of material placed (at
least one per layer) shall be performed by an independent
testing agency.
(e) A cutoff and key trench of impervious material shall be
provided under all embankments four feet or greater in height.
The cutoff trench shall run the entire length of the
embankment and tie into undisturbed natural ground.
(f) Anti-seep collars, or a PADEP approved alternative, must be
provided on all outflow culverts in accordance with the
methodology contained in the latest edition of the PADEP E&S
Manual. An increase in seepage length of 15% must be used in
accordance with the requirements for permanent anti-seep
collars.
§ 144-20 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-20
140:247
(19) Construction of stormwater management facilities:
(a) Basins used for rate control only shall be installed prior to or
concurrent with any earthmoving or land disturbances which
they will serve. The phasing of their construction shall be noted
in the narrative and on the plan.
(b) Basins that include water quality or recharge components shall
have those components installed in such a manner as to not
disturb or diminish their effectiveness.
(c) Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and be
subject to review at all times with copies being forwarded to
the Township Engineer upon request.
(d) Temporary and permanent grasses or stabilization measures
shall be established on the sides and base of all earthen basins
within 15 days of construction.
(20) Exceptions to these requirements may be made at the discretion of
the Township for BMPs that retain or detain water, but are of a
much smaller scale than traditional stormwater management
facilities.
C. Stormwater-carrying facilities.
(1) All storm sewer pipes, grass waterways, open channels, swales and
other stormwater-carrying facilities that service drainage areas
within the site must be able to convey post-development runoff
from the ten-year design storm.
(2) Stormwater management facilities that convey off-site water
through the site shall be designed to convey the twenty-five-year
storm event (or larger events, as determined by the Township
Engineer).
(3) All developments shall include provisions that allow for the
overland conveyance and flow of the post-development onehundred-
year storm event without damage to public or private
property.
(4) Storm sewers.
(a) Storm sewers must be able to convey post-development runoff
without surcharging inlets for the ten-year storm event.
(b) When connecting to an existing storm sewer system, the
applicant must demonstrate that the proposed system will not
exacerbate any existing stormwater problems and that
adequate downstream capacity exists.
(c) Inlets, manholes, pipes, and culverts shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications set forth in PennDOT's
§ 144-20 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-20
140:248
Publication 408, and as detailed in the PennDOT's Publication
72M, Standards for Roadway Construction (RC), or other detail
approved by the Township Engineer. All material and
construction details (inlets, manholes, pipe trenches, etc.),
must be shown on the SWM site plan, and a note added that
all construction must be in accordance with PennDOT's
Publication 408 and PennDOT's Publication 72M, latest
edition. A note shall be added to the plan stating that all
frames, concrete top units, and grade adjustment rings shall be
set in a bed of full mortar according to Publication 408.
(d) A minimum pipe size of 15 inches in diameter shall be used in
all roadway systems (public or private) proposed for
construction in the Township. Pipes shall be designed to
provide a minimum velocity of 2 1/2 feet per second when
flowing full, but in all cases, the slope shall be no less then
0.5%. Arch pipe of equivalent cross-sectional area may be
substituted in lieu of circular pipe where cover or utility
conflict conditions exist.
(e) All storm sewer pipes shall be laid to a minimum depth of one
foot from subgrade to the crown of pipe.
(f) In curbed roadway sections, the maximum encroachment of
water on the roadway pavement shall not exceed half of a
through travel lane or one inch less than the depth of curb
during the ten-year design storm of five-minute duration.
Gutter depth shall be verified by inlet capture/capacity
calculations that account for road slope and opening area.
[1] Inlets shall be placed at a maximum of 400 feet apart.
[2] Inlets shall be placed so drainage cannot cross
intersections or street center lines.
(g) Standard Type "C" inlets with eight-inch hoods shall be used
along curbed roadway networks. Type "C" inlets with ten-inch
hoods that provide a two-inch sump condition may be used
with approval of the Township Engineer when roadway
longitudinal slopes are 1.0% or less.
(h) For inlets containing a change in pipe size, the elevation for the
crown of the pipes shall be the same or the smaller pipe's
crown shall be at a higher elevation.
(i) All inlets shall provide a minimum two-inch drop between the
lowest inlet pipe invert elevation and the outlet pipe invert
elevation.
(j) On curbed sections, a double inlet shall be placed at the low
point of sag vertical curves, or an inlet shall be placed on each
§ 144-20 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-20
140:249
side of the low point at a distance not to exceed 100 feet, or at
an elevation not to exceed 0.2 feet above the low point.
(k) At all roadway low points, swales and easements shall be
provided behind the curb or swale and through adjacent
properties to channelize and direct any overflow of stormwater
runoff away from dwellings and structures.
(l) All inlets in paved areas shall have heavy-duty bicycle-safe
grating. A note to this effect shall be added to the SWM site
plan or inlet details therein.
(m) Inlets must be sized to accept the specified pipe sizes without
knocking out any of the inlet corners. All pipes entering or
exiting inlets shall be cut flush with the inside wall of the inlet.
A note to this effect shall be added to the SWM site plan or inlet
details therein.
(n) Inlets shall have weep holes covered with geotextile fabric
placed at appropriate elevations to completely drain the
subgrade prior to placing the base and surface course on
roadways.
(o) Inlets, junction boxes, or manholes greater then five feet in
depth shall be equipped with ladder rungs and shall be
detailed on the SWM site plan.
(p) Inlets shall not have a sump condition in the bottom (unless
designed as a water quality BMP or specifically approved by
the Township). Pipe shall be flush with the bottom of the box or
concrete channels shall be poured.
(q) Accessible drainage structures shall be located on continuous
storm sewer system at all vertical dislocations, at all locations
where a transition in storm sewer pipe sizing is required, at all
vertical and horizontal angle points exceeding 5°, and at all
points of convergence of two or more storm sewer pipes.
(r) All storm drainage piping shall be provided with either
reinforced concrete headwalls or end sections of compatible
material as the pipe involved at its entrance and discharge.
(s) Outlet protection and energy dissipaters shall be provided at
all surface discharge points in order to minimize erosion
consistent with the E&S Manual.
[1] Flow velocities and volumes from any storm sewer shall
not result in a degradation of the receiving channel.
(t) Stormwater roof drains and pipes shall not be connected to
storm sewers or discharge onto impervious areas without
approval by the Township Engineer.
§ 144-20 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-20
140:250
§ 144-21. Calculation methodology.
(5) Swale conveyance facilities.
(a) Swales must be able to convey post-development runoff from a
10-year design storm with 6 inches of freeboard to top of the
swale.
(b) Swales shall have side slopes no steeper than 3:1.
(c) All swales shall be designed, labeled on the SWM site plan, and
details provided to adequately construct and maintain the
design dimension of the swales.
(d) Swales shall be designed for stability using velocity or shear
criteria. Velocity criteria may be used for channels with less
than ten-percent slope. Shear criteria may be used for all
swales. Documentation must be provided to support velocity
and/or shear limitations used in calculations.
(e) Where swale bends occur, the computed velocities or shear
stresses shall be multiplied by the following factor for the
purpose of designing swale erosion protection:
[1] When swale bend is 30° to 60°: 1.75.
[2] When swale bend is 60° to 90°: 2.00.
[3] When swale bend is 90° or greater: 2.50.
(f) Manning's "n" values used for swale capacity design must
reflect the permanent condition.
A. All calculations shall be consistent with the guidelines set forth in the
BMP Manual, as amended herein.
B. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the Rational Method or the NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Methodology.
Other methods shall be selected by the design professional based on
the individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site and approved by the Township Engineer.
C. Rainfall values.
(1) Rational Method. The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Drainage Manual, Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves,
Publication 584, Chapter 7A, latest edition, shall be used in
conjunction with the appropriate time of concentration and return
period.
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. The Soil Conservation Service Type
II, twenty-four-hour rainfall distribution shall be used in
conjunction with rainfall depths from NOAA Atlas 14 or be
consistent with the following table:
§ 144-20 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-21
140:251
Return Interval
(year)
24-hour Rainfall Total
(inches)
1 2.02
2 2.41
10 3.38
25 4.00
50 4.50
100 5.03
D. Runoff volume.
(1) Rational method. Not to be used to calculate runoff volume.
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. This method shall be used to
estimate the change in volume due to regulated activities.
Combining curve numbers for land areas proposed for development
with curve numbers for areas unaffected by the proposed
development into a single weighted curve number is not
acceptable.
E. Peak flow rates.
(1) Rational Method. This method may be used for design of
conveyance facilities only. Extreme caution should be used by the
design professional if the watershed has more then one main
drainage channel, if the watershed is divided so that hydrologic
properties are significantly different in one versus the other, if the
time of concentration exceeds 60 minutes, or if stormwater runoff
volume is an important factor. The combination of Rational Method
hydrographs based on timing shall be prohibited.
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method.
(a) This method is recommended for design of stormwater
management facilities and where stormwater runoff volume
must be taken into consideration. The following provides
guidance on the model applicability:
[1] NRCS's TR-55: limited to 100 acres in size.
[2] NRCS's TR-20, WinTR-20, WinTR-55, HEC-HMS: no
watershed size limitations.
[3] Other models as preapproved by the Township Engineer.
(b) The NRCS antecedent runoff condition II (ARC II, previously
AMC II) must be used for all simulations. The use of continuous
simulation models that vary the ARC are not permitted for
stormwater management purposes.
§ 144-21 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-21
140:252
(3) For comparison of peak flow rates, flows shall be rounded to a tenth
of a cubic foot per second (cfs).
F. Runoff coefficients.
(1) Rational Method. Use Table C-1 (Appendix C).103
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. Use Table C-2 (Appendix C).104
Curve numbers (CN) should be rounded to tenths for use in
hydrologic models as they are a design tool with statistical
variability. For large sites, CNs should realistically be rounded to
the nearest whole number.
(3) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, existing nonforested pervious areas conditions shall
be considered as meadow (good condition).
(4) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, 20 percent of existing impervious area, when
present, shall be considered meadow (good condition).
G. Design storm.
(1) All stormwater management facilities shall be verified by routing
the proposed one-year, two-year, ten-year, twenty-five-year, fiftyyear,
and one-hundred-year hydrographs through the facility using
the storage indication method or Modified Puls Method. The design
storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation method
that produces a full hydrograph.
(2) The stormwater management and drainage system shall be
designed to safely convey the post-development one-hundred-year
storm event to stormwater detention facilities, for the purpose of
meeting peak rate control.
(3) All structures (culvert or bridges) proposed to convey runoff under
a Township road shall be designed to pass the fifty-year design
storm with a minimum one foot of freeboard measured below the
lowest point along the top of the roadway.
H. Time of concentration.
(1) The time of Concentration is to represent the average condition
that best reflects the hydrologic response of the area. The following
time of concentration (Tc) computational methodologies shall be
used unless another method is preapproved by the Township
Engineer:
(a) Predevelopment: NRCS's Lag Equation:
103. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
104. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 144-21 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-21
140:253
Time of concentration = Tc = [(Tlag/.6) * 60] (minutes)
Where:
Tlag = lag time (hours)
L = hydraulic length of watershed (feet)
Y = average overland slope of watershed (percent)
S = maximum retention in watershed as defined by: S
= [(1000/CN) — 10]
CN = NRCS curve number for watershed
(b) Post-development; commercial, industrial, or other areas with
large impervious areas (greater than 20% impervious area):
NRCS Segmental Method. The length of sheet flow shall be
limited to 100 feet. Tc for channel and pipe flow shall be
computed using Manning's Equation.
(c) Post-development; residential, cluster, or other low-impact
designs less than or equal to 20% impervious area: NRCS Lag
Equation or NRCS Segmental Method.
(2) Additionally, the following provisions shall apply to calculations for
time of concentration:
(a) The post-development Tc shall never be greater that the
predevelopment Tc for any watershed or subwatershed. This
includes when the designer has specifically used swales to
reduce flow velocities. In the event that the designer believes
that the post-development Tc is greater, it will still be set by
default equal to the predevelopment Tc for modeling purposes.
(b) The minimum Tc for any watershed shall be five minutes.
(c) The designer may choose to assume a five-minute Tc for any
post-development watershed or subwatershed without
providing any computations.
(d) The designer must provide computations for all
predevelopment Tc paths. A five-minute Tc can not be assumed
for predevelopment.
(e) Undetained fringe areas (areas that are not tributary to a
stormwater facility but where a reasonable effort has been
made to convey runoff from all new impervious coverage to
best management practices) may be assumed to represent the
predevelopment conditions for purpose of Tc calculation.
§ 144-21 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-21
140:254
I. Drainage areas tributary to sinkholes or closed depressions in areas
underlain by limestone or carbonate geologic features shall be excluded
from the modeled point of analysis defining predevelopment flows. If
left undisturbed during construction activities, areas draining to closed
depressions may also be used to reduce peak runoff rates in the postdevelopment
analysis. New, additional contributing runoff should not be
directed to existing sinkholes or closed depressions.
J. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning's Equation shall be
used for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. The Manning's Equation should not
be used for analysis of pipes under pressure flow or for analysis of
culverts. Manning's "n" values shall be obtained from PennDOT's
Drainage Manual, Publication 584. Inlet control shall be checked at all
inlet boxes to ensure the headwater depth during the ten-year design
event is contained below the top of the grate for each inlet box.
K. The Township has the authority to require that computed existing
runoff rates be reconciled with field observations, conditions and site
history. If the designer can substantiate, through actual physical
calibration, that more appropriate runoff and time of concentration
values should be utilized at a particular site, then appropriate
variations may be made upon review and recommendation of the
Township.
§ 144-21 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-21
140:255

ARTICLE VIII
SWM Site Plan and Report Requirements
§ 144-22. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter and not eligible for the
exemptions provided in § 144-12, the final approval of subdivision and/or
land development plans, the issuance of any building or occupancy permit,
or the commencement of any land disturbance activity, may not proceed
until the applicant has received written approval of a SWM site plan from
the Township.
§ 144-23. SWM site plan and report contents.
The SWM site plan and SWM site report shall consist of all applicable
calculations, maps, and plans. All SWM site plan materials shall be
submitted to the Township in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat
and well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall be rejected.
Appropriate sections from the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,105 and other applicable local ordinances, shall be followed in
preparing the SWM site plan.
A. The SWM site plan shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Plans shall be of one size and in a form that meets the requirements
for recording in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Butler
County.
(a) Plans for tracts of less than 20 acres shall be drawn at a scale
of one inch equals no more than 50 feet;
(b) Plans for tracts of 20 acres or more, plans shall be drawn at a
scale of one inch equals no more than 100 feet;
(c) Lettering shall be drawn to a size to be legible if the plans are
reduced to one-half size.
(2) The name of the development; name and location address of the
property site; name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant/owner of the property; and name, address, telephone
number, e-mail address, and engineering seal of the individual
preparing the SWM site plan.
(3) The date of submission and dates of all revisions.
(4) A graphical and written scale on all drawings and maps.
(5) A North arrow on all drawings and maps.
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 144-22 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-23
140:257
(6) A location map at a minimum scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet
and illustrates the project relative to highways, townships or other
identifiable landmarks.
(7) Metes and bounds description of the entire tract perimeter.
(8) Existing and final contours at intervals:
(a) Slopes less than 5%: no greater than one foot;
(b) Slopes between 5% and 15%: no greater than two feet;
(c) Steep slopes (greater than 15%): five-foot contour intervals
may be used.
(9) Perimeters of existing water bodies within the project area
including stream banks, lakes, ponds, springs, field delineated
wetlands or other bodies of water, sinkholes, flood hazard
boundaries (FEMA-delineated floodplains and floodways), areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved, the total extent of the upstream
area draining through the site, and overland drainage paths. In
addition, any areas necessary to determine downstream impacts,
where required for proposed stormwater management facilities,
must be shown.
(10) The location of all existing and proposed utilities, on-lot
wastewater facilities, water supply wells, sanitary sewers, and
waterlines on and within 50 feet of property lines, including inlets,
manholes, valves, meters, poles, chambers, junction boxes, and
other utility system components.
(11) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that may be affected by the project.
(12) Soil names and boundaries with identification of the Hydraulic Soil
Group classification including rock outcroppings.
(13) Proposed impervious surfaces (structures, roads, paved areas, and
buildings), including plans and profiles of roads and paved areas
and floor elevations of buildings.
(14) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(15) Horizontal alignment, vertical profiles, and cross sections of all
open channels, pipes, swales and other BMPs.
(16) The location and clear identification of the nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs.
(17) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities,
shown on a separate from the SWM site plan (typically an E&S
plan).
§ 144-23 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-23
140:258
(18) A minimum twenty-foot wide access easement around all
stormwater management facilities that would provide ingress to
and egress from a public right-of-way. In lieu of providing an
easement to the public right-of-way, a note may be added to the
plan granting the Township or its designees access to all easements
via the nearest public right-of-way.
(19) Construction details for all drainage and stormwater BMPs.
(20) Construction sequence.
(21) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership, operations,
and maintenance responsibilities.
(22) Notes and statements:
(a) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater BMPs are fixtures that cannot be altered or
removed without prior approval by the Township.
(b) A statement referencing the operation and maintenance
(O&M) agreement and stating that the O&M agreement is part
of the SWM site plan.
(c) A note indicating that record drawings will be provided for all
stormwater facilities prior to occupancy, or the release of the
surety bond.
(d) The following signature block for the registered professional
preparing the stormwater management plan:
"I, _____________________________, hereby certify that the
Stormwater Management Plan meets all design standards and
criteria of MIDDLESEX TOWNSHIP's Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
(e) The following signature block for the Township Engineer
reviewing the Stormwater Management Plan:
"I, ______________________________, have reviewed this
Stormwater Management Plan in accordance with the Design
Standards and Criteria of MIDDLESEX TOWNSHIP's
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
B. The SWM site report shall include (but not be limited to):
(1) General data including:
(a) Project name;
(b) Project location: address of the property site;
(c) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant/owner
of the property;
§ 144-23 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-23
140:259
(d) Name, address, telephone number, e-mail address, and
engineering seal of the individual preparing the SWM site
report;
(e) Date of submission and revisions.
(2) Project description narrative that clearly discusses the project and
provides the following information, where applicable:
(a) Narrative.
[1] Statement of the regulated activity describing what is
being proposed. Overall stormwater management concept
with description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications and
materials to be used for stormwater management
facilities.
[2] Expected project schedule.
[3] Location map showing the project site and its location
relative to release rate districts.
[4] Detailed description of the existing site conditions
including a site evaluation completed for projects
proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography, and other environmentally sensitive areas
such as brownfields.
[5] Total site area, pre- and post-, which must be equal or have
an explanation as to why it is not.
[6] Total site impervious area.
[7] Total off-site areas.
[8] Number and description of stormwater management
facilities.
[9] Type of development.
[10] Predevelopment land use.
[11] Whether site is a water-quality-sensitive (WQS)
development.
[12] Whether site is in a defined sensitive area.
[13] Types of water quality and recharge systems used, if
applicable.
[14] Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural
computations for all stormwater management facilities.
§ 144-23 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-23
140:260
[15] A written maintenance plan for all stormwater features
including detention facilities and other stormwater
management elements.
[16] Identification of ownership and maintenance responsibility
for all permanent stormwater management facilities.
[17] Other pertinent information, as required.
(b) Summary tables.
[1] Predevelopment hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions,
curve numbers (CN), computation of average slope,
hydraulic length, computed time of concentration.
[2] Existing conditions runoff volume and peak rate of runoff.
[3] Post-development runoff volume and peak rate of runoff.
[4] Undetained areas, areas to ponds.
[5] Land use for each subarea.
[6] Hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions, curve numbers
(CN).
[7] Time of concentration computed for each subarea.
[8] Post-development peak rate of runoff routed to ponds and
out.
[9] Pond maximum return period design data, including
maximum water surface elevation, berm elevation, and
emergency spillway elevation.
[10]Water quality depth and volume requirements.
(c) Calculations.
[1] Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural
computations, calculations, assumptions, and criteria for
the design of all stormwater BMPs.
[2] Details of the berm embankment and outlet structure
indicating the embankment top elevation, embankment
side slopes, top width of embankment, emergency spillway
elevation, perforated riser dimensions, pipe barrel
dimensions and dimensions and spacing of antiseep
collars.
[3] Design computations for the control structures (pipe
barrel and riser, etc.).
[4] A plot or table of the stage-storage (volume vs. elevation)
and all supporting computations.
§ 144-23 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-23
140:261
[5] Routing computations.
(d) Drawings.
[1] Drainage area maps for all watersheds and inlets depicting
the time of concentration path for both existing conditions
and post-developed condition.
[2] ll stormwater management facilities must be located on a
plan and described in detail, including easements and
buffers boundaries.
(3) Reports that do not clearly indicate the above information may be
rejected for review by the Township and will be returned to the
applicant.
(4) Description of, justification, and actual field results for infiltration
testing with respect to the type of test and test location for the
design of infiltration BMPs.
(5) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality,
and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic features
and on any existing Township stormwater collection system that
may receive runoff from the project site.
(6) Description of the proposed changes to the land surface and
vegetative cover, including the type and amount of impervious area
to be added.
(7) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership, operation,
and maintenance responsibilities as well as schedules and costs for
inspection and maintenance activities for each permanent
stormwater or drainage BMP, including provisions for permanent
access or maintenance easements.
C. Supplemental information to be provided prior to recording of the SWM
site plan, as applicable:
(1) Signed and executed operations and maintenance agreement
(Appendix A).106
(2) Signed and executed easements, as required for all on-site and offsite
work.
(3) An erosion and sedimentation control plan and approval letter from
the Butler County Conservation District.
(4) A NPDES permit.
(5) Permits from PADEP and ACOE.
(6) Geologic assessment.
106. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 144-23 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-23
140:262
§ 144-24. SWM site plan and report submission.
§ 144-25. SWM site plan and report review.
(7) Soils investigation report, including boring logs, compaction
requirements, and recommendations for construction of detention
basins.
(8) A highway occupancy permit from PennDOT when utilization of a
PennDOT storm drainage system is proposed or when proposed
facilities would encroach onto a PennDOT right-of-way.
A. The applicant shall submit the SWM site plan and report for the
regulated activity.
B. Five copies of the SWM site plan and report shall be submitted and be
distributed as follows:
(1) Two copies to the Township accompanied by the requisite executed
review fee reimbursement agreement,107 as specified in this
chapter.
(2) One copy to the Township Engineer.
(3) One copy to the Butler County Planning Department.
(4) One copy to the Butler County Conservation District.
C. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the Township or
PADEP.
A. The Township shall require receipt of a complete SWM site plan and
report as specified in this chapter. The Township shall review the SWM
site plan and report for consistency with the purposes, requirements,
and intent of this chapter.
B. The Township shall not approve any SWM site plan and report that is
deficient in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole
discretion and in accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan
and report is found to be deficient, the Township may disapprove the
submission and require a resubmission, or in the case of minor
deficiencies, the Township may accept submission of modifications.
C. The Township shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 calendar
days whether the SWM site plan and report is approved or disapproved
if the SWM site plan and report is not part of a subdivision or land
development plan. If the SWM site plan and report involves a
subdivision or land development plan, the timing shall following the
Subdivision and Land Development process according to the Municipal
Planning Code.
107. Editor's Note: See Appendix D included at the end of this chapter.
§ 144-23 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-25
140:263
§ 144-26. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan and report for a development
site that involves a change in stormwater management facilities or
techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater
management facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions
are not as stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the Township shall
require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with
this chapter.
§ 144-27. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plan and report.
A disapproved SWM site plan and report may be resubmitted with the
revisions addressing the Township's concerns documented in writing, to the
Township in accordance with this chapter. The applicable Township review
fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan and
report.
§ 144-28. Term of validity for approval of plan.
§ 144-29. Record drawings; completion certificate; final inspection.
D. The Township Building Permit Office shall not issue a building permit
for any regulated activity if the SWM site plan and report has been
found to be inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by the
Township. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained prior to
issuance of a building permit.
A. The Township's approval of a SWM site plan and report authorizes the
regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term
of validity of five years following the date of approval. The Township
may specify a term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for
any specific SWM site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the
date the Township signs the approval for a SWM site plan. If
stormwater management facilities included in the approved SWM site
plan have not been constructed, or if an record drawing of these
facilities has not been approved within this time, then the Township
may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke any and
all permits or approvals.
A. The applicant shall be responsible for providing record drawings of all
stormwater BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The record
drawing and an explanation of any discrepancies with the approved
SWM site plan shall be submitted to the Township as a prerequisite for
the release of the guarantee or issuance of an occupancy permit.
B. The record drawing shall include a certification of completion signed by
a qualified professional verifying that all permanent stormwater BMPs
have been constructed according to the approved SWM site plan and
report.
§ 144-25 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-29
140:264
(1) Drawings shall show all approved revisions and elevations and
inverts to all manholes, inlets, pipes, and stormwater control
facilities.
(2) Submission shall include a comparison of the constructed stagestorage
(volume vs. elevation) of all aboveground and belowground
stormwater storage facilities to the approved design.
C. After receipt of the record drawing and certification of completion by
the Township, the Township may conduct a final inspection.
§ 144-29 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-29
140:265

ARTICLE IX
Easements
§ 144-30. Easements.
A. Easements shall be established to accommodate the existence of
drainageways.
B. Where a tract is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or
stream, there shall be provided an easement paralleling the line of such
watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream with a width adequate to
preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage in the one-hundredyear
floodplain.
C. Easements shall be established for all on-site stormwater management
or drainage facilities, including but not limited to detention facilitates
(aboveground or below ground), infiltration facilities, all stormwater
BMPs, drainage swales, and drainage facilities (inlets, manholes, pipes,
etc.).
D. Easements are required for all areas used for off-site stormwater
control.
E. All easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide and shall encompass
the one-hundred-year surface elevation of the proposed stormwater
facility.
F. Easements shall provide ingress to, and egress from, a public right-ofway.
In lieu of providing an easement to the public right-of-way, a note
may be added to the plan granting the Township or its designees access
to all easements via the nearest public right-of-way able for vehicle
ingress and egress on grades of less than 10% for carrying out
inspection or maintenance activities.
G. Where possible, easements shall be centered on side and/or rear lot
lines.
H. Nothing shall be planted or placed within the easement which would
adversely affect the function of the easement, or conflict with any
conditions associated with such easement.
I. All easement agreements shall be recorded with a reference to the
recorded easement indicated on the site plan. The format and content
of the easement agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the
Township Engineer and Solicitor.
§ 144-30 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-30
140:267

ARTICLE X
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 144-31. Financial guarantee.
§ 144-32. Maintenance responsibilities.
A. The applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the Township for
the timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater
management controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and
this chapter, equal to 110% of the full construction cost of the required
controls in accordance with the Township's Planning Code.
B. At the completion of the project and as a prerequisite for the release of
the financial guarantee, the applicant shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified person, verifying that all permanent
facilities have been constructed according to the SWM site plan
and report and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of record drawings.
(3) Request a final inspection from the Township to certify compliance
with this chapter, after receipt of the certification of completion
and record drawings by the Township.
A. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall describe the
future operation and maintenance responsibilities. The operation and
maintenance description shall outline required routine maintenance
actions and schedules necessary to ensure proper operation of the
stormwater control facilities.
B. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall establish
responsibilities for the continuing operating and maintenance of all
proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following
principals:
(1) If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers, and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to the Township, stormwater
control facilities/BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by
the Township, if expressly accepted by the Township.
(2) If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if
sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of
stormwater control facilities/BMPs shall be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
§ 144-31 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-32
140:269
§ 144-33. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
facilities.
(3) Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater BMPs shall be
enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded
as deed restrictions or easements that run with the land.
(4) The SWM site plan and report shall be recorded as a restrictive
deed covenant that runs with the land.
(5) The Township may take enforcement actions against an applicant
for failure to satisfy any provision of this chapter.
C. The Township, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer, shall
make the final determination on the continuing maintenance
responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report.
The Township may require a dedication of such facilities as part of the
requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a requirement is
not an indication that the Township will accept the facilities. The
Township reserves the right to accept or reject the ownership and
operating responsibility for any portion of the stormwater management
controls.
D. If the Township accepts ownership of stormwater BMPs, the Township
may, at its discretion, require a fee from the applicant to the Township
to offset the future cost of inspections, operations, and maintenance.
E. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved SWM site plan or to allow the property to
remain in a condition which does not conform to an approved SWM site
plan, unless the Township grants an exception in writing.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report, the applicant
shall sign the operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (Appendix
A)108 covering all stormwater control facilities that are to be privately
owned. The operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be
recorded with the SWM site plan and made a part hereto.
B. Other items may be included in the operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory
operation and maintenance of all BMP facilities. The operation and
maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Township and the Township Solicitor.
C. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance of the
stormwater BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the operation and
maintenance (O&M) agreement, the Township may perform the
services required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment
of fees may result in a lien against the property.
108. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 144-32 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-33
140:270
ARTICLE XI
Inspections
§ 144-34. Schedule of inspections.
§ 144-35. Right-of-entry.
A. PADEP or its designees normally ensure compliance with any permits
issued, including those for stormwater management. In addition to
PADEP compliance programs, the Township or its Township assignee
may inspect all phases of the installation of temporary or permanent
stormwater management facilities.
B. During any stage of earth disturbance activities, if the Township
determines that the stormwater management facilities are not being
installed in accordance with the approved SWM site plan, the Township
shall revoke any existing permits or approvals until a revised SWM site
plan is submitted and approved as specified in this chapter.
C. Stormwater BMPs shall be inspected by the landowner, or the
landowner's designee according to the inspection schedule described
on the SWM site plan for each BMP.
(1) The Township may require copies of the inspection reports, in a
form as stipulated by the Township.
(2) If such inspections are not conducted or inspection reports not
submitted as scheduled, the Township, or its designee, may
conduct such inspections and charge the owner appropriate fees.
Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.
(a) Prior to conducting such inspections, the Township shall
inform the owner of its intent to conduct such inspections. The
owner shall be given 30 days to conduct required inspections
and submit the required inspection reports to the Township.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Township may enter at reasonable times, upon
any property within the Township, to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operations and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in
regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. Stormwater BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on
behalf of the Township ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater BMP in the Township such
devices, as are necessary, to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
discharges from such stormwater BMP.
§ 144-34 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-35
140:271
D. Unreasonable delay in allowing the Township access to a stormwater
BMP is a violation of this chapter.
§ 144-35 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-35
140:272
ARTICLE XII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 144-36. Notification.
§ 144-37. Enforcement.
§ 144-38. Public nuisance.
§ 144-39. Suspension and revocation.
A. In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, an approved SWM site plan, or fails to conform to the
requirements of any permit or approval issued hereunder, the Township
shall provide written notification of the violation. Such notification shall
set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for
correction of these violation(s).
B. Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person to
the penalties provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be
deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Township from pursuing
any and all other remedies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of
the real property on which any regulated activity is proposed to occur,
is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with the terms and conditions
of this chapter.
A. The Township is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the
provisions of this chapter. The approved SWM site plan shall be on file
at the project site throughout the duration of the construction activity.
The Township or its designee may make periodic inspections during
construction.
B. Adherence to approved SWM site plan.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
undertake any regulated activity on any property except as
provided for by an approved SWM site plan and pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure
required by the SWM site plan pursuant to this chapter.
(3) It shall be unlawful to allow a property to remain in a condition that
does not conform to an approved SWM site plan.
A. A violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the Township may be suspended or
revoked for:
§ 144-36 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-39
140:273
§ 144-40. Violations and penalties.
§ 144-41. Appeals.
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act, during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, pollution, or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended approval or permit may be reinstated by the Township
when:
(1) The Township or its designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the violation(s) that caused the suspension.
(2) The Township is satisfied that the violation(s) has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 per day for each violation, recoverable with costs.
Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and
penalties shall be cumulative.
B. In addition, the Township, through its solicitor, may institute injunctive,
mandamus, or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the Township
within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township, relevant to the
provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the Butler County Court of
Common Pleas within 30 days of the Township's decision.
§ 144-39 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-41
140:274
ARTICLE XIII
Prohibitions
§ 144-42. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain (including indoor drains and sinks), or conveyance whether
on the surface or underground, that allows any nonstormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the Township's separate storm sewer system or waters of the
commonwealth is prohibited.
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the Township's separate storm sewer system, which has not
been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records, and approved
by the Township is prohibited.
C. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the Township's
separate storm sewer system or into surface waters of the
commonwealth, which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
(1) As provided in § 144-42D below; and
(2) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
D. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources including dechlorinated waterline and fire
hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air-conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space pumps.
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(12) Uncontaminated groundwater.
§ 144-42 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-42
140:275
§ 144-43. Roof drains.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration areas, vegetative
BMPs, or pervious areas to the maximum extent practicable.
§ 144-44. Alteration of BMPs.
(13)Water from individual residential car washing.
(14) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
E. In the event that the Township or PADEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in § 144-42D, significantly contribute to pollution
of waters of the commonwealth, or is so notified by PADEP, the
Township will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
F. Upon notice provided by the Township or PADEP under § 144-42E, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the Township
or PADEP, to cease the discharge, consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
G. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
commonwealth law.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, or structures unless it is part of an
approved maintenance program, without the written approval of the
Township.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, structures, or within a drainage
easement which would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP without
the written approval of the Township.
§ 144-42 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-44
140:276
ARTICLE XIV
Fees and Expenses
§ 144-45. Fee for review.
The fee required by this chapter is the Township review fee. The Township
review fee shall be established by the Township, by resolution, to defray
review costs incurred by the Township and the Township Engineer. The
applicant shall pay all fees.
§ 144-46. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover:
§ 144-47. Recording of approved plan and agreements.
A. Administrative and clerical costs.
B. Review of the SWM site plan and report by the Township.
C. Preconstruction meetings.
D. Inspection of stormwater management facilities/BMPs and drainage
improvements during construction.
E. Final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities/BMPs and drainage improvements presented in the SWM site
plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed, or implemented, as described in the SWM site plan, shall
record the following documents in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds
of Butler County, within 90 days of approval of the SWM site plan by the
Township:
(1) The SWM site plan.
(2) Operations and maintenance (O&M) agreement (Appendix A).109
(3) Easements under § 144-30.
(4) Riparian buffers.
B. The Township may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
109. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 144-45 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 144-47
140:277
Chapter 147
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading, excavation and fill — See Ch. 89.
Impact fees — See Ch. 97.
Improvement design standards — See Ch.
101.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
150.
§ 144-47 MIDDLESEX CODE § 144-47
147:278
ARTICLE I
Accumulations on Sidewalks
[Adopted 2-3-1964 by Ord. No. 13]
§ 147-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Middlesex
Snow and Ice Clearing Ordinance of 1964."
§ 147-2. Definitions and word usage.
The following words, terms, and phrases as used in this article shall have
the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the
singular, and the words used in the present tense include the future. The
word "shall" is always mandatory.
OWNERS — The real or equitable owners of property abutting sidewalks or
streets, as in this article is defined.
PROPERTY OWNER — Includes any person or persons, male or female,
corporation, partnership, association, company, individual, owner,
occupant, lessee, tenant or any organization.
SIDEWALK — A paved path or footwalk for public use located between
the cartway or curbline and right-of-way line of any public or municipal
maintained street or highway.
STREET — Any highway within the Township of Middlesex, when
maintained by either the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the County of
Butler or the Township of Middlesex.
TENANT — Includes the occupant, lessee, tenant or person having charge
of any building, lot or parcel of ground, abutting the sidewalk or street, as
in this article is defined.
TOWNSHIP OF MIDDLESEX — The elected officials of the Township of
Middlesex, or any authorized representatives, agency or agencies of the
Township appointed by the Supervisors of the Township.
§ 147-3. Accumulations prohibited.
Following the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
property owner:
A. To deposit or permit to be deposited and keep (except upon permit
issued by the Township) any rubbish, trash or materials of any
character whatsoever upon a sidewalk or street within the Township.
B. To allow or permit snow or ice to lie upon, remain upon or be piled or
accumulated upon a sidewalk within the Township for more than 24
hours.
§ 147-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 147-4
147:279
§ 147-4. Clearing of snow and ice required.
It shall be the duty of the property owner, not later than 24 hours after snow
has ceased to fall, to clear or cause to be cleared a pathway in the sidewalk
upon which such property abuts. Such pathway shall be not less than 30
inches in width and shall be thoroughly cleared to that extent of snow and
ice or other obstruction.110
§ 147-5. Method of snow and ice removal.
§ 147-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.112
A. Snow or ice removed from sidewalk areas shall be placed on the
person's property.
B. If there shall be an excessive amount of snow or ice and there is no
longer any place on the person's property to shovel the snow, then it
may be placed along the curbline, but not in the street.
C. Should the snow and ice on the sidewalk pavement, or footpath, be
frozen so hard that it cannot be removed without injury to the pavement
or damaging the base of the footpath, the person having charge of the
snow and ice removal shall cause the sidewalk abutting or adjacent to
such premises to be strewn and to be kept strewn with ashes, sand,
sawdust, or any approved abrasive material, and shall as soon
thereafter as the weather shall permit thoroughly clean such
sidewalks.111
110. Editor's Note: Original Section 5, regarding winter parking, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I). See now Ch. 162, Vehicles and Traffic.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
112. Editor's Note: Original Section 8, regarding removal of vehicles in violation of winter
parking restrictions, which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). See now Ch. 162, Vehicles and
Traffic.
§ 147-4 MIDDLESEX CODE § 147-6
147:280
ARTICLE II
Encroachment by Trees and Shrubs
[Adopted 7-8-1974 by Ord. No. 27]
§ 147-7. Definitions and word usage.
§ 147-8. Planting within rights-of-way prohibited.
No person shall henceforth plant or cause to be planted any trees, bushes,
shrubs or hedges within the rights-of-way of Middlesex Township.
§ 147-9. Trimming of vegetation to prevent encroachments.
§ 147-10. Clear sight triangles.
Any person owning property at the intersection of two or more Township
roads or at the intersection of one or more Township roads with a state
highway or a private drive shall maintain a clear sight triangle which shall
measure a minimum distance of 35 feet along each street center line from
the point of intersection. No trees, bushes, hedges, or shrubs, grading or
other obstruction to vision shall be permitted to interfere with said clear
sight distance.
A. The following words when used in this article shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association
or corporation.
TOWNSHIP ROAD — Any Township street, avenue, road, alley, highway
or other public place located in the Township of Middlesex and
established for the use of vehicles and maintained by the Township of
Middlesex.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and neuter.
A. Every person growing a tree, bush, shrub or hedge within a Township
road right-of-way or abutting a Township road or right-of-way shall trim
such trees, bushes, shrubs and hedges so as not to cause a hazard to the
Township highway or right-of-way by streetlights, so that no such trees,
bushes, shrubs or hedges, branches, twigs, leaves or foliage shall be
closer to the side line of the traveled portion of any Township road than
10 feet.
B. Any person growing a tree, bush, shrub, or hedge within the Township
road or growing upon property abutting a Township road or right-ofway
shall trim such tree, shrub, hedge or bush in such a manner that
the minimum clearance of a portion thereof hanging over the traveled
portion of any Township road or within 10 feet thereof shall be 15 feet
above the traveled portion of said Township road.
§ 147-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 147-11
147:281
§ 147-11. Diseased trees.
No person shall permit diseased trees to continue growing within the rightsof-
way of Middlesex Township.
§ 147-12. Notice of violation; failure to comply; Township to do
work and collect costs.
The Board of Supervisors of Middlesex Township or its duly authorized
agents, when they determine that trees, bushes, shrubs or hedges are
planted or growing or diseased contrary to the provisions hereof, shall
cause the person or owner of the property upon which said trees, hedges,
bushes or shrubs are growing contrary to the provisions of this article or
the owner of property abutting upon a Township right-of-way upon which
such trees, hedges, bushes or shrubs are growing contrary to the provisions
of this article to be notified in writing by certified mail, return receipt,
as to the existence of said condition and the violation of this article and
that said notice shall set forth a time limit not in excess of 30 days from
the date of service of the same within which compliance shall be required
to each and every provision of this article, and, in the event of failure to
comply within said time limit with the provisions of this article, then, the
Board of Supervisors shall cause compliance with this article and shall
take the necessary steps to trim, cut or destroy such trees, hedges, bushes
or shrubs that are planted or growing contrary to the provisions of this
article and, upon doing the same, shall charge the owner of said property
or of the abutting property with the cost of trimming or cutting said trees,
bushes, hedges or shrubs, together with a penalty of 10% of said costs,
and the Township of Middlesex shall have the right to bring an action in
assumpsit or the right to file a lien against the premises in accordance with
the existing provisions of the Municipal Lien Laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 147-13. Violation declared to be nuisance.
The maintenance or planting or growing of trees, shrubs, bushes or hedges
in violation of provisions hereof is hereby declared to be a nuisance and the
Township of Middlesex shall be entitled to abate the same in accordance
with the provisions hereof.
§ 147-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
§ 147-11 MIDDLESEX CODE § 147-14
147:282
Chapter 150
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 65.
Floodplain management— See Ch. 84.
Grading, excavation and fill — See Ch. 89.
Impact fees — See Ch. 97.
Improvement design standards — See Ch.
101.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 134.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 144.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 147.
Water — See Ch. 168.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 147-14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 147-14
147:283

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 150-1. Title; authority; jurisdiction; review and approval authority.
§ 150-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
A. Title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Middlesex
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
B. Authority. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority contained
in Article V, Section 501, of Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
as amended,113 which enables and authorizes governing bodies of
municipalities to enact a subdivision and land development ordinance
to regulate subdivisions and land developments situated within the
municipality.
C. Jurisdiction. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the area within
the corporate boundaries of Middlesex Township, Butler County,
Pennsylvania.
D. Review and approval authority. From and after the effective date
hereof, all subdivisions and land developments situated within the
Township shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and
report and to the Supervisors for approval in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
A. To guide the orderly and efficient development of the Township.
B. To create conditions favorable to the health, safety and general welfare
of the citizens of the Township.
C. To provide for the equitable processing of subdivision and land
developments by establishing uniform procedures and standards.
D. To ensure coordination of subdivision and land developments with
Township, intermunicipal, county and commonwealth improvement
plans.
E. To assist orderly, efficient, integrated and harmonious development of
the Township.
F. To coordinate proposed streets with existing streets or other proposed
streets, parks or other features of the Township.
G. To provide adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air
and for the proper distribution of population.
113. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 150-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-2
147:285
§ 150-3. Compliance required.
No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall
be effected, no street, sanitary sewer, stormwater sewer, water main or
other improvements in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed,
opened or dedicated for public use or travel, no grading of the property
shall be commenced, or for the common use of occupants of buildings
abutting said improvements, except in strict accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and all ordinances of the Township.
§ 150-4. Modifications and waivers.
§ 150-5. Interpretation.
H. To protect the social and economic stability of the Township and
conserve the value of lots and buildings in the Township.
I. To provide for proper control of runoff and drainage, water supply,
sewage disposal and other utility services.
A. The Supervisors may grant a modification or waiver of the
requirements of one or more provisions of this chapter for the following
reasons, provided that such modification or waiver will not be contrary
to the public interest and that the purposes of the chapter are observed:
(1) Hardship. The literal enforcement of the provisions will exact
undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question and the modification is the minimum necessary to
afford relief; or
(2) Alternative standard. An alternative standard can be demonstrated
to provide equal or better results.
B. Authority to impose conditions. When granting modifications or
waivers, the Supervisors may impose conditions to ensure that the
public interest is preserved and the intent of this chapter is observed.
C. Requests in writing. All requests for modifications or waivers shall be in
writing and shall accompany and be a part of the application for
development. The requests shall state in full the grounds and facts of
hardship or evidence of equal or better result on which the request is
based, the provision or provisions of this chapter involved and the
minimum modification necessary.
D. Records required. The Supervisors shall only by resolution or ordinance
grant requests for modifications or waivers, setting forth the reasons
which justified the modifications or waivers.
A. Minimum requirements. In the interpretation and application of this
chapter, the provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements,
adopted for the promotion of health, safety, morals and general welfare.
§ 150-2 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-5
147:286
B. Conflict with other public provisions. Where any provision of this
chapter is at variance with any other ordinance, rule or regulation or
other provision of law, the most restrictive provision or that provision
imposing the higher standard shall govern.
C. Conflict with private provisions. Whenever the requirements of this
chapter are at a variance with the requirements of deed restrictions,
covenants or other private agreements, or with restrictive covenants
running with the land to which the Township is a party, the
requirements of this chapter shall remain unchanged and in full force
and effect.
D. Liability. The review and approval of a subdivision or land development
by the Township in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall
not constitute liability upon the Township, its officials or employees.
E. Amendment procedure.
(1) Hearing and notice. The Supervisors may, from time to time, amend
this chapter by appropriate action taken after a public hearing held
pursuant to public notice, which public notice shall include a brief
summary setting forth the principal provisions of the proposed
amendment and a reference to the place within the Township
where copies of the proposed amendment may be secured or
examined without charge or obtained for a charge not greater than
the cost thereof. Unless the proposed amendment shall have been
prepared by the Planning Commission, the Supervisors shall
submit the amendment to the Planning Commission for
recommendations at least 30 days prior to the hearing on the
amendment. The Township shall also submit the proposed
amendment to the County Planning Commission for
recommendation at least 30 days prior to the hearing on the
amendment.114
(2) Copy. Within 30 days after the adoption, the Supervisors shall
forward a copy of any amendment to this chapter to the County
Planning Commission.
(3) Publication, advertisement and availability of ordinance. The
Township shall publish the proposed amendment once in one
newspaper of general circulation within the Township not more
than 60 days nor less than seven days prior to passage. Publication
shall include notice of the time and place of the meeting at which
passage shall be considered and shall include either the full text of
the amendment or the title and brief summary prepared by the
Township Solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in reasonable
detail. If the full text is not included, a copy thereof shall be
supplied to such newspaper of general circulation and an attested
copy of the proposed amendment shall be filed in the County Law
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 150-5 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-5
147:287
Library (or other county office designated by the County
Commissioners).
§ 150-5 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-5
147:288
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 150-6. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted or defined as follows:
§ 150-7. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words or phrases shall,
for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated and
shall be literally applied by the Township of Middlesex staff, members of
the Planning Commission, Zoning Hearing Board, consultants and by the
Board of Supervisors. Words or terms used but not defined in this chapter
shall have the same meaning as stated in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code115 or Chapter 175, Zoning.
AMUSEMENT PARK — A tract of land or an area used principally as the
location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION, FINAL — The application for development for subdivision or
land development submitted under §§ 150-12 and 150-26 of this chapter.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a zoning permit, for the approval of a subdivision plan or
for the approval of a development plan. Every application for development
must include the form designated by the Township and all other plans and
information required by this chapter and all other Township ordinances.
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
B. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural.
C. Words used in the plural number shall include the singular.
D. The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual, or an
unincorporated association.
E. The words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory.
F. The word "may" is permissive or discretionary where compliance is
indicated.
115. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 150-6 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-7
147:289
APPLICATION, PRELIMINARY — The application for development for
subdivision or land development submitted under §§ 150-11 and 150-25 of
this chapter.
ARCHITECT — An architect registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
AREA, LOT — The area of a lot measured on a horizontal plane bounded by
the front, side and rear lot lines of the lot.
AREA, NET LOT — The lot area less any portions of the lot located in
identified floodplain areas, or wetlands.
AREA, NET SITE — The site area less any portions of the site located in
environmentally sensitive areas, those areas designated for nonresidential
uses, including, but not limited to, limited neighborhood commercial areas
and common open space, and those areas consisting of streets and utilities.
AREA, SITE — The total area of the lot or lots comprising a site.
AS-BUILT PLANS — Plans, profiles, cross-sections and construction details,
prepared by the subdivider's engineer or surveyor, showing the exact
location, elevation, grade, size and nature of material of all the
improvements after completion, drawn to the same scale as the approved
construction drawings. Said plans shall be on reproducible linen or plastic.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BLOCK — An area bounded on all sides by roads.
BUILDING — A roofed structure used for shelter, enclosure or protection of
persons, goods, materials, equipment or animals. When separated by walls
which are common with the walls of adjoining buildings, each portion of
such structure shall be considered a separate building.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line extending across a lot, establishing the
minimum open space to be provided between the front line of buildings and
the front lot line.
CARTWAY — A paved area of right-of-way exclusive of a curb structure.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at a street
intersection, defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of street lines.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A concept of designs and site planning in
which several houses are grouped together on a tract of land. Each cluster
of houses is set off from others by an intervening space, often held for the
common enjoyment of the neighboring residents or the community at large
and which helps give visual definition to each individual group.
COMMISSION or PLANNING COMMISSION — Middlesex Township
Planning Commission, Butler County, Pennsylvania.
COMMON AREA — That area in a subdivision or land development,
including common open space, owned or leased and maintained by an
§ 150-7 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-7
147:290
association or other combination of persons for the benefit of the residents
of the subdivision or land development and, if owned under the
Pennsylvania Unit Property Act,116 including all common elements
designated for the use of all dwelling unit owners.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan of Middlesex
Township indicating the general locations recommended for circulation
facilities, community improvements and land uses.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure,
including the placement of mobile homes.
CONTOUR — An imaginary line connecting all points with the same
elevation above or below a fixed base point whose elevation is known.
COUNTY — The County of Butler, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COVENANT — An agreement legally binding successor owners of property
to certain conditions regarding the use of the property stipulated by the
original owner or owners.
CROSSWALK — A public right-of-way which crosses a block to furnish
access to pedestrians to adjacent streets or properties.
CUL-DE-SAC — A short street having one end open to traffic and being
permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround.
CULVERT — Any structure not classified as a bridge, which provides an
opening under the roadway.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, streets
and other paving, utilities, filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging or
drilling operations and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a land
development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location
and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of
development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and
public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the development plan" shall mean
the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DRAWINGS — All drawings, cross sections, applicable standard drawings
or reproductions thereof pertaining to the construction of the project.
DRIVEWAY, COMMON — An improved vehicular access facility serving a
maximum of two parcels or lots which may be under separate or common
ownership which connects the parcels and provides access to a public
street.
116. Editor's Note: The Pennsylvania Unit Property Act was repealed 7-2-1980 by P.L. 286, No.
82. See now 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 150-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-7
147:291
DRIVEWAY, PRIVATE — An improved vehicular access facility serving only
one parcel or lot, which provides access to a public street but which does
not provide access to any other lot or parcel under separate ownership.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more living or sleeping rooms with cooking and
sanitary facilities for one or more persons or one family.
EASEMENT — A nonpossessory interest in land; a grant of one or more
property rights by the landowner to and for the use by the public, a
corporation or another person or entity and the use of which shall not be
inconsistent with the rights of the grantee.
ELEVATION — A point or series of points (see "contours") which are a
known vertical distance above or below a predetermined elevation datum.
All elevations used shall be based on United States Geological Survey
Datum.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT — An assessment of the impact
of a use on the 1) natural environment, including geology, topography, soils,
hydrology, vegetation, wildlife, wetlands and air quality; and 2) the cultural
environment, including lot use, utilities, traffic, population, economics,
services, historic assets and general character of the neighborhood. The
assessment of traffic impact must include a complete traffic analysis
prepared and sealed by a professional traffic engineer identifying the
impact of the proposed development on existing traffic and circulation
patterns and proposing solutions to problems which may arise as a
consequence of the proposed development.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA — An area with one or more of the
following environmental characteristics:
FINANCIAL SECURITY — Surety, in a form acceptable to the Township
Solicitor, in the form of cash, a certified check or irrevocable letter of credit
and restrictive or escrow account or set-aside agreement from a federalor
commonwealth-chartered lending institution, or a corporate performance
bond or a labor-and-material payment bond from a surety company
authorized to conduct business in the commonwealth, which may be
classified as the following:
A. Slopes over 25%;
B. Identified floodplain area;
C. Wetlands;
D. Habitats of endangered species;
E. Land formerly used for landfill operations or hazardous industrial use.
IMPROVEMENT SECURITY — A financial security which guarantees
the satisfactory completion of improvements required by this chapter.
A.
§ 150-7 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-7
147:292
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — A study with the accompanying Flood
Boundary - Floodway Map prepared for the Township by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse, and or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FORM 408 — Form 408, Pennsylvania Department of Transportation latest
revised data or addition thereto.
HOUSE NUMBER — A number assigned to a specific lot or parcel to be used
as an address.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — The floodplain area specifically
identified in Chapter 84, Floodplain Management, or Chapter 175, Zoning,
as being inundated by the one-hundred-year flood. Included would be areas
identified as floodway, flood-fringe and general floodplain.
IMPROVEMENTS, PRIVATE — Any of the following improvements for which
plans must comply with the minimum requirements of this chapter, Chapter
101, Improvement Design Standards, Chapter 175, Zoning, or with
conditions of approval of a final plat, land development, site plan or
conditional use: roads, streets, walkways, parking areas, gutters, curbs,
waterlines, sewers, stormwater management facilities, landscaping,
lighting, traffic control devices and other facilities to be owned, maintained
or operated by a private entity, such as an individual, corporation or owners'
association, including temporary erosion and sedimentation control or
stormwater management methods undertaken during construction.
IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC — All roads, streets, walkways, sidewalks,
gutters, curbs, sewers, waterlines, stormwater management facilities,
landscaping, road lighting, traffic control devices and other facilities to
be dedicated to or maintained by the Township for which plans and
specifications must comply with Chapter 101, Improvement Design
Standards.
MAINTENANCE SECURITY — A financial security which guarantees
the structural functioning and integrity of improvements required by
this chapter for a specified period after their completion and
acceptance by the Township.
B.
§ 150-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-7
147:293
INSPECTOR — An authorized representative of the Supervisors assigned to
make any and all inspections of the work performed and materials furnished
by the developer.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A landscape architect registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS) — A qualitative measure describing operational
conditions within a traffic stream; generally described in terms of such
factors as speed, freedom to maneuver, traffic interruptions, comfort,
convenience and safety. Levels of service are designated A through F, with
LOS A indicating the best service and LOS F indicating the worst.
LINE, LOT — A line which separates a lot from another lot or from a street
or any other public or private space.
LINE, SETBACK — A line parallel to a lot line, at a distance from the lot line
in accordance with the yard, perimeter or setback requirements of Chapter
175, Zoning.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at
their intersection or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior
angle of less than 135°.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear
lines of a lot.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenants; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leasehold, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
§ 150-7 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-7
147:294
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that abuts upon two parallel streets or that abuts
upon two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured on
the front yard setback line in accordance with Chapter 175, Zoning.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement are is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of Chapter 84, Floodplain Management, or the building
code.117
MOBILE HOME — A mobile home as defined in Chapter 175, Zoning.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MONUMENT — A permanent marker constructed of concrete, stone or
other permanent object placed to designate boundary lines, corners of
property and rights-of-way of streets and utilities, for the purpose of
reference in land and property surveys.
MPC — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, 53
P.S. § 10101 et seq., and as it may be amended.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water or a combination of land and water within a development site and
designated and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a
development, not including, streets, off-street parking areas and areas set
aside for public facilities.
OPEN SPACE, RECREATION — That area of land suitable for the
development of specific active recreation facilities for leisure time activities,
usually of a formal nature and often performed with others, requiring
equipment and taking place at prescribed places, sites or fields including
but not limited to baseball fields, soccer fields, football fields, tennis,
basketball and other court games, hockey facilities, multipurpose fields and
community swimming pools and attendant facilities.
PEDESTRIAN CONNECTION — An area of land providing a connection for
bicyclists and pedestrians between two streets or two lots.
PennDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PRD) — An area of land,
controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 65, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 150-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-7
147:295
of dwelling units, or combination of residential and nonresidential uses, the
development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of
dwelling, or use, density, or intensity, lot coverage and required open space
to the provisions established in any one district created, from time to time,
under the provisions of Chapter 175, Zoning.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — The preliminary map or maps of a proposed
subdivision, drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final, which has been approved.
PUBLIC ACCESS EASEMENT — An easement granted to the public for all
the purposes for which a public sidewalk may be used, including but not
limited to pedestrian and bicycle travel.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
governing body or planning agency, intended to inform and obtain public
comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of
October 15, 1998, P.L. 729, No. 93 (65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.), known as the
"Sunshine Act."118
PUBLIC NOTICE — A notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall be not
more than 30 days or less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPORT — A letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing
made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to
any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination.
RESERVE STRIP — A parcel of land separating a street from adjacent
properties.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — An area of land reserved or dedicated for use as a street,
pedestrian connection, bicycle way, or other means of public or private
transportation; or for an electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water
main, sanitary or storm sewer, or other special use. A right-of-way includes
the entire area reserved or dedicated for the use.
SECRETARY — The Secretary of Middlesex Township.
STREET — A public or private right-of-way deeded or dedicated for public
use by motor vehicles, bicycles and pedestrian travel. Streets shall be
classified in the following classifications, which shall apply to roads in
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 150-7 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-7
147:296
the Township of Middlesex and shall be applied as defined in the
Comprehensive Plan:
STREET, PRIVATE — All land between a right-of-way, whether public or
private and whether improved or unimproved, which is intended to
accommodate vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian traffic, including an avenue,
drive, boulevard, highway, road, freeway, parkway, lane, viaduct or other
vehicular way.
STREET, PUBLIC — Any street, including the entire public right-of-way,
which has been dedicated to and accepted by the Township or which has
been devoted to public use by legal mapping, use or other means.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new road or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBDIVISION, PLAT ADJUSTMENT — A subdivision limited to any of the
following purposes:
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the Township
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements for
which financial security was posted pursuant to Section 509 of the MPC119)
of those improvements required as a condition for final approval have been
ARTERIAL, MAJOR — A street that serves or is designed to serve
heavy traffic flows and that provides for traffic movements between
communities and/or other heavy traffic generating areas.
A.
COLLECTOR — A street that serves or is designed to serve and collect
traffic from local streets and connect with arterial streets or from
another collector street and local streets.
B.
LOCAL — A street that serves or is designed to serve low flows of traffic
and that provides primarily for access to abutting properties.
C.
CUL-DE-SAC — A short street at least 250 feet in length having one
end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicle
turnaround.
D.
A. Adjustment of lot lines between lots where no new lots are created.
B. Consolidation of lot lines.
Survey corrections including final survey corrections of property lines
for townhouses and other attached dwellings after construction when
in conformance with the previously recorded plan.
C.
§ 150-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-7
147:297
completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the project will be
able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — A map showing ground elevations by contour lines
and the location of natural and man-made features upon the land.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middlesex, Butler County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP BUILDING CODE — The officially adopted building code of the
Township and all subsequent amendments thereto.120
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — An engineer employed by the Township or
engaged as a consultant thereto.
TOWNSHIP FLOODPLAIN — The officially adopted Floodplain Ordinance of
the Township and all subsequent amendments thereto.121
TOWNSHIP GRADING, FILL AND EXCAVATION — The officially adopted
Grading, Fill and Excavation Ordinance of the Township and all subsequent
amendments thereto.122
TOWNSHIP IMPROVEMENT DESIGN STANDARDS — The officially
adopted Improvement Design Standards Ordinance of the Township and all
subsequent amendments thereto.123
TOWNSHIP RECREATION PLAN — The officially adopted Parks and
Recreation and Open Space Comprehensive Plan of the Township and all
subsequent amendments thereto.
TOWNSHIP STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The officially adopted
Stormwater Management Ordinance of the Township and all subsequent
amendments thereto.124
TOWNSHIP ZONING — The officially adopted Zoning Ordinance of the
Township and all subsequent amendments thereto.125
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK — A system of rights-of-way and easements
designed to provide safe and efficient travel from place to place for motor
vehicles and pedestrians including but not limited to streets, public access
easements, common open space, pedestrian connections, sidewalks,
walking trails, biking trails and transit stations.
WATERCOURSE — All existing channels, creeks, ditches, drains, dry runs,
springs and streams, also all proposed channels, ditches, drains and
drainage facilities.
WETLAND — Any area meeting the criteria of the appropriate state or
federal agency to be a wetland.
119. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
120. Editor's Note: See Ch. 65, Construction Codes, Uniform.
121. Editor's Note: See Chapter 84, Floodplain Management.
122. Editor's Note: See Chapter 89, Grading, Excavation and Fill.
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. 101, Improvement Design Standards.
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 144, Stormwater Management.
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Zoning.
§ 150-7 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-7
147:298
ARTICLE III
Administrative Procedures
§ 150-8. General procedures.
A. No person proposing a subdivision shall proceed with any grading or
improvements until the final application is approved by the Supervisors.
B. No person proposing a subdivision shall sell, transfer, lease or
otherwise convey any lot, parcel or tract in a subdivision, or construct
or commence the construction of any building in a subdivision, until the
final application of the proposed subdivision is approved by the
Supervisors and recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof.
C. For a subdivision or land development meeting the following criteria,
the applicant may elect to combine the preliminary and final approval
procedures for a combined approval process. All chapter sections for
preliminary and final approval shall still apply.
(1) Residential subdivision of less than five lots, not including any
multifamily development.
(2) Commercial subdivision of less than three lots where no public or
private street is proposed.
(3) Commercial land development applications of not more than
100,000 square feet of gross floor area when all improvements are
to be bonded and constructed at one time.
D. Every subdivision and land development shall meet every requirement
of all this chapter and all other ordinances of the Township.
E. Every subdivision and land development shall be in accordance with the
laws of the county, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the federal
government.
F. Procedural regulations. The Township Manager is authorized to publish
procedural regulations to implement the procedural and substantive
content of this chapter including but not limited to applications for
development.
G. Reports. All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory
only and shall not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or
agency, nor shall any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used, received or
considered by the body, board, officer or agency rendering a
determination or decision shall be made available for inspection for the
applicant and all other parties to any proceeding upon request, and
copies thereof shall be provided at cost of reproduction.
H. Applicant's burden to comply. Every applicant shall have the burden to
comply with this chapter and all other ordinances of the Township for
every application for development. The Township shall provide every
applicant with any initial report concerning compliance with this
§ 150-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-8
147:299
§ 150-9. Preapplication conferences.
§ 150-10. Official filing date.
The official filing date for all applications for development shall be the date
of the regular Planning Commission meeting next following the date the
complete application for development including payment of the applicable
filing fee, provided that should the said next regular meeting occur more
than 30 days following the filing of the application for development, the
official filing date shall be the 30th day following the day the complete
application for development is filed.
§ 150-11. Preliminary approval procedures.
chapter and all ordinances of the Township. Failure of any applicant
to comply with discrepancies after the issuance of the initial report or
any subsequent report shall be grounds for denial of the application for
development.
A. Purpose. Before submission of a preliminary application, the developer
is strongly encouraged to have meetings with the Planning Commission
and the Township to determine the feasibility, suitability and timing of
the application. The preapplication conference is intended to provide
the developer with information and guidance from the Township before
incurring substantial expenses with regard to the site and the
preparation of plans. All preapplication conferences shall be scheduled
by the Township.
B. Scheduling. The request for a preapplication conference with the
Planning Commission and preapplication conference submission shall
be received and accepted by the Township at least seven days prior to
the date of the meeting of the Planning Commission.
C. Relationship to formal review process. The submission of a
preapplication conference submission shall not be deemed the
beginning of the time period for review as prescribed by law. The
preapplication conferences are advisory only and shall not bind the
Township to approve any application for development.
A. Required. A preliminary application is required for all subdivisions and
land developments except those exempted under the provisions of
§ 150-8C of this chapter.
B. Planning agency authority. The Planning Commission shall review all
preliminary applications.
C. Application submission. All preliminary applications shall be submitted
to the Township on any business day during regular business hours. In
order to be considered at a Planning Commission meeting, the complete
preliminary application must have been received and accepted by the
§ 150-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-11
147:300
Township at least 15 working days prior to the Planning Commission
meeting.
D. Determination of acceptance/rejection as incomplete. Within five
working days after a preliminary application is submitted, the Township
shall certify the preliminary application as substantially complete and
accepted or incomplete and rejected. Within said time, the Township
shall notify the applicant in writing if the preliminary application is
incomplete and rejected, stating the deficiencies in the application and
returning the filing fee. The applicant may reapply, submitting the fee
and missing material at any time.
E. Deemed acceptance. Failure of the Township to make a determination
of acceptance/rejection shall result in deemed acceptance of the
preliminary application for processing. However, deemed acceptance
for processing shall not constitute a waiver of any deficiencies in the
preliminary application or approval of the preliminary application.
F. Distribution. The applicant shall distribute the appropriate number of
copies of the preliminary application as required by the review agency
within 20 calendar days from the date the preliminary application was
filed and accepted by the Township to each of the following:
(1) County Planning Commission; and
(2) Appropriate public water provider; and
(3) Appropriate public sewer provider; and
(4) Any municipal, county and state agencies as applicable and as
requested by the Planning Commission or the Supervisors.
G. Review by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall
review all preliminary applications at a public meeting. In its review,
the Planning Commission shall consider the report of the staff,
Township Engineer and all review agencies. The Planning Commission
shall make a written recommendation to the Supervisors for approval,
approval subject to conditions, or disapproval of the preliminary
application setting forth the reasons for the recommendations.
H. Public hearing. Before action is taken on a preliminary application, the
Planning Commission or the Supervisors may hold a public hearing
thereon after public notice.
I. Decision.
(1) Authority. The Supervisors shall act on all preliminary applications.
(2) Decision deadline. Not later than 90 days after the official filing
date, the Supervisors shall render a decision on the preliminary
application. All decisions shall be made at a public meeting.
§ 150-11 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-11
147:301
§ 150-12. Final approval procedures.
(3) Extension of deadline. The applicant may agree in writing to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of
presentation of communication of the decision.
(4) Actions. The Supervisors shall take one of the following actions:
(a) Approve the preliminary application; or
(b) Approve the preliminary application with conditions; or
(c) Disapprove the preliminary application on the basis that it does
not comply with specific standards and regulations set forth in
this chapter or any other applicable ordinances of the
Township.
J. General standards for review of preliminary applications. The
Supervisors shall approve the preliminary application if the preliminary
application complies with the standards and regulations set forth in this
chapter and all other applicable ordinances of the Township.
K. Notification of decision. The decision of the Supervisors shall be in
writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or
mailed to the applicant's last known address not later than 15 days
following the decision. If the decision is disapproval, the written
notification shall specify all defects in the application and shall cite with
section numbers the provisions of this chapter or the section numbers
with provisions of other applicable ordinances of the Township that
have not been satisfied.
L. Effect of approval. After approval of a preliminary application, the
preliminary plat shall be entitled to the protections afforded by Section
508(4) of the MPC.126
A. Required. A final application is required for all subdivisions and land
developments.
B. Final application submission and types.
(1) Filing date. All final applications shall be submitted to the Township
on any business day during regular business hours. A final
application shall be submitted within five years of granting of
preliminary approval or in accordance with the phasing plan
approved by the Township. In order to be considered at a Planning
Commission meeting, the complete final application must have
been received and accepted by the Township at least 15 working
days prior to the Planning Commission meeting.
(2) Types. The applicant shall request, in writing, one of the following
types of approval:
126. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 150-11 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-12
147:302
(a) Approval for recording with provision of an improvement
security to guarantee satisfactory completion of required
improvements, if any; or
(b) Approval for construction of required improvements with
extension of time for delayed approval for recording following
satisfactory completion of required improvements.
C. Determination of acceptance/rejection as incomplete. Within five
working days after a final application is submitted, the Township shall
certify the final application as substantially complete and accepted or
incomplete and rejected. Within said time, the Township shall notify the
applicant in writing that the final application is incomplete and
rejected, stating the deficiencies in the final application and returning
the filing fee. The applicant may reapply, submitting the fee and missing
material at any time.
D. Deemed acceptance. Failure of the Township to make a determination
of acceptance/rejection shall result in deemed acceptance of the final
application for processing. However, deemed acceptance for processing
shall not constitute a waiver of any deficiencies in the final application
or approval of the final application.
E. Distribution. The applicant shall distribute the appropriate number of
copies of the final application as required by the review agency within
20 calendar days from the date the final application was filed and
accepted by the Township to each of the following:
(1) County Planning Commission; and
(2) Appropriate public water provider; and
(3) Appropriate public sewer provider; and
(4) Any municipal, county and state agencies as applicable and as
requested by the Planning Commission or the Supervisors.
F. Review by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall
review all final applications. The Planning Commission shall review the
final application at a public meeting. In its review, the Planning
Commission shall consider the reports of the Township Engineer and all
review agencies. The Planning Commission shall make a written
recommendation to the Supervisors for approval, approval subject to
conditions, or disapproval of the application. The Planning Commission
shall set forth the reasons for its recommendations.
G. Decision.
(1) Authority. The Supervisors shall act on all final applications. The
Supervisors shall render a decision at a public meeting.
(2) Revised final applications. After the review of the final application
by the Planning Commission, six copies of the final application,
§ 150-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-12
147:303
which may be revised as recommended by the Planning
Commission, shall be submitted to the Township and shall be
forwarded to the Supervisors. The Supervisors shall consider the
final application at their next regular meeting, provided the copies
of the final application are submitted to the Township no later
than 10 working days before the meeting date. If the revised final
application has substantial revisions from the revisions
recommended by the Planning Commission, the Supervisors may
refer the revised final application to the Planning Commission for
review and recommendation.
(3) Decision deadline. Not later than 90 days after the official filing
date, the Supervisors shall render a decision on the final
application for recording or for construction with delayed approval
for recording.
(4) Extension of deadline. The applicant may agree in writing to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of
presentation of communication of the decision.
(5) Actions on final applications for recording. The Supervisors shall
take one of the following actions:
(a) Approve the final application; or
(b) Approve the final application with conditions; or
(c) Disapprove the final application on the basis that it does not
comply with specific standards and regulations set forth in this
chapter or any other applicable ordinances of the Township.
(6) Actions on final applications for construction of required
improvements with delayed recording pending satisfactory
completion of required improvements.
(a) The Supervisors shall take one of the following actions:
[1] Approve the final application for construction with
approval for recording delayed for one year, or any
extension granted by the Supervisors pending the
satisfactory completion of required improvements and
compliance with requirements for approval of
improvements; or
[2] Approve the final application for construction as in
Subsection H with conditions; or
[3] Disapprove the final application on the basis that it does
not comply with specific standards and regulations set
forth in the this chapter or any other applicable ordinances
of the Township.
§ 150-12 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-12
147:304
(b) Following completion of all procedures for approval of required
improvements in accordance with § 150-17, the applicant shall
submit a written request to the Supervisors for final approval
for recording. The request shall be considered by the
Supervisors at the next regular meeting of the Supervisors,
providing the request is received by the Supervisors no later
than 10 working days before the meeting date. The
Supervisors shall take one of the following actions:
[1] Approve the final application for recording;
[2] Approve the final application for recording with
conditions; or
[3] Disapprove the final application for recording on the basis
that it does not comply with specific standards or
regulations of this chapter or any other applicable
ordinances of the Township.
H. General standards for review of final applications. The Supervisors
shall approve the final application if the final application complies with
the standards and regulations set forth in this chapter and the
preliminary plat approval. Approval for recording shall be granted only
when the public and private improvements have been satisfactorily
completed or when an improvement security shall be provided before
release of the plat for recording.
I. Form of final application approval. final application approval shall be by
resolution or ordinance of the Supervisors.
J. Improvement security.
(1) Amount. In lieu of the completion of any improvements required as
a condition for the final approval, the Township shall require an
improvement security in an amount equal to 110% of the cost of
completion of improvements estimated as of 90 days following the
date scheduled for completion by the applicant or developer.
(2) Determination of amount. The amount of improvement security
required shall be based upon an estimate of the cost of completion
of the required improvements, submitted by an applicant or
developer and prepared by an engineer and certified by such
engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The
Township, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer, may
refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown.
(3) Resolution of disputes regarding amount. If the applicant or
developer and the Township are unable to agree upon an estimate,
then the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another
engineer chosen mutually by the Township and the applicant or
developer. The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be
presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the
§ 150-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-12
147:305
event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said
engineer shall be paid equally by the Township and the applicant or
developer.
(4) Adjustment to amount. Annually, the Township may adjust the
amount of the improvement security by comparing the actual cost
of the improvements which have been completed and the estimated
cost for the completion of the remaining improvements as of the
expiration of the 90th day after either the original date scheduled
for completion or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to
said adjustment, the Township may require the applicant or
developer to post additional security in order to assure that the
financial security equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be
posted by the applicant or developer in accordance with this
subsection. If the party posting the improvement security requires
more than one year from the date of posting of the improvement
security to complete the required improvements, the amount of
improvement security may be increased by an additional 10% for
each one-year period beyond the first anniversary date from
posting of the improvement security or to an amount not exceeding
110% of the cost of completing the required improvements as
reestablished on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year
period by using the above procedure.
(5) Term. The term of the improvement security shall be for a period of
one year from the date that the improvement security is posted.
(6) Guarantees in phased development. In the case where development
is projected over a period of years, the Supervisors may authorize
submission of final plats by section or stages of development
subject to such requirements or guarantees as to improvements in
future sections or stages of development as it finds essential for the
protection of any finally approved section of the development.
K. Notification of decision. The decision of the Supervisors shall be in
writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or
mailed to the applicant's last known address not later than 15 days
following the decision. If the decision is disapproval, the written
notification shall specify all defects in the final application and shall cite
with section numbers with provisions of this chapter or the section
numbers with provisions of any other applicable ordinances of the
Township that have not been satisfied.
L. Compliance with conditions of approval; municipal signatures. The
applicant shall comply with all conditions of approval, including
construction of required improvements or providing an improvement
security, before the proper Township officials execute the certifications
on the final plat. When the conditions of the final approval have been
met, the proper officers of the Township shall sign the final plat for
recording and shall affix the Township Seal.
§ 150-12 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-12
147:306
§ 150-13. Phased development.
§ 150-14. Recording of final plat.
M. Effect of approval. Final approval of a subdivision and land
development plan shall be effective for one year from the date of the
Supervisors' approval. During this period, the applicant shall meet all
conditions of approval, if any. Final approval shall further be effective
for 90 days from the effective date of approval. During this period, the
applicant shall record the plat as provided in § 150-14, Recording of
final plat. After the final plat is recorded, the plan shall be entitled to
the protections afforded by Section 508(4) of the MPC.127
A. Permitted. The applicant may construct a subdivision or land
development in separate phases over time in accordance with the
standards for phased development set forth in § 150-34.
B. Schedules for final application submissions and modifications thereto.
Where the applicant anticipates that he will not submit final
applications for one or more phases of the overall development as
depicted on the preliminary plat within five years of the date of
preliminary plat approval, he shall file with his preliminary application
a schedule delineating all proposed phases as well as intended dates for
filing final applications for each phase. The applicant shall update such
schedules annually on or before the anniversary of the preliminary plat
approval until such time as the Supervisors have granted final plat
approval for the final phase of the overall development as depicted on
the preliminary plat. Any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall be
subject to the approval of the Supervisors in their sole discretion.
C. Modification of phasing. Any phase that does not comply with the
preliminary plat approved by the Supervisors will require complete
resubmission of the preliminary application.
A. Time for recording. Within one year after the date of the final approval
for recording by the Supervisors, the developer shall comply with all
conditions of approval. If all conditions of final approval are met, the
Township shall execute the final plat. Within 90 days after the execution
of the final plat, the Township shall record the final plat in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds of the county.
B. Effect of final plat recording on Official Map. After a final plat has been
approved and recorded as provided in this chapter, all public streets
and public grounds on such plan shall be and become a part of the
Official Map of the Township, if any, without public hearing.
C. Effect on acceptance of public improvements. Until final acceptance by
resolution or ordinance, no property or other public improvements
shown on the recorded final plat shall be deemed a part of the public
127. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 150-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-14
147:307
§ 150-15. Fee schedule.
improvements of the Township, but the same shall be deemed to be
private until and unless the same have been completed in accordance
with this chapter and accepted in accordance with law.
D. Effect on building construction. No building permit shall be issued in
any recorded plat unless and until one copy of the reproducible Mylar
with all required signatures is filed with the County Recorder of Deeds,
one copy is on file with the Township and the third copy returned to the
applicant. In addition, all required financial security must be in place
and acceptable to the Township for form and amount.
E. Digital copy of plat for recording. In addition to the plat prepared for
recording, the applicant shall submit a computer-readable file in the
form specified by the Township which shall provide a true and complete
display of the final plat for recording including all information
contained on the finally approved plan except for the surveyor's seal or
signature. The computer-readable file shall be submitted at the same
time that the plat is submitted for recording if it is requested by the
Township.
A. Fees for review. The Supervisors shall establish, by resolution, a
schedule of fees for applications for development, for the Township's
review of the materials in connection therewith which are to be
provided to the Township under the provisions of this chapter, including
but not limited to the payment of fees charged by the Township's
professional consultants for their review. Such resolution shall be duly
recorded in the Resolution Book of the Township, and such fee schedule
shall be reproduced and made available upon request at the Township
Building. The resolution providing for the various fees shall be
periodically reviewed and amended, when necessary, by resolution of
the Supervisors. Any approvals for the issuance of any permits under
this chapter shall be contingent upon the payment of the proper fees as
established by the resolution and the fee schedule.
(1) Review fee dispute. In the event the applicant disputes the amount
of any such review fees, the applicant shall, within 14 days of the
applicant's receipt of the bill, notify the Township that such fees are
disputed, in which case the Township shall not delay or disapprove
a subdivision or land development application due to the
applicant's request over disputed fees.
(2) Review fee dispute resolution. In the event that the Township and
the applicant cannot agree on the amount of review fees which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Township
shall follow the procedure for dispute resolution set forth in MPC
Section 510(g),128 provided that the professionals resolving such
128. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510.
§ 150-14 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-15
147:308
§ 150-16. Partial release of improvement security.
dispute shall be of the profession or discipline as the consultants
whose fees are being disputed.
B. Fees for inspection of required improvements. The Supervisors shall
establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees for the Township's inspection
of improvements required under the provisions of this chapter,
including but not limited to the payment of fees charged by the
Township's professional consultants for their inspection. Such
resolution shall be duly recorded in the Resolution Book of the
Township, and such fee schedule shall be reproduced and made
available upon request at the Township Office. The resolution providing
for the various fees shall be periodically reviewed and amended, when
necessary, by resolution of the Supervisors. The release, in whole or in
part, of any financial security posted in connection with such
improvements and, if applicable, the acceptance of such improvements
by the Township shall be contingent upon the payment of the proper
fees as established by the resolution and the fee schedule.
(1) When inspection fees are disputed. In the event the applicant
disputes the amount of any such expense in connection with the
inspection of improvements, the applicant shall, within 14 days of
the applicant's receipt of the bill, notify the Township that such fees
are disputed as unreasonable or unnecessary, in which case the
Township shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land
development application or any approval or permit related to
development due to the applicant's request over disputed engineer
expenses.
(2) Dispute resolution. If within 30 days of the applicant's receipt of
the bill, the Township and the applicant cannot agree on the
amount of expenses which are reasonable and necessary, then the
applicant and the Township shall follow the procedure for dispute
resolution set forth in MPC Section 510(g).
C. Criteria for fees. Review and inspection fees shall be reasonable and in
accordance with the ordinary and customary charges by the Township
Engineer or consultant for similar services in the Township, but in no
event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the engineer or
consultant to the Township when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise
imposed on applicants.
A. From time to time, during the installation of the required public and
private improvements, the developer may request partial release of the
improvement security in an amount necessary for payment of
contractors performing the work. Any such request shall be in writing
and shall be addressed to the Supervisors. The Supervisors shall have
45 days from the receipt of such request to allow the Township
Engineer to certify, in writing, that such portion of the installation of
§ 150-15 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-16
147:309
§ 150-17. Approval of required improvements; final release of
improvement security.
public improvements has been completed in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the approved final plat.
B. Upon such certification by the Township Engineer, the Supervisors shall
authorize release of an amount as estimated by the Township Engineer
which fairly represents the value of the improvements completed. The
Supervisors may require retention of 10% of the estimated cost of such
improvements until such time as all improvements have been installed
and the improvement security is released in its entirety.
C. If the Supervisors fail to act within the forty-five-day period, the
Supervisors shall be deemed to have approved the release of funds as
requested.
A. Notice of completion.
(1) When the developer has completed the required public
improvements and the private improvements in a plan for which an
improvement security is required, the developer shall notify the
Township, in writing, by certified or registered mail and shall send
a copy of such notice to the Township Engineer. Upon completion of
the public improvements in a plan, as-built plans and profiles of the
public improvements, as constructed, shall be submitted to the
Township by the developer with the notice of completion.
(2) Within 10 days of the receipt of such notification, the Township
shall authorize the Township Engineer to inspect the aforesaid
improvements.
(3) Township Engineer's report.
(a) Upon authorization by the Township, the Township Engineer
shall perform a final inspection of the public and private
improvements in the plan. Within 30 days of receiving the
authorization from the Supervisors, the Township Engineer
shall file a report, in writing, with the Supervisors indicating
approval or rejection of the public improvements, either in
whole or in part, and in the case of rejection, shall provide a
statement of the reasons for such rejection. The Township
Engineer shall also report regarding completion of private
improvements which have been bonded in accordance with
applicable ordinance requirements and conditions of approval,
if any.
(b) Notification to developer. Within 15 days of receipt of the
Township Engineer's report, the Township shall notify the
developer, in writing, by certified mail, of the action of the
Supervisors with relation to approval or rejection of the public
improvements, as well as the completion, in accordance with
§ 150-16 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-17
147:310
§ 150-18. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
In the event that the public and private improvements required to be
installed by the provisions of this chapter are not installed in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter or the final plat prior to the expiration
of the improvement security, the Township shall have the power to enforce
the improvement security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies
provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. If proceeds
from the improvement security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing
or making repairs or corrections to all the improvements guaranteed by
such improvement security, the Township may, at its option, install part
of the public improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land
development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to
recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the
improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the improvement
security or from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer,
or both, shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements
guaranteed by such improvement security and not for any other municipal
purpose.
§ 150-19. Maintenance security.
the specifications shown on the approved plan, of any private
improvements for which an improvement security has been
required.
(4) Failure of Township to comply. If the Supervisors or the Township
Engineer fails to comply with the time limitation provisions
contained in this article, all public and private improvements will
be deemed to have been approved, and the developer shall be
released from all liability pursuant to the improvement security
posted with the Township.
(5) Completion of rejected improvements. If any portion of the public
or private improvements shall not be approved or shall be rejected
by the Supervisors, the developer shall proceed to make the
required corrections or additions, and, upon completion, the same
procedure of notification, inspection and approval as outlined in
this article shall be followed.
(6) Developer's rights. Nothing in this article, however, shall be
construed to limit the developer's right to contest or question, by
legal proceedings or otherwise, any determination of the
Supervisors or the Township Engineer.
A. Following completion of all or some of the required public
improvements in a plan and prior to the acceptance by the Township of
the dedication of those required public improvements, the Supervisors
shall require posting of a maintenance security, as defined by this
chapter, to secure the structural integrity of the improvements and to
guarantee the proper functioning of those improvements in accordance
§ 150-17 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-19
147:311
§ 150-20. Acceptance of public improvements.
§ 150-21. Approval of private improvements.
Approval of private improvements for which an improvement security has
been required and final release of that improvement security shall indicate
compliance with the specifications shown on the approved plan; however, it
shall not imply approval by the Township of the method of construction or
structural integrity of the private improvements beyond that which is shown
on the approved plan, nor shall there be any liability associated with or
responsibility for maintenance of those improvements by the Township. The
developer shall not be required to post a maintenance security for private
improvements.
§ 150-22. Final inspection of public improvements.
Prior to the end of the eighteen-month period when the maintenance
security expires and before the maintenance security is released, the
Township Engineer shall make a final inspection and certify in writing to
the Supervisors that all the public improvements are in good order. If any
repairs are required or maintenance needed, the developer shall be notified
in writing, and such repairs or maintenance shall be done and approved
prior to certification by the Township Engineer.
with the design standards of this chapter and Chapter 101,
Improvement Design Standards.
B. The term of the maintenance security shall be for a period of 18 months
from the date of acceptance of the improvements by the Supervisors.
The amount of the maintenance security shall be 15% of the actual cost
of installation of the improvements.
A. Upon completion of the inspection and approval of the public
improvements, the developer shall submit a request to the Supervisors,
in writing, to accept the dedication of the public improvements. The
request for acceptance shall include deeds of dedication and all other
legal descriptive documents necessary to prepare a resolution or
ordinance and shall be submitted at least 10 days prior to the regular
meeting of the Supervisors. At the regular meeting, the Supervisors
shall enact a resolution or ordinance accepting the public
improvements as part of the Township's public facilities, subject to the
posting of the maintenance security required by § 150-19 of this
chapter.
B. No property or public improvement shown on a final plat shall be
considered to have been finally accepted by the Township until the
dedication thereof has been officially accepted by adoption of a
resolution or ordinance of the Township, duly enacted and advertised in
accordance with law. Approval of public improvements under § 150-17
shall not constitute acceptance of public improvements under this
section.
§ 150-19 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-22
147:312
ARTICLE IV
Application Content Requirements
§ 150-23. Authority to waive certain requirements.
In a subdivision for residential use of less than five lots and where the
lots abut existing public streets, and/or utilities, and in a land development
of less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area and additions of less
than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area to previously approved land
developments, the Supervisors may wave certain requirements, such as
topographic, street and utility specifications, or environmental impact
assessment, where such information is available from previously recorded
plats or other sources acceptable to the Supervisors.
§ 150-24. Preapplication conference submission guidelines.
The written request for a preapplication conference with the Planning
Commission shall include the following:
§ 150-25. Preliminary application contents.
A preliminary application for preliminary approval shall consist of the
following items. Maps and data may be on separate sheets or combined
A. Twelve copies of a letter identifying the site, the name of the property
owner, and the nature of the proposed project.
B. Preapplication conference fee.
C. Twelve copies of a sketch plan, recommended but optional, being an
approximate drawing but generally drawn to a scale of 100 feet to the
inch, having a sheet size of 11 inches by 17 inches minimum and
including the following:
(1) The location, size and topography (USGS) of the site and the nature
of the applicant's interest in the land proposed to be developed,
including the approximate tract boundary, North point, and
identification of adjacent streets.
(2) The intensity of land use to be allocated to various parts of the site
as well as the number of dwelling units contemplated.
(3) The general layout of the proposed development and
interrelationship of uses including, but not limited to, common
open space, buildings and other structures, residential building
types, off-street parking, lot and street configuration.
(4) In the case of development plans which call for execution over a
period of years, a statement regarding the proposed phasing
schedule should be issued.
(5) Any other information available to the applicant which may be of
benefit to the Township in providing its assistance.
§ 150-23 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-25
147:313
on one sheet depending on the size and complexity of the proposed
development.
A. Twelve copies: application form, provided by the Township, and
completed by the developer.
B. Preliminary application fee.
C. Twelve copies: if the developer is other than the landowner, the
landowner's authorization for the developer to apply and nature of
developer's interest in the site.
D. Twelve copies: preliminary plan which shall meet the following
specifications and include the following:
(1) Sheet size: 24 inches by 36 inches, with index for multiple sheets.
(2) Preparation by a professional engineer, surveyor, landscape
architect or architect registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania evidenced by the name, address, seal and signature of
the professional on the plans and drawings.
(3) Name and address of the developer and landowner.
(4) The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared the
plan, the plan date, and the dates of all plan revisions.
(5) Location map at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet showing the
relationship of the site to be subdivided or developed to adjoining
property, to major streets, municipal boundaries and streams
within 1,000 feet of any part of the property proposed to be
developed, and including a title and graphic scale.
(6) Proposed name of the subdivision or land development.
(7) Scale of one inch equals not more than 100 feet or greater.
(8) North arrow, written scale and graphic scale.
(9) A boundary and topographic survey of all lots which include the site
of the proposed subdivision or land development with bearings and
distances, identification of all corner markers, lot area, municipal
boundaries, easements, public and private rights-of-way, within 200
feet of the proposed subdivision or land development, prepared by
a surveyor. The linear closure accuracy shall be 1:10,000.
(10) Existing and proposed contours at vertical intervals of two feet if
the general slope is less than 10% and at intervals of five feet if the
general slope is greater than 10%. The accuracy of the contour
lines shall be within 50% of the required contour interval.
(11) Utilizing existing records and data, show existing adjacent land
uses and lot lines within 200 feet of the proposed development
including existing platting of adjacent land, names of owners of any
§ 150-25 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-25
147:314
adjoining properties not in recorded plats, existing zoning, the
location of all public and private streets, drives, or lanes, railroads,
utilities, towers, easements, embankments, walls, streams and
watercourses, buildings and other structures, fences and walls, fire
hydrants, storm drainage structures, and other significant natural
or man-made features.
(12) Existing and proposed streets and rights-of-way, including
dedicated widths, roadway widths, approximate gradient, types
and widths of pavements, curbs, sidewalks and other pertinent data
including jurisdiction of ownership and maintenance responsibility;
proposed street names.
(13) Existing and proposed easements, including widths, ownership,
and purposes.
(14) Existing and proposed public and private improvements; utilities
including water, sanitary and storm sewers, gas, electric,
telephone, and cable television; fire hydrants; oil and gas wells; and
street lights. Identify type and ownership. Show approximate
location. Proposed utilities may be shown by means of a typical
street cross-section with a note that the proposed utilities will be
extended within the street to serve all lots.
(15) All areas within identified floodplain areas including flood-fringe,
floodway and general floodplain areas.
(16) Existing watercourses, wetlands and other significant natural
features.
(17) Potentially hazardous features, including quarry sites, surface and
subsurface mines, undermined areas, underground fires, solid
waste disposal sites, contaminated areas, and landslide-prone
areas. Show approximate location and cite source information.
(18) Significant cultural features, including cemeteries; burial sites;
archeological sites; and historic buildings, structures, plaques,
markers, or monuments. Show approximate location and cite
source information.
(19) For subdivisions, the proposed layout of lots (showing scaled
dimensions), lot numbers, lot area, front yard, and perimeter yard.
(20) For land developments, proposed building locations, dimensions,
loading and unloading areas, service docks, approximate finished
floor elevations, and gross floor area, proposed parking lots and
parking lot layout, curbs, wheel stops, driveways, internal
circulation, sidewalks, walkways, pedestrian and bicycle paths,
buffer areas, landscaped areas, proposed structures, and required
yards and indications of compliance with requirements of this
chapter.
§ 150-25 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-25
147:315
(21) Schedule of applicable Township zoning district requirements,
including area and bulk regulations, density, lot coverage,
impervious surface, building and yard requirements.
(22) Tabulation of site data including but not limited to the following:
(a) Total site area.
(b) Proposed use of land and area for residential and
nonresidential uses.
(c) Proposed residential density and number of dwelling units and
building types.
(d) Area of land proposed to be dedicated for street rights-of-way,
recreation open space, common area, common open space.
(e) Phasing schedule.
(f) Total existing and proposed parking spaces and accessible
parking spaces and basis for parking requirement calculations.
(g) Lot coverage and impervious surface coverage.
(h) Typical lot size.
(23) List any variances, modifications or waivers to this chapter,
Chapter 175, Zoning, or any other requirements, zoning approvals
or other approvals which were previously granted for the site.
(24) List any modifications or waivers of this chapter, variances or
modifications of the Township zoning requirements or
modifications other regulations being requested and a justification
for the request.
E. Seven copies: environmental analysis map(s) showing, identifying, and
citing sources for the following:
(1) Location of unique land forms or natural features (such as hills,
berms, knolls, mounds, swales, bowls, depressions, rock
outcroppings or scenic views), plant and wildlife habitat areas for
rare or endangered species and land formerly used for landfill
operations or hazardous industrial use.
(2) Topographic contours with a vertical interval as required in
Subsection D(10) showing slope areas by the following categories
with a tabulation of the area in each slope category and the area
and percent of each category proposed to be disturbed, developed,
graded or stripped of vegetation by the proposed development:
Category
0 - 14.9%
15 - 24.9%
§ 150-25 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-25
147:316
25 - 39.9%
40% and over
(3) Type of bedrock, and its associated environmental characteristics
affecting the site.
(4) Subsurface conditions, including information about past and
possible future coal mining activity, subsidence risk assessment
and other environmental concerns.
(5) Locations of existing gas and oil wells.
(6) Type of soils and their associated environmental characteristics
(such as depth to seasonal high water table, depth to bedrock,
erodibility, permeability, landslide-prone and hydric soils).
(7) Watercourses or bodies of water, floodplains (including separate
delineations for the regulatory floodway and flood-fringe areas),
wetlands or other hydrologic conditions affecting the site (proof of
the nonexistence of such conditions shall be provided by the
applicant).
(8) Any land formerly used for landfill operations or hazardous
industrial use.
(9) Any other environmentally sensitive features.
F. Three copies: preliminary engineering plans with scaled dimensions for
the proposed subdivision or land development showing:
(1) Horizontal center line, cross sections, and vertical profiles of
proposed streets within the plan and at a distance of 200 feet
beyond the plan with geometric data. The geometric data shall be
based on graphical scales and is not required to be coordinated
with base survey lines.
(2) A stormwater management plan prepared in accordance with
Chapter 144, Stormwater Management.
G. Twelve copies: other required information:
(1) A written report on the feasibility of connection to an existing
sewerage system, including distances to the nearest public sewer,
service load of the subdivision or land development.
(2) If connection to a public sewerage system is not feasible, a report
on the feasibility of a separate sewerage system and treatment
works, including the design, population, type and location of
treatment and receiving stream.
(3) If connection to a public or a private sewerage system is not
feasible, a report on the feasibility of on-lot sewage disposal,
§ 150-25 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-25
147:317
§ 150-26. Final application contents.
prepared in accordance with the required procedures of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(4) For subdivisions of 10 lots or more and for land developments of
5,000 square feet of gross building area or more: environmental
impact assessment.
(5) Phasing schedule for submission of applications for final approval
of plans to be developed in phases.
(6) Any additional information as required by either the Planning
Commission or the Supervisors necessary to evaluate the character
and impact of the proposed subdivision or land development.
A. Twelve copies: application form, provided by the Township, and
completed by the developer. The developer shall indicate on the form
whether approval is requested for construction of required
improvements with consent to delay processing the final application for
approval for recording until the developer submits a written request for
such approval.
B. Final application fee.
C. Twelve copies: preliminary plat. All maps, plans, drawings, and written
material revised according to the official written communication
granting preliminary approval shall be submitted. Revisions shall be
noted and dated on all exhibits. Except for the phasing schedule,
supporting maps and materials not revised need not be submitted.
D. Twelve copies: 24 inches by 36 inches in size, in accurate and final form
for recording meeting the specifications of the office of the County
Recorder of Deeds. The final plat shall be drawn at a scale no smaller
than 100 feet equals one inch. The overall size of the sheets shall be a
maximum of 24 inches by 36 inches. The final plan shall show the entire
plan or that phase of the plan granted preliminary approval for which
final approval is sought. The final plan shall include the following:
(1) Title block, placed in the lower right hand corner and containing
the following information:
(a) The name and location of the subdivision or land development.
(b) The name and plan book volume and page numbers of any
previously recorded plans.
(c) Name, address, and phone number of the owner of record and
the applicant or developer.
(d) Source of title of land as shown by the books of the County
Recorder.
§ 150-25 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-26
147:318
(e) Name, address, and phone number of the firm that prepared
the plans, and the name, seal, and registration number of the
surveyor or engineer who prepared the plan.
(f) Sheet number, North arrow, and graphic scale.
(2) Tract boundaries, right-of-way lines of streets, easements, and
other right-of-way lines. Tract boundaries shall be determined by
field survey only and shall be balanced and closed. Surveys shall be
prepared in accordance with the standards in Appendix 1.129
(3) Complete curve data for all curves included in the final plan,
including radius, arc length, chord bearing and chord distance.
(4) Location, elevation, type, and size of all monuments and lot line
markers. State whether found, set or proposed.
(5) Approved street names and street right-of-way widths.
(6) Lot numbers, lot dimensions, lot areas in square feet, and building
setback lines.
(7) Tabulation of area data, including lots, parcels, units, areas
dedicated for rights-of-way, and total plan area.
(8) Tax map identification numbers.
(9) House numbers.
(10) Easements and rights-of-way for all public and private
improvements, including widths, purposes, and limitations, if any.
(11) Accurate dimensions, acreage, and purpose of any property to be
reserved as public or common open space or recreation open
space.
(12) Platting of adjacent property and the names of the adjacent
property owners.
(13) Site location map, prepared in accordance with § 150-25D(5) of this
chapter.
(14) Lowest floor elevation, including basement, on all lots in any
identified floodplain area as established in Chapter 84, Floodplain
Management, Chapter 175, Zoning, or the Township building
code,130 and based upon National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.
(15) Notation on the plat of any modifications or waivers granted to the
requirements of this chapter and of any variances or modifications
to the requirements of Chapter 175, Zoning.
129. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
130. Editor's Note: See Ch. 65, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 150-26 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-26
147:319
(16) Other notations on the plat as required by this chapter or the
preliminary approval.
(17) Delineation of all public improvements being dedicated by the plan.
(18) Plans which require access to a street under the jurisdiction of
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation contain a notice in
conformity with Appendix 2131 that, before driveway access is
permitted, a highway occupancy permit is required pursuant to
Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945, known as the "State
Highway Law."
(19) Certification in conformity with Appendix 2 by a surveyor that the
plat represents an actual survey, and that all monuments shown
thereon exist and their location, size, and material are correctly
shown.
(20) A statement in conformity with Appendix 2, duly acknowledged
before an officer (notary public) authorized to take
acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the landowner of the
property, to the effect that the subdivision or land development
shown on the final plan is the act and deed of the landowner, that s/
he is the owner or beneficial owner of the property shown on the
survey and plans, and that s/he desires the same to be recorded as
such.
(21) Certification in conformity with Appendix 2 of the offer of
dedication of applicable required improvements and other
property.
(22) A certificate in conformity with Appendix 2 for approval by the
Supervisors.
(23) Certificates in conformity with Appendix 2 for review by the
Planning Commission and the County Planning Commission.
(24) A certificate in conformity with Appendix 2 for review by the
Township Engineer.
E. Final land development plans. In addition to the information for a final
plan, land development plans shall include the following information:
(1) Building location, floor elevations, and height.
(2) Parking areas, parking lot striping, roads and access drives,
vehicular and pedestrian circulation features (directional flow by
arrows), loading areas, sidewalks, walkways, walking and
pedestrian connections, landscaping and buffer yards.
(3) Stormwater management facilities.
131. Editor's Note: Appendix 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 150-26 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-26
147:320
F. Five copies: construction drawings, two plans at 11 inches by 17 inches
and three plans at 24 inches by 36 inches in size for public and private
improvements. Construction drawings shall be prepared by a
registered engineer and drawn at a scale no smaller than one inch
equals 50 feet on sheets measuring a minimum of 11 inches by 17
inches in size and a maximum 24 inches by 36 inches. An index shall be
provided for multiple sheets. Construction drawings shall show the
following:
(1) Plan and center-line profile drawings of each street in the plan and
extending at least 200 feet beyond the plan. Street profiles shall
include complete vertical curve information.
(2) At least three cross-sections at intervals no greater than 100 feet,
extending at least 50 feet from the street center line to each side,
or extending 25 feet from the right-of-way line to each side,
whichever is greater.
(3) The location of all existing and proposed sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, manholes, catchbasins, and endwalls within the site, and
all necessary extensions thereof beyond the site.
(4) By plan, all pipe sizes, materials, distances, and grades; and top
and invert elevations of all manholes, catchbasins, and endwalls.
Show existing and proposed ground.
(5) All construction details for stormwater management facilities,
including any intake control structures, discharge control
structures, underground storage tanks, sumps, and stormwater
detention basins.
(6) The locations of all other existing and proposed utilities including
gas, water, sanitary and storm sewers, fire hydrants, electric,
telephone, and cable television.
(7) The locations of proposed street lights and construction details.
(8) All easements and rights-of-way for public improvements.
G. Twelve copies: landscaping plan for recreation open space, common
open space, and land development plans. Landscaping plans shall
include the following:
(1) All pertinent information regarding the general site layout, existing
man-made and natural features on the site, proposed grading,
existing vegetation to be retained and other conditions affecting
proposed landscaping.
(2) Names, sizes at time of planting, quantities, and approximate
location of all proposed plant materials. Proposed planting shall be
designated on the plan by symbols appropriately scaled to
represent the sizes of such at time of planting. Planting beds shall
be shown by a clearly delineated border outline. Identification of all
§ 150-26 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-26
147:321
proposed plantings shall be numerically quantified and keyed to
the planting schedule by the first letters of each plant's botanical
name.
(3) Planting schedule shall be provided for all proposed plantings,
including both botanical and common plant names, identification
key, total quantity, size (height, width and caliper) at the time of
planting based on American Association of Nurserymen increments
and minimum size after a three-year growth period.
(4) Proposed buffering, screening, walls and fences, and elevations.
(5) Proposed courtyards, plazas, lanes, walkways, paths, common open
space and recreation areas and facilities, street or site furniture,
ponds, fountains, trellises, pergolas, gazebos, accessory structures,
art and sculpture, common mail boxes, solid waste and recycling
storage facilities, to be located at or above grade. Construction
details, cross sections, elevations, manufacturers specifications,
and materials for all of the above items where applicable.
(6) Notes regarding special maintenance requirements to be
temporarily used during the period of establishment, or
permanently, and the limits of any such special maintenance areas.
H. Twelve copies: lighting plan for land development. The lighting plan
shall show the location and size of all site lighting fixtures whether
freestanding or affixed to buildings, including the delineation of isolux
lighting lines at increments of 0.2, 0.5 and 1.0 footcandle for each
fixture, as applicable, and construction details, manufacturers
specifications, elevations, materials and colors for each type of lighting
fixture proposed.
I. Five copies: final grading plan and final soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan with a narrative consistent with Section 44 of the Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual, as amended, of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, as approved by
the County Conservation District.
J. Five copies: final calculations for design and location of storm drainage
facilities in accordance with Chapter 144, Stormwater Management.
K. Five copies: a proposed traffic warning and regulatory control signage
plan, prepared in accordance with PennDOT Publications 201 and 236.
L. Two copies: permits and approvals. The developer shall submit certified
copies of all permits and approvals required by applicable federal and
state laws and county codes and regulations, including without
limitation the following:
(1) County Conservation District approvals and permits.
(2) Federal Aviation Administration and PennDOT Bureau of Aviation
approvals where required.
§ 150-26 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-26
147:322
(3) Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection approved
Planning Module, sewage facilities permits, general permit,
wetland encroachment permits, stream encroachment/obstruction
permits, etc.
(4) County and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania permits for any
proposed streets or driveways.
(5) Appropriate public sewer provider: an executed sewer service
agreement.
(6) Appropriate public water provider: an executed water service
agreement.
(7) Appropriate utility and transmission companies: approval of
development around rights-of-way and easements.
(8) Appropriate railroad company: approval of any proposed grade
crossings, rail extensions or alterations.
(9) Any other necessary approvals.
M. Two copies: declaration of covenants, grants of easements, conditions,
and restrictions, owners' association bylaws, mechanism for transfer of
title of common areas to all owners.
N. Two copies: calculation of improvement security in accordance with the
requirements of Article V of the MPC and § 150-12J, Improvement
security, of this chapter.
§ 150-26 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-26
147:323

ARTICLE V
Required Improvements and/or Fees
[Amended 10-3-2007 by Ord. No. 113]
§ 150-27. General standards.
All of the required improvements specified in this article shall be
constructed and installed by the developer at no expense to the Township
and in accordance with Chapter 101, Improvement Design Standards,
established by the Township and all other applicable Township, county and
state regulations. Furthermore, all public and private improvements shall
be constructed and installed in accordance with Chapter 101, Improvement
Design Standards.
§ 150-28. Monuments.
Monuments shall be placed in all subdivisions and land developments in
accordance with Chapter 101, Improvement Design Standards, and in
accordance with the design standards in Article VI of this chapter.
§ 150-29. Public improvements.
Public improvements, as defined in § 150-7, shall be provided in each new
subdivision and land development, except those subdivisions classified as
a plat adjustment, in accordance with Chapter 101, Improvement Design
Standards, and in accordance with the design standards in Article VI of this
chapter, subject to the following:
A. Sanitary sewage facilities.
(1) All subdivisions and land developments as further provided in the
following subsections shall be provided with sanitary sewage
facilities which are in accordance with Township Sewage Facilities
Plan and which have been approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, and the Township or
authority or other appropriate body responsible for the collection,
conveyance, and treatment of sanitary sewage.
(2) Where the public sanitary sewer system is within 1,000 lineal feet
of the nearest subdivision site boundary line, the subdivider shall
provide the subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer system to
be connected to the public sanitary sewer system.
(3) Where the public sanitary sewer system is further than 1,000 lineal
feet to the nearest subdivision site boundary line, and in the
judgment of the Supervisors, extension of the sanitary sewer
system to the subdivision will not take place in the foreseeable
future, a sewage disposal system utilizing an interim treatment
plant may be permitted if approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection. If an interim treatment plat is permitted,
§ 150-27 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-29
147:325
equitable agreements, approved by the Township Solicitor, shall be
established concerning the operation of the treatment plant.
(4) If a sewage disposal system utilizing an interim treatment plant is
not feasible, a private sewage disposal system consisting of septic
tanks and tile absorption fields may be permitted if approved in
accordance with the regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection.
B. Stormwater management facilities. Every subdivision or land
development which will affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall
include facilities for the management of runoff to comply with the
Pennsylvania Storm Water Management Act of 1978, P.L. 864 No.
167,132 and Chapter 144, Stormwater Management.
C. Pedestrian and bicycle facilities
(1) Sidewalks. Sidewalks adjacent to and on both sides of streets shall
be required in all commercial subdivisions; residential subdivisions
of 20 lots or more; land developments; and multiple-family
developments; and when required by Chapter 175, Zoning. All
sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 101,
Improvement Design Standards.
(2) Bikeways. Where possible, bikeways should be separated from all
other modes of travel. All bikeways shall be installed in accordance
with Chapter 101, Improvement Design Standards. [Amended
3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
(3) Pedestrian connections. All subdivisions and land developments
shall be required to provide pedestrian connections linking
pedestrian facilities to similar adjacent facilities. [Amended
3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
D. Water. Every lot in a subdivision or land development must have a
suitable water distribution system.
(1) When a public water distribution system is within 1,000 feet from
the subdivision or land development, the applicant shall supply the
subdivision or land development with a water distribution system
that connects to the public water distribution system in accordance
with the provisions and specifications of the appropriate public
water provider.
(2) When no public water distribution system exists within 1,000 feet
from the subdivision or land development, the applicant shall
supply acceptable evidence of the availability of private water for
domestic and fire protection needs. The applicant may be required
to make one or more test wells in the area to be developed if such
evidence is deemed not acceptable. Copies of well logs from said
132. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 150-29 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-29
147:326
§ 150-29.1. Recreation fees.
test wells which are obtained shall include the name and address
of the well driller and shall be submitted with the preliminary
application. If a private water supply is permitted, it must comply
with the standards of § 150-37 of this chapter and all requirements
of the county and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Gas. A gas distribution system shall be required in accordance with the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania unless the energy supply is
to be all electric.
F. Electricity. An electric distribution system shall be required in
accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All
such facilities shall be located underground in accordance with
§ 150-42 of this chapter.
G. Telephone. A telephone distribution system shall be required in
accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All
such facilities shall be located underground in accordance with
§ 150-42 of this chapter.
H. Cable television. A cable television conduit to provide lateral
connection between trunk lines and each residential unit in the plan
shall be required as a public improvement in accordance with §§ 150-29
and 150-42E of this chapter.
I. Landscaping. Street shade trees and other landscaping shall be
required along all public and private streets in accordance with
§ 150-39 of this chapter.
A. Imposition of fee and amount. As a condition precedent to obtaining
approval of any residential subdivision or residential land development,
the applicant/developer for such plan shall pay to the Township a fee of
$800 per dwelling unit.
B. Permitted use of fee payment. Any fees collected hereunder shall be
used solely for the provision of park or recreational facilities accessible
to the new development.
C. Creation of Parks and Recreation Capital Improvements Fund.
(1) The Township shall deposit such fees in an interest-bearing
account, which account will hold funds only for the park and
recreational facilities being added or improved pursuant to the
Parks Plan. Interest earned on such account shall become funds of
such account.
(2) The Township Manager shall establish the Parks and Recreation
Capital Improvements Fund. Recreation fees shall be deposited
into the fund. The fund shall be used solely for the purpose of
providing land and facilities for recreation uses in the Township.
§ 150-29 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-29.1
147:327
D. Dedication of land in lieu of fee.
(1) The applicant/developer may provide the dedication of land for
open space and/or recreation facilities to the Township, or to a
homeowner's association or other responsible party in lieu of the
above-described fee for land development projects which have 20
acres in area or greater.
(2) An applicant/developer may offer for public dedication of land
suitable for parks, playgrounds and other recreational use and
open space, or, upon agreement between the Township and the
developer, the construction of recreational facilities, the private
reservation of land or a combination thereof for park, recreation
and open space purposes. The determination as to whether
dedication of land shall be to the Township as public land, or to a
private homeowners' association or other responsible entity, shall
be at the sole discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
(3) Such dedication and/or agreements are to service the future
population of the Township and to protect sensitive areas such as
steep slopes, floodplains, or special scenic areas. All such
requirements shall conform to the authority conferred in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.)
and shall constitute a condition precedent to the preliminary or
final plan approval.
(4) As a condition precedent to final approval of any subdivision or land
development intended for residential use greater than 20 acres of
land, the developer shall dedicate for public use recreation open
space meeting the design standards of § 150-29B(5) of this chapter.
(5) Every subdivision or land development for residential purposes
shall contain open space for recreational, scenic or aesthetic
purposes according to the following:
(a) Area dedicated for common open space. No less than 15% of
the total site area shall be set aside for common open space,
and not less than 50% of the identified common open space
shall be contiguous and shall be developed as active or passive
recreation areas accessible to residents of the Township.
(b) Minimum size: shall be 2,185 square feet (.050 acres) per
dwelling unit.
(c) Vehicular access: shall be easily and safely accessible, have
adequate ingress and egress including meeting applicable site
distance and other standard requirements, and have a
minimum of 250 feet of frontage on a public or proposed public
street.
(d) Location: shall be centrally located within the development
site, on one parcel of land with no intervening land.
§ 150-29.1 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-29.1
147:328
(e) Size and shape: size and shape shall be suitable for
development as a park, and no single side of the land shall
amount to more than 35% of the perimeter.
(f) Maximum finished slope and land disturbance: the land
proposed for parks, playgrounds or other recreational use shall
have a slope from 0% to 4%. Land in its natural state shall have
a slope no greater than 8%.
(g) Pedestrian access: shall be accessible to each dwelling unit in
the development via pedestrian easement or dedicated rightof-
way within which sidewalks shall be built by developer prior
to acceptance by the Township. Dedicated right-of-way for
access shall not be included in the calculation of the required
open space area and shall be graded in a manner suitable for
pedestrian access.
(h) Utilities and vegetation: shall be in reasonable proximity to
utilities including water, sanitary sewer, and electric and shall
have established vegetation thereon.
(i) Use limitations: shall not be burdened with an undue number
of restrictions, such as mining conditions, overhead or
underground utilities, stormwater management facilities or
liens of other encumbrances which would prevent, limit or
restrict its use in any way. Not more than 15% of the land can
be encumbered by utility easements other than those servicing
the parcel.
(j) Wetlands: shall not include areas defined as wetlands by either
the Army Corps of Engineers or the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection.
(k) Floodplains: shall not include any areas defined as floodplains
including floodway and floodway fringe areas, by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(l) Timing of dedication: shall be deeded to the Township,
homeowners' association or other responsible party at the time
of recording of the final plat. Delivery of a deed or deeds
describing the land proposed for dedication shall be completed
prior to recording of the plan. For phased plans, all land to be
set aside shall be situated in the first phase, unless otherwise
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(m) Conformity with Township Comprehensive Parks Recreation
and Open Space Plan. All land proposed for dedication as
recreation open space shall be suitable for the use intended
and be located and designed in accordance with the Plan.
§ 150-29.1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-29.1
147:329
(n) Modifications. The Supervisors may waive any of the above
criteria if such land fits within the Township's Comprehensive
Plan for parks and greenways.
E. Nonexemption from payment. Developments less than 20 acres of land
will not be exempt from paying a fee to Middlesex.
F. Establishing a fee amount and authorization to revise fee amount. The
fee per lot or dwelling unit in lieu of dedication of land shall be $800,
which amount may be revised from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
G. Payment of fee. When a recreation fee is required, final approval of a
final application shall be conditioned upon the execution of an
agreement between the Township and the applicant, on a form provided
by the Township, providing for payment of the recreation fee at the time
of issuance of a building permit for development pursuant to the final
plat as approved, or the applicant shall pay the recreation fees prior to
release of the final plat for recording.
H. Refunds. Upon request of any persons who paid any fee under this
section, the Township shall refund such fee, plus interest accumulated
thereon from the date of payment, if the Township had failed to utilize
the fee paid for the purposes set forth in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code within three years from the date such fee
was paid. If the Township does not use the recreation fees to provide
land and facilities for recreation use within three years from the date of
receipt of the recreation fees, the Township shall refund the recreation
fees plus interest earned from the date of payment approved.
§ 150-29.1 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-29.1
147:330
ARTICLE VI
Design Standards
§ 150-30. Application of standards.
§ 150-31. Official Map.
The design of all subdivisions and land developments shall be subject to the
reservations established by the adoption of an Official Map by the Township.
§ 150-32. Natural features.
§ 150-33. Lots.
A. Any application for development shall conform to the principles and
standards of design set forth in this chapter.
B. The standards specified in this chapter are minimum design
requirements.
A. Preservation required. Existing natural features such as trees, steep
slopes, watercourses and historic spots shall be preserved as a
conservation measure except to the extent that their removal or
modification is functionally related to the harmonious design of the
subdivision or land development.
B. Steep slope disturbance. The maximum percentage of lot area or site
area of a development which may be disturbed, graded and stripped of
vegetation during development and construction of public and private
improvements with the exception of incidental grading for structure
construction shall conform with the requirements of Chapter 175,
Zoning.
C. Identified floodplain areas. All development in identified floodplain
areas shall conform with the requirements of Chapter 84, Floodplain
Management, and Chapter 175, Zoning.
D. Wetlands and watercourses. All development affecting wetlands and
watercourses shall conform with state and federal wetland regulations.
A. Conformity with Chapter 175, Zoning. Proposed subdivisions and land
developments shall comply with lot area, width and yard and perimeter
setback requirements and all other requirements of Chapter 175,
Zoning.
B. Lot arrangement. The arrangement of lots within the development shall
promote the preservation of the natural conditions of the site, including
but not limited to, existing contours, watercourses and environmentally
sensitive areas.
C. Access. Every lot shall be provided with access adequate for the use of
public safety vehicles and other public and private purposes and shall
§ 150-30 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-33
147:331
§ 150-34. Phased development.
be served by a public or private street improved in accordance with
this article and Chapter 101, Improvement Design Standards, that is
connected to the general street system of the Township.
D. Access to arterial and collector streets. No lot shall be provided with
direct vehicle access to an arterial or collector street unless specifically
approved by the Supervisors when no alternative is possible. Normally,
only one street, driveway or point of vehicle access shall be permitted
from a subdivision onto an arterial or collector street; however, two or
more streets, driveways or points of vehicle access may be permitted if
they will improve the traffic circulation and safety in the area.
Restrictions may be imposed on additional street, driveway or point of
vehicle access such as limited turn movements and shared access
between adjacent uses.
E. Common driveways. Common driveways are encouraged and, in some
instances, may be required in order to reduce the number of access
points to public streets. Common driveways shall require the recording
of a joint access and maintenance easement agreement or other
acceptable measure of ensuring the perpetual maintenance of the
common driveway.
F. Service street. A service street may be required by the Planning
Commission when the lots of a proposed residential or commercial
subdivision abut a collector or arterial street and when a potential
traffic hazard exists.
G. Side lot lines. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to
straight streets and on radial lines to curved streets wherever feasible.
Pointed or very irregular lots shall be avoided unless such variations
shall improve the overall neighborhood structure and design.
H. Through lots. Through lots shall be avoided except where essential to
provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to
overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
I. Large-lot subdivisions. When a tract is subdivided into lots larger than
required by Chapter 175, Zoning, for building lots and there is no
covenant preventing resubdivision of the lots, such lots or parcels shall,
to the benefit of the Township, be so arranged as to permit a logical
location and opening of future streets and resubdividing with provision
for adequate utility connections for each subdivision.
J. Residual tracts. No tract of land that is not buildable in accordance with
Chapter 175, Zoning, shall be permitted. All portions of a plan shall be
incorporated into existing or proposed lots unless special usage is
applied as part of a land development proposal.
A. Preliminary plan approval to include all phases. Where an applicant
proposes phased development of a project over time, the applicant shall
§ 150-33 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-34
147:332
§ 150-35. Transportation network.
comply with all requirements for preliminary plan approval for all
phases except where application content requirements have been
waived in accordance with § 150-4 of this chapter.
B. Residential subdivision minimum phase size. Each section in any
residential subdivision or land development, except for the final phase,
shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number of dwelling units as
depicted on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser percentage is
approved by the Supervisors at their discretion.
C. Independence of phases. Each phase of a development shall include the
required improvements necessary to serve that phase of development
as if it were the final phase of the development, independent of any
proposed future phase of development.
A. Purpose. Transportation networks shall have a variety of types of
design components that reduce travel distance, provide multiple travel
routes, and promote the use of alternate modes including bicycle,
pedestrian and transit routes throughout the Township. In order for the
transportation network to provide safe and efficient travel to
automobiles, bicyclists and pedestrians, design elements must
consistently be applied to calm automobile traffic.
B. Streets.
(1) General. All streets shown on any plan shall be of sufficient width
and proper grade and shall be so located as to accommodate the
probable volume of traffic thereon, facilitate fire protection,
provide access of fire-fighting equipment to buildings and provide a
coordinated system of streets conforming to the Township
Comprehensive Plan, Official Map and other transportation plans of
the Township, county and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) Impact fee. Impact fees must be paid in accordance with all
applicable Township ordinances and the Township Transportation
Capital Improvements Plan and Program.
(3) Street intersections
(a) General. Street segments shall be interrupted by intersections
designed to disperse traffic flow and reduce motor vehicle
speeds.
(b) Streets shall be laid out so as to provide a minimum of 100 feet
of street that intersects at acute angles between 80° and 90°.
No more than two streets shall intersect at any one point.
(c) Termination. In order to calm traffic flows, street intersections
shall be designed to terminate to a recreation open space,
§ 150-34 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-35
147:333
public access easement, building or other similar landmark or
feature.
(d) Spacing. The minimum distance between center lines of
parallel or approximately parallel streets intersecting a cross
street from the opposite direction shall be as follows:
[1] Local streets: 100 feet
[2] Collector streets: 300 feet.
[3] Arterial streets: 800 feet.
(4) Street connectivity.
(a) Multiple connections. All local and collector street segments
over 800 feet in length shall be intersected by a minimum of
two local and/or collector streets except where impracticable
due to topography, existing development or existing natural
features.
(b) Connections to adjacent land uses. Except where impracticable
due to topography, existing development or existing natural
features, streets shall be extended to the property boundary
line of the site along all existing and future similar or
compatible adjacent land uses at intervals not to exceed 1,500
linear feet for each direction (north, south, east and west) in
which the development abuts similar or compatible adjacent
land uses.
[1] Reserve strip. Where future street connections are
provided, a reserve strip shall be required across the end
of the street designed in accordance with Chapter 101,
Improvement Design Standards. Said reserve strip shall be
dedicated to the Township.
(c) Where streets continue into abutting municipalities and/or
abutting developments, the applicant shall coordinate the
design of the street with both municipalities in order to ensure
uniform cartway widths, pavement cross-sections, and other
public improvements. When, in such instance, street design
criteria conflict, the street shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with this chapter and Chapter 101, Improvement
Design Standards.
(d) Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs shall only be recommended for
approval where existing contours and/or lot line configurations
offer no other practical alternatives for connections or through
traffic.
[1] Access. Cul-de-sacs shall be connected to a through public
or private street that has direct access to a local, collector
or arterial street.
§ 150-35 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-35
147:334
[2] Length. Cul-de-sacs shall be a minimum of 250 feet and a
maximum of 600 feet in length, serve a maximum of 16
dwelling units and be constructed in accordance with
Chapter 101, Improvement Design Standards.
[3] Turnaround. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall have an outside
curb radius of not less than 40 feet and a right-of-way
radius of not less than 50 feet. The maximum grade of the
turnaround portion of the cul-de-sac shall be 5%.
[4] Landscaping. In order to reduce impervious surface area,
cul-de-sacs shall be provided with a pervious landscaped
island, 10 feet in diameter, in accordance with Chapter
101, Improvement Design Standards.
[5] Pedestrian connections. A ten-foot-wide pedestrian
connection, constructed in accordance with Chapter 101,
Improvement Design Standards, shall be provided from
the end of each cul-de-sac to the nearest street or property
line of adjacent property.
(5) Functional classification of streets.
(a) The design of a street system shall include the classification of
streets based on their functions and projected traffic as
determined by the Township Engineer.
(b) Each street shall be designed for its entire length to meet the
standards for its classification.
(c) The classification of each street shall be based upon the
projection of traffic volumes 10 years after its completion.
Traffic volumes shall be calculated in accordance with trip
generation rates published in the most recent edition of the
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation
Manual or alternate source acceptable to the Township
Engineer and shall consider all traffic likely to use each street.
(6) Street design standards.
(a) Minimum right-of-way and cartway widths shall not be less
than indicated in Table 1; however, the required width of a
right-of-way or cartway may be increased where anticipated
traffic flow warrants it, to provide for bicycle or pedestrian
facilities, or to provide for drainage easements needed
reasonably parallel such thoroughfares. Such increased width
will be established by the Supervisors upon recommendation
by the Township Engineer.
§ 150-35 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-35
147:335
Table 1
Right-of-Way and Cartway Widths
Street Type
Minimum
Right-of-Way Width
(feet)
Minimum Cartway
Width
(feet)
Arterial 70 - 120 40 - 70
Collector 60 - 80 36 - 48
Local 42 - 56 22 - 32
(b) Street grade and curb radius. Street grade and curb radius
shall be in accordance with the following:
[1] Maximum grade.
[a] Arterial: 7.5%.
[b] Collector, commercial: 10%.
[c] Collector, residential: 12%.
[d] Local, commercial: 10%.
[e] Local, residential: 12%.
[2] Minimum curb radius.
[a] Arterial: 40 feet.
[b] Collector, commercial: 40 feet.
[c] Collector, residential: 40 feet.
[d] Local, commercial: 40 feet.
[e] Local, residential: 20 feet.
(c) Maximum grade approaching intersections. All streets shall be
designed so that the maximum grade for the 25 feet before
intersections shall not exceed 3%.
(d) The streets shall be graded to the grades and dimensions
shown on plans and profiles and approved by the Supervisors
and shall be in accordance with Chapter 101, Improvement
Design Standards.
(e) Obstructions/clear sight triangle. No fences, hedges,
shrubbery, walls, planting or other obstructions, except for
trees and grass, shall be located within the right-of-way. A clear
sight triangle shall be maintained at all intersections in
accordance with Chapter 101, Improvement Design Standards.
§ 150-35 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-35
147:336
(f) Reverse curves shall have a minimum tangent distance
between the curves of not less than specified in Chapter 101,
Improvement Design Standards.
(g) Vertical curves shall have a minimum sight distance of not less
than that which is specified in Chapter 101, Improvement
Design Standards.
(7) Street names and signs.
(a) All streets shall be named with a name which is approved by
the Supervisors and which may not be confused with an
existing street name.
(b) Any subdivider or developer shall be required to provide and to
install street name, regulatory and warning signs of the type
approved by the Township on such streets and in such places
as the Township shall designate.
(c) Street name signs approved by the Township shall be required
at all intersections.
C. Sidewalks.
(1) General. All sidewalks shall be located within a right-of-way or
public access easement and constructed in accordance with
Chapter 101, Improvement Design Standards.
(2) Width. The width of all sidewalks shall be as follows: [Amended
3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
(a) Sidewalks along arterial and collector streets shall be a
minimum of six (6) feet wide and shall be buffered from the
street by an eight-foot-wide strip consisting of grass or
landscape stones.
(b) Sidewalks along local streets shall be a minimum of four (4)
feet wide and shall be buffered from the street by a six-footwide
strip consisting of grass or landscape stones.
D. Bikeways.
(1) General. Where bikeways are provided they shall be located within
a right-of-way or public access easement and constructed in
accordance with Chapter 101, Improvement Design Standards.
Except where impracticable, bikeways shall be separated from
other modes of travel including pedestrians. [Amended
3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
(2) Width. All bikeways shall have a minimum width of six (6) feet per
travel lane where adjacent to a street, or five (5) feet per travel lane
where not on a street.
E. Public transportation.
§ 150-35 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-35
147:337
§ 150-36. Easements.
Easements for utilities and drainage shall have a minimum width of 20 feet.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be provided
a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way of width sufficient for the
purpose
§ 150-37. Water supply systems.
§ 150-38. Sanitary sewage facilities.
(1) Bus. Where a proposed development is adjacent to or within a
reasonable distance of collector or arterial streets where transit
service is provided or may be provided in the future, the street
design requirements shall be adjusted for transit passenger waiting
shelters.
(2) Rail transit facility or other exclusive transit right-of-way. Where a
development site is adjacent to or includes rail transit facilities or
other exclusive transit right-of-way, the applicant shall consult with
the appropriate transit authority to determine whether any special
design features concerning the exclusive transit facilities will be
required.
A. The water supply system for the subdivision or land development shall
meet the design standards and requirements of all appropriate boards
or bodies having jurisdiction.
B. If a private water supply is permitted, it must comply with the
standards and requirements of the county and the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
C. If a private water supply is permitted, individual private wells shall be
located at least 25 feet from the property lines, and shall not be located
within the floor plan of any building and also shall maintain the
minimum horizontal isolation distances specified in Pennsylvania Code
Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 73, Standards for Sewage
Disposal Facilities.
A. No application for preliminary approval of a plan of subdivision or land
development shall be approved unless a complete Sewage Facilities
Planning Module, as required for the proposed development, has been
submitted to the Township.
B. No final plat shall be approved or recorded until the plans and
specifications for sanitary sewage facilities have been approved and
permits issued, as required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
C. All sanitary sewage facilities for the subdivision or land development
shall be constructed in accordance with the design standards and
requirements of all public boards or bodies having jurisdiction.
§ 150-35 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-38
147:338
§ 150-39. Landscaping; street shade trees.
When street shade trees are required or proposed by the developer, they
shall be installed in accordance with the following standards:
§ 150-40. Fire hydrants.
In all plans where public water is provided, fire hydrants shall be installed
at accessible appropriate locations to give adequate fire protection as
outlined by the National Board of Fire Underwriters.
§ 150-41. Grading and erosion and sedimentation control.
Land proposed for subdivision and land development shall not be developed
or changed by grading, excavating or by the removal or destruction of
the natural topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover except in conformity
with Chapter 89, Grading, Excavation and Fill, Chapter 144, Stormwater
Management, and with the rules and regulations of the commonwealth. The
erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the County
Planning Commission and the County Conservation District for review and
approval unless a determination has been made by the County Planning
Commission and the County Conservation District that a plan is not
required.
§ 150-42. Utilities.
D. When a community sanitary sewerage facility is proposed to serve a
development, a point of connection to the sanitary sewer shall be
provided for each lot. Sanitary sewers shall also be extended to the
perimeter of the subdivision or land development to allow service to
adjacent properties.
A. Location. Street shade trees shall be installed on both sides of the street
right-of-way except along a cul-de-sac.
B. Spacing. Street shade trees shall be planted at a maximum spacing
interval of one tree per 40 feet of street right-of-way and a minimum of
one tree per lot.
C. Quality and size. All trees planted within a street right-of-way shall be
balled and burlapped, single-stemmed trunks, branches no lower than
six feet above ground and no less than 2 1/2 inches in diameter
measured six inches above the established ground level.
D. Type. No one street right-of-way tree species may make up more than
30% of the planting stock of the development. The Supervisors may
provide a listing of acceptable trees in Chapter 101, Improvement
Design Standards.
A. Every lot in a subdivision or land development shall be capable of being
served by utilities, and the necessary easements shall be provided.
§ 150-38 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-42
147:339
§ 150-43. Permanent monuments.
B. Electric, gas and other utility distribution lines shall be installed
underground within public rights-of-way or within property easements,
subject to the laws of the commonwealth and except where
development is in the identified floodplain area and the requirements of
§ 150-44F of this chapter supersede this requirement for underground
installation.
C. To the fullest extent possible, underground utility lines located in street
rights-of-way shall not be installed beneath existing or proposed paved
areas and in any case shall be installed prior to the placement of any
paving.
D. If a lot abuts an easement or right-of-way with existing overhead
electrical, telephone, television, or other service lines, the lot may
utilize the overhead lines, but service connections shall be installed
underground. Where a subdivision or land development requires a road
widening or service extension which necessitates the replacement or
relocation of overhead lines, replacement or relocation shall be
underground.
E. Cable television lines. All cable television lines and wires shall be
installed underground in any subdivision or land development. The
design standards for such underground cable television lines shall be in
accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
federal laws. Cable shall be installed at a minimum depth of one foot.
A. Placement.
(1) Permanent monuments shall be installed at or near the beginning
and ends of tangent sections of all streets to provide permanent
horizontal control and shall be installed after all the grading of lots
has been completed and referenced. Perimeter monuments shall be
installed as specified by the Township Engineer. Perimeter
monuments shall be set prior to construction.
(2) All lot corner markers set shall be noted on the subdivision plan.
(3) The location of monuments shall be identified on the Pennsylvania
Plane Coordinate System - NAD 83 or 27, where feasible.
(4) All monuments and markers shall be placed by a surveyor prior to
approval of the final plan, or an improvement security sufficient to
cover their cost of installation shall be provided.
B. Materials. Monuments and markers shall be constructed in accordance
with Chapter 101, Improvement Design Standards.
§ 150-42 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-44
147:340
§ 150-44. Standards for development in identified floodplain areas.
In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, development in any
identified floodplain area shall comply with the following:
A. Within any FW (Floodway Zoning District), as established in Chapter
175, Zoning, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Any new construction, development, use, activity or encroachment
that would cause any increase in flood heights shall be prohibited.
(2) No new construction or development shall be allowed unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management.
B. Within any FA (General Floodplain Zoning District), as established in
Chapter 175, Zoning, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) New construction and/or development shall be prohibited within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse unless all required federal and state permits have
been secured.
(2) No activity which would cause any increase in flood heights shall be
permitted within a floodway area delineated by an applicant.
C. Fill. Fill, where used, shall:
(1) Extend at least 15 feet laterally beyond all points of the building.
(2) Be comprised only of soil or small rock materials and shall not
include organic waste.
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring or settling.
(4) Have a slope no greater than 50%.
(5) Not adversely affect adjacent properties.
D. Drainage. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow
of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner and in accordance
with Chapter 144, Stormwater Management. The system shall ensure
proper drainage along streets and provide positive drainage away from
buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of
excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
E. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and
systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
§ 150-44 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-44
147:341
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area, except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it or
contamination from it during a flood.
F. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines and electrical,
telephone and cable television systems shall be located, elevated
(where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment
during a flood.
G. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be not more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
H. Each lot within any identified floodplain area, as established in Chapter
175, Zoning, intended for residential structures shall be capable of
providing a building site with a lowest floor elevation (including
basement) at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year flood
elevation as defined in the FIS.
§ 150-44 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-44
147:342
ARTICLE VII
Mobile Home Parks
§ 150-45. Relationship to other requirements.
Mobile home park subdivisions and developments shall comply with all
applicable requirements of this chapter, the county, and the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. Where there is a conflict between the requirement of this
article and other articles of this chapter, the requirement of this article shall
govern.
§ 150-46. Additional application requirements.
The final application shall include copies of all required permits issued by
the county or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the proposed mobile
home park.
§ 150-47. Stormwater management.
§ 150-48. Landscape screening.
All mobile home parks located adjacent to industrial or commercial land
uses shall be required to provide screening so as to block out the view of
such areas. Such screening may be of fencing or of natural growth or a
combination of fences and natural growth. All such screening shall be of a
minimum height of six feet and shall be placed on the property boundary
line separating the park and such adjacent nonresidential uses.
§ 150-49. Park street system.
A. The ground surface in all parts of every mobile home park shall be
graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe efficient
manner, in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 144,
Stormwater Management, and the Township Engineer.
B. Surface water collectors and other bodies of standing water capable of
breeding mosquitoes and other insects shall be eliminated or controlled
in a manner approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
A. A safe and convenient vehicular access shall be provided from abutting
public streets. Where feasible, as determined by the Township, two
park entrances shall be provided.
B. The entrance roads connecting the park with a public street shall have
a minimum pavement width of 34 feet and shall have adequate street
lighting.
C. Other surfaced roadways shall be 24 feet wide, plus curbs, to
accommodate anticipated traffic, and shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
§ 150-45 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-49
147:343
§ 150-50. Sidewalks.
§ 150-51. Mobile home lots.
Each mobile home lot shall be improved with a mobile home foundation
which shall be in accordance with the Township building code.133 Anchors
or tie-downs, such as cast-in-place concrete "dead men," eyelets embedded
in concrete, screw augers or arrowhead anchors, shall be placed at least
at each corner of the mobile home stand, and each device shall be able to
sustain a minimum load of 4,800 pounds.
§ 150-52. Water supply.
(1) Minimum right-of-way width shall be 50 feet.
(2) Cul-de-sac streets shall be provided at the closed end with a
turnaround having a cartway outside diameter of at least 50 feet.
D. All parks shall be furnished with lighting units so spaced and equipped
with luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will provide
average levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians and
vehicles at night.
A. All parks shall provide safe, convenient, sidewalks of adequate width
for intended use, which are durable and convenient to maintain.
Sudden and abrupt changes in alignment and gradient shall be
prohibited.
B. Where pedestrian traffic is concentrated and a common walkway
system is provided, such common walkway shall have a minimum width
of four feet.
C. All mobile home lots shall be connected to common walks or to streets,
or to driveways or parking spaces connecting to a paved street. Such
individual walks shall have a minimum width of four feet.
A. General requirements. An adequate supply of water shall be provided
for mobile homes, service buildings and other accessory facilities as
required by this chapter. Where a public water supply system of
satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available, the connection
shall be made thereto, and its supply shall be used exclusively. Where
public water is not available, the development of a private water supply
system shall be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or the Township, whichever has jurisdiction.
In any instance where public sewer and water facilities are available
and are capable of being extended to the development site, the
developer shall connect the project to such facilities. If the cost of the
connector facility or line is more than the cost for the installation of an
interim treatment facility, the developer shall not be required to
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 65, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 150-49 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-52
147:344
connect to the public system. Central water service shall be supplied to
each structure to be erected in the development. A fire hydrant shall be
provided within 600 feet of each structure.
B. Construction specifications. Water distribution systems shall be
constructed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
appropriate water provider.
§ 150-52 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-52
147:345

ARTICLE VIII
Violations, Remedies and Appeals
§ 150-53. Preventive remedies.
§ 150-54. Enforcement remedies; violations and penalties.
A. Court actions. In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute
and maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain,
correct, or abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to
recover damages, and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building,
structure, or premises.
B. Permit denials and conditions. The Township may refuse to issue any
permit or grant any approval necessary to further improve or develop
any real property which has been developed or which has resulted from
a subdivision or land development in violation of this chapter. As an
additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval for the development of any such real property, the Township
may require compliance with the conditions that would have been
applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an interest
in such real property. This applies to any of the following applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
C. No exemption. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument
of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or
transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such
penalties or from the remedies provided in this section.
A. Initial jurisdiction. District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction in
proceedings brought under this section.
B. Civil enforcement action. When the Township finds that any person,
partnership, or corporation has violated any provision of this chapter or
any condition imposed by the Township pursuant to this chapter or has
proceeded without satisfying the requirements of this chapter, the
Township may institute civil enforcement proceedings.
§ 150-53 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 150-54
147:347
§ 150-55. Appeals.
Appeals from any action or decision under this chapter shall proceed in
accordance with the MPC.134
C. Judgment. Where the District Justice finds the person, partnership, or
corporation liable for such violations, the person, partnership, or
corporation shall pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred by the Township. No
judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice.
D. Enforcement of judgment. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgement, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure.
E. Continuing violations. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a
good-faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the
chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice. Thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
F. Order of stay tolling per-diem judgments. The Court of Common Pleas,
upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the
per-diem judgment pending a final adjudication of a violation and
judgment.
G. Enforcement by Township. Nothing in this section shall be construed or
interpreted to grant to any person or entity other than the Township the
right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
134. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 150-54 MIDDLESEX CODE § 150-55
147:348
Chapter 155
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rental occupancy reports — See Ch. 128.
§ 150-55 TAXATION § 150-55
155:349

ARTICLE I
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 2-5-1992]
§ 155-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Middlesex Township Per Capita Tax
Ordinance No. 29 of 1992."
§ 155-2. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of the Local Tax Enabling
Act, Act of 1965, P.L. 1257, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 155-3. Establishment of tax.
A per capita tax of $5 is hereby levied and assessed upon each resident of
the Township of Middlesex over the age of 18 years and under the age of 62
years.
§ 155-4. Definitions.
Unless otherwise stated, the following words or terms shall have the
meanings stated:
INHABITANT — Any person domiciled within the Township of Middlesex,
Butler County, Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any natural person.
RESIDENT — Any person residing in the Township of Middlesex, Butler
County, Pennsylvania, on the first day of the tax year.
TAX COLLECTOR — The person or persons designated by the Middlesex
Township Board of Supervisors to collect or receive the current, prior and/
or delinquent taxes imposed by this article.
TAXPAYER — Includes any person required to pay a per capita tax.
§ 155-5. Tax year.
The taxing year under this article shall be from the first day of January to
the 31st day of December of each calendar year.
§ 155-6. Determination of age.
A person shall be deemed liable to pay the tax if his 18th birthday occurs
prior to the first day of the taxing year. A person shall be deemed to be
exempt from the tax if his 62nd birthday occurs before the first day of the
taxing year.
§ 155-7. Exemptions.
§ 155-1 TAXATION § 155-7
155:351
§ 155-8. Exoneration policy.
The Tax Collector may be exonerated from collecting taxes from:
§ 155-9. Payment discounts and penalties.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of the tax under this article shall be
entitled to a discount of 2% on the amount of such tax upon making payment
of the whole amount thereof within two months after the date of the tax
notice. All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of any such taxes
imposed against them for four months after the date of the notice shall be
charged a penalty of 10%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes by
A. Any person whose total income from all sources is less than the
maximum amount of the exemption permitted by Section 2 of the Local
Tax Enabling Act, 1965, December 31, P.L. 1257, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 6902, shall be exempted from the duty to pay the tax established by
this article. The Tax Collector shall establish forms and procedures for
the submission of applications for exemption as provided by Act No. 309
of 1974.
B. The Tax Collector shall make the determination of exemption as
provided by Act No. 309, Section 202.
C. Any person aggrieved by the determination of the Tax Collector may
appeal such determination to the Board of Supervisors pursuant to the
Local Agency Law.135
D. The Tax Collector shall report to the Board of Supervisors the names
and addresses of the persons exempt from the tax annually.
A. Persons who are exempt from payment of the tax by reason of age or
income as defined in this article.
B. Persons for whom the payment of the tax is a hardship by reason of
physical disability where medical evidence of incapacitation is
provided; persons mentally retarded or persons living in a nursing
home.
C. Persons on active military duty.
D. Persons who have paid a per capita tax to another municipality other
than a school district where proof of payment is provided by said
person.
E. Mistakes, death and removals, provided that all provisions of law have
been complied with by the Tax Collector.
F. Persons age 18, 19 or 20, provided they provide verification they are
full-time students.
135. Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 and 751 et seq.
§ 155-7 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-9
155:352
the Tax Collector and collected by the Tax Collector. The Tax Collector shall
furnish a receipt to every person paying said tax.
§ 155-10. Collection of tax.
All taxes levied under this article shall be collected by the Tax Collector
in the manner authorized by the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of 1965,
December 31, P.L. 1257, as it is now or may hereafter be amended, 53 P.S.
§ 6901 et seq.; and the Local Tax Collection Law, Act of 1945, May 25, P.L.
1050, as it is now or may hereafter be amended, § 72 P.S. 5511.1 et seq.
§ 155-11. Interest and penalties for nonpayment.
Any person failing to carry out any provision of this article, or failing,
neglecting or refusing to any tax or penalties, shall be liable to the following
penalties:
§ 155-12. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other penalty provided for in this article, any person
failing to carry out any provisions of this article, or failing, neglecting or
refusing to pay any tax or penalties imposed herein within a period of one
year after the due date of the tax as stated in the tax notice, shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the Township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith. The failure of anyone required to file a return to
receive or procure a return form shall not excuse him from making a return
or from paying the tax.
A. Interest. Interest shall accrue at the rate of 6% per annum upon per
capita taxes which remain due and unpaid, computed from the date on
the tax notice as the due date for payment without penalty.
B. Penalty. A penalty of 10% shall be imposed upon per capita taxes which
remain due and unpaid, computed from the date stated in the tax notice
for the assessment of penalty.
C. Costs of collection. Any person failing to pay the tax due shall be liable
for all costs of collection.
§ 155-9 TAXATION § 155-13
155:353
§ 155-13. Continuation of tax.
The tax imposed herein shall continue in force on a calendar- or fiscal-year
basis, as the case may be, without annual reenactment unless the rate of tax
is subsequently changed.
§ 155-13 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-13
155:354
ARTICLE II
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
[Adopted 7-16-2003 by Ord. No. 95]
§ 155-14. Title; continuation of tax.
This article shall be known as the "Middlesex Township Earned Income Tax
Ordinance." The provisions hereof shall become effective on the first day of
July 2003 A.D. and the tax shall continue in force on a calendar-year or a
taxpayer fiscal-year basis, without annual reenactment, unless the rate of
the tax is subsequently changed. Changes in rate become effective on the
date specified in the amending ordinance.
§ 155-15. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901, as amended.
§ 155-16. Definitions and interpretation.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Middlesex.
BUSINESS — Any enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking
of an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit whether by a person, partnership, association, or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of
abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. Domicile is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt
some other permanent home. In the case of businesses, or associations, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the
place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation including salaries, wages,
commissions, bonuses and incentive payments whether based on profits
or otherwise, fees, tips and similar remuneration for services rendered,
whether in cash or in property, such as:
§ 155-14 TAXATION § 155-16
155:355
Items of remuneration received, directly or through an agent, in cash
or in property, based on payroll periods or piecework, for services
rendered as an employee or casual employee, agent or officer of an
individual, partnership, business or nonprofit corporation, or
government agency. These items include salaries, wages, commissions,
bonuses, stock options, incentive payments, fees, tips, dismissal,
termination or severance payments, early retirement incentive
payments and other additional compensation contingent upon
retirement, including payments in excess of the scheduled or customary
salaries provided for those who are not terminating service, rewards,
vacation and holiday pay, paid leaves of absence, payments for unused
vacation or sick leave, tax assumed by the employer, signing bonuses,
amounts received under employee benefit plans and deferred
compensation arrangements.
A.
Scholarships, stipends, grants and fellowships, if services are rendered
in connection therewith.
When used in this subsection, the following words have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
FELLOWSHIP STIPEND or FELLOWSHIP AWARD — A fixed
sum of money paid periodically for services or to defray
expenses to a graduate student who is enrolled in a graduate
degree program at a university.
(a)
GRANT-IN-AID-FINANCIAL — Support given by a public
agency or private institution to an individual to further the
individual's education.
(b)
POSTDOCTORAL RESEARCH FELLOWSHIP STIPEND or
POSTDOCTORAL RESEARCH FELLOWSHIP AWARD — A fixed
sum of money paid periodically for service or to defray
expenses of an individual who has obtained a doctoral degree
at a university and in conducting research at a research
facility.
(c)
(d) SCHOLARSHIP — A grant-in-aid to a student.
(1)
B.
Other forms of remuneration characterized as taxable compensation
by the Tax Reform Code of 1971, as amended, and its implementing
regulations, as amended, and any future amendments to said code and/
or its implementing regulations.
C.
Compensation does not include:
Periodic payments for sickness and disability other than the regular
wages received during a period of sickness or disability; or
(1)
Disability, retirement or other payments arising under workmen's
compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar
legislation by any government; or
(2)
D.
§ 155-16 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-16
155:356
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
INCOME TAX OFFICER or OFFICER — The person, public employee or
private agency designated by governing body to collect and administer the
tax on earned income and net profits.
NET PROFITS — Any of the following:
Payments commonly recognized as old age or retirement benefits
paid to persons retired after reaching a specific age or after a
stated period of employment; or
(3)
Payments commonly known as public assistance, or unemployment
compensation payments by any governmental agency; or
(4)
(5) Payments to reimburse actual expenses; or
Payments made by employers or labor unions for employee benefit
programs covering hospitalization, sickness, disability or death,
supplemental employment benefits or strike benefits, subject to
certain conditions identified in the Tax Reform Code of 1971, as
amended, and its implementing regulations; or
(6)
Any compensation received by United States servicemen serving in
a combat zone; or
(7)
Payments received by a foster parent for in-home care of foster
children from an agency of the commonwealth or a political
subdivision thereof, or an organization tax exempt from federal
tax under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954,
which is licensed by the commonwealth or a political subdivision
thereof as a placement agency; or
(8)
Payments made by employers or labor unions for employee benefit
programs covering social security or retirement; or
(9)
Personal use of an employer's owned or leased property or of
employer-provided services.
(10)
The net income from the operation of a business, profession, or other
activity, except corporations, after provision for all costs and expenses
incurred in the conduct thereof be determined either on a cash or
accrual basis in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles and practices, as defined in the Tax Reform Code of 1971,
as amended, its implementing regulations, and any subsequent
amendments to said code and/or regulations. Net profits do not include
income which is not paid for services provided and which is in the
nature of earnings from an investment.
A.
To constitute net profits, all of the following must apply:
(1) The gross profits shall be derived from one of the following:
B.
§ 155-16 TAXATION § 155-16
155:357
The marketing of a product or service to customers on a
commercial basis or from securities employed as working
capital in the business operations.
(a)
Accounts and notes receivable from sales of products or
services in the ordinary course of the business operations.
(b)
Assets which serve an operational function in the ordinary
course of business operations.
(c)
The marketing activity shall be conducted with the manifest
objective of achieving profitable operations.
(2)
The marketing objective shall be conducted with regularity and
continuity and may not be limited or exclusive.
(3)
In computing net profits, a deduction will not be allowed for any item
of cost, expense or liability derived or incurred in connection with, or
attributable to, any of the following:
The ownership or disposition of assets that are held for investment
purposes or otherwise serve an investment function.
(1)
The trading in securities for personal purposes and not for the
accounts of customers.
(2)
The sale, discontinuation or abandonment of a business or segment
thereof.
(3)
Any tax imposed on, or measured by, gross or net earned or
unearned income.
(4)
An isolated or nonrecurring transaction which is not a normal or
routine business activity.
(5)
C.
Choosing to form a partnership or other entity or to associate with
others, receiving and reporting income or gain as the income of the
partnership, entity or associates or dividing the same among its
partners, beneficial owners or associates or the trading in securities for
the benefit of shareholders, partners, members or associates does not
of itself make the income of the partnership, entity or associates net
profits.
D.
For purposes of this section, only the following participants in the
stock, securities, options, derivatives, futures or commodities market
are engaged in marketing of a product or service to customers:
Those who maintain or provide a market place or facilities for
bringing together purchasers and sellers of these financial
investment products.
(1)
Those who are licensed to act as their customers' agents and
charge a negotiated commission for executing transactions and do
not take title to the particular portion they buy or sell.
(2)
E.
§ 155-16 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-16
155:358
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the taxing district.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the taxing district.
Those who devote managerial attention to the financial investment
products holdings of others, or who employ other persons to assist
them in that management, in the capacity of a licensed investment
advisor.
(3)
Licensed dealers, including financial investment product
specialists and market makers, if the conditions in Subsection
E(4)(a) through (d) are met:
The dealer maintains an inventory of financial investment
products with the objective of reselling his inventories at a
profit to customers or operates as a specialist or market maker.
(a)
The dealer makes market by quoting the bid and ask prices
at which he is willing to buy and sell the financial investment
products and by buying directly from or selling directly to
customers.
(b)
The dealer's profit is determined in whole or in part by a
markup based on cost.
(c)
The dealer elects to inventory securities held for resale to
customers or uses the mark-to-market system of accounting.
(d)
(4)
Underwriters who facilitate initial sales of financial investment
products by acting either as licensed dealers in a principal capacity
or as brokers in an agency capacity.
(5)
When a person operates as an investor or trader with respect to a
portion of that person's activities and as a market establishment,
broker, investment counselor or dealer with respect to the rest, this
section applies only to the operations as a market establishment,
broker, investment counselor or dealer. For taxpayers engaged in the
business, profession or activity of farming, the term shall not include:
Any interest earnings generated form any monetary accounts or
investment instruments of the farming business;
(1)
(2) Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
(3)
(4) Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
F.
§ 155-16 TAXATION § 155-16
155:359
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXING DISTRICT — The Township of Middlesex, Butler County,
Pennsylvania.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association, or any other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits, or to pay
a tax thereon.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middlesex, Butler County, Pennsylvania.
§ 155-17. Imposition of tax.
§ 155-18. Declaration and payment of tax.
A. A tax for general revenue purposes is hereby reimposed in the amount
of 1% of earned income received and to net profits earned by residents
and nonresidents of the Township, beginning on the first day of July
2003, and continuing for each taxable year thereafter.
B. Except as otherwise provided in Section 14 of the Local Tax Enabling
Act, 53 P.S. § 6914, as amended, allowing for crediting or deductions for
duplication of taxes, in the event the Mars Area School District, Butler
County, Pennsylvania, shall impose, or continue to impose, an earned
income tax under the authority of the Act on residents or businesses
domiciled within that Township during the same year or part of year,
then the tax herein imposed shall be 1/2% from the day such duplication
becomes effective.
A. Net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of the
current year, make and file with the officer on a form prescribed or
approved by the officer a declaration of his estimated net profits
during the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of
the current year, and pay to the officer in four quarterly
installments, as nearly equal as possible, the tax due thereon as
follows: the first installment at the time of filing the declaration,
and the other installments on or before June 15 of the current year,
September 15 of the current year, and January 15 of the succeeding
year, respectively.
(2) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of
the current year shall make and file the declaration hereinabove
required on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of
the current year, or December 31 of the current year, whichever of
these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first
anticipates such net profit, and pay to the officer in installments, as
nearly equal as possible, the tax due thereon, on or before the
quarterly payment dates which remain after the filing of the
declaration.
§ 155-16 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-18
155:360
(3) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the officer on a form prescribed or approved by
the officer a final return and reconciliation showing the amount of
net profits earned during the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, the total
amount of tax due thereon and the total amount of tax paid thereon.
At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the
officer the balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund
or credit in the case of overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of
paying the fourth quarterly installment of his estimated tax, elect to
make and file with the officer on or before January 31 of the
succeeding year the final return as hereinabove required.
(4) The officer is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the
making and filing of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits,
and for the payments of the estimated tax in cases where a
taxpayer who has filed the declaration hereinabove required
anticipated additional net profits not previously declared or finds
that he has overestimated his anticipated net profits.
(5) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the
tax due.
B. Earned income.
(1) Annual earned income tax return. Every taxpayer shall, on or
before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the
officer on a form prescribed or approved by the officer a final
return showing the amount of earned income received during the
period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year. Such final return shall also show
the total amount of tax due thereon, the amount of tax paid
thereon, and the amount of tax thereon that has been withheld
pursuant to the provisions relating to the collection at source and
the balance of tax due. At the time of filing the final return, the
taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or shall make demand
for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(2) Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission, or other compensation
and who received any earned income not subject to the provisions
relating to collection at source shall make and file with the officer
on a form prescribed or approved by the officer a quarterly return
on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year,
October 31 of the current year, and January 31 of the succeeding
year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned income not
subject to withholding by him during the three-month periods
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year, and December 31 of the current
§ 155-18 TAXATION § 155-18
155:361
§ 155-19. Collection at source.
year, respectively, and subject to the tax, together with such other
information as the officer may require. Every taxpayer making such
returns shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the officer the
amount of tax shown as due thereon.
C. Death of taxpayer. In the event of the death of a taxpayer during a
taxable period, his personal representative shall file his return on or
before the 15th day of April of the year following the date of death and
on or before such date shall pay any tax due from such deceased
taxpayer under this article or demand refund in the case of
overpayment.
D. Guardian of taxpayer. Should a guardian of the estate be appointed for a
taxpayer, such guardian shall be imputed with the same duties and
responsibilities as the taxpayer would have regarding the reporting and
paying of taxes under this article.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse,
or other place of business within the Township who employs one or
more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation, who has not previously registered,
shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer, register with the
officer his name and address and such other information as the officer
may require.
B. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse,
or other place of business within the Township who employs one or
more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission, or other compensation shall deduct at the time of payment
thereof the tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to his
employment, and shall, on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31
of the current year, October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the
succeeding year, file a return and pay to the officer the amount of taxes
deducted during the preceding three-month periods ending March 31
of the current year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of the
current year, and December 31 of the current year, respectively. Such
return unless otherwise agreed upon between the officer and the
employer shall show the name and social security number of each such
employee, the earned income of such employee during such preceding
three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom, the political
subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the complete
address of each and every employee subject to withholding, the total
earned income of all such employees during such preceding threemonth
period, and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the
return. Any employer who for two of the preceding four quarterly
periods has failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part thereof, or has
failed to pay over the proper amount of tax to the taxing authority, may
be required by the officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In
such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the officer on or before the
§ 155-18 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-19
155:362
§ 155-20. Powers and duties of officer.
last day of the month succeeding the month for which the tax was
withheld.
C. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the officer:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted, and the total amount of tax paid
to the officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current year
and ending December 31 of the current year.
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, setting
forth the employee's name, address and social security number, the
amount of earned income paid to the employee during said period,
the amount of tax deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the
tax upon such employee, and the amount of tax paid to the officer.
Every employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return to
the employee for whom it is filed.
D. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
E. Except as otherwise provided herein, every employer who willfully or
negligently fails or omits to make the deductions required by this
section shall be liable for payment of the taxes which he was required to
withhold to the extent that such taxes have not been recovered from the
employee. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no employer shall be held
liable for failure to withhold earned income taxes or for the payment of
such withheld tax money to a political subdivision other than the
Township if such failure to withhold or such incorrect transmittal of
withheld taxes arises from incorrect information as to the employee's
place of residence submitted by the employee, nor shall an employer be
liable for failure to withhold earned income taxes, or to make reports of
wages, salaries, commissions or other compensation of his/its
employees, unless the official continuing register of all earned income
taxes levied under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended, maintained and supplemented annually by the Department of
Community and Economic Development, lists the Township's levying of
the earned income tax.
F. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of tax or from complying with the requirements of the article
relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
§ 155-19 TAXATION § 155-20
155:363
A. The Board, by resolution, shall appoint the officer.
B. It shall be the duty of the officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a
record showing the amount received by him from each person or
business paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
C. Bond.
(1) Each officer, before entering upon his official duties, shall give and
acknowledge a bond to the Township. If the Township shall, by
ordinance, designate any bond previously given by the officer as
adequate, such bond shall be sufficient to satisfy the requirements
of this subsection. Each such bond shall be joint and several with
one or more corporate sureties which shall be surety companies
authorized to do business in this commonwealth and duly licensed
by the Insurance Commissioner of this commonwealth. Each bond
shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the officer, his
clerks, assistants, appointees of all trusts confided in him by virtue
of his office, upon the faithful execution of all duties required of him
by virtue of his office, upon the just and faithful accounting or
payment over, according to law, of all monies and all balances
thereof paid to, received or held by him by virtue of his office and
upon the delivery to his successor or successors in office of all
books, papers, documents, or other official things held in right of
his office.
(2) Each such bond shall be taken in the name of the Township, and
shall be for the use of the Township appointing the officer, and for
the use of such other person or persons for whom money shall be
collected or received, or as his or her interest shall otherwise
appear, in case of a breach of any of the conditions thereof by the
acts or neglect of the principal of the bond.
(3) The Township, or any person, may sue upon the said bond in its own
or his own name for its or his own use.
(4) Each such bond shall contain the name or names of the surety
company or companies bound thereon. The Township shall fix the
amount of the bond at an amount equal to the maximum amount of
taxes which may be in the possession of the officer at any given
time. The Township may at any time, upon cause shown and due
notice to the officer, and his surety or sureties, require or allow the
substitution or the addition of a surety company acceptable to the
Township for the purpose of making the bond sufficient in amount,
without releasing the surety or sureties first approved from any
accrued liability or previous action on such bond. The Township
shall designate the custodian of the bond required to be given by
the officer.
D. The officer charged with the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this article is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
§ 155-20 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-20
155:364
§ 155-21. Suit for collection of tax.
promulgate, and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of
declarations and returns, and of payments alleged or found to be
incorrect, or as to which any overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to make refunds in case of overpayment, for any period
of time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the
sum involved, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration
of the article. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable
unless it has been approved by ordinance by the Board. A copy of such
rules and regulations currently in force shall be available for public
inspection.
E. The officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer, earned
income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary business
expenses to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer's employer.
F. The officer and agent designated by him are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers, and records of any employer or of any
taxpayer or of any person whom the officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration
or return, or, if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax
due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every person whom the
officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer is hereby
directed and required to give to the officer, or to any agent designated
by him, the means, facilities and opportunities for such examination and
investigation as hereby authorized. The officer shall have such power to
subpoena books, records and papers of the employer or taxpayer as
may be found in authority of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
G. Any information gained by the officer, his agents, or by any other official
or agent of the Township as a result of any declarations, returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by the
article shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in
accordance with a proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided by
law.
H. The officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year.
A. The officer may sue in the name of the Township for the recovery of
taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due, or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
§ 155-20 TAXATION § 155-21
155:365
§ 155-22. Interest and penalties.
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under
provisions of the article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person, or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return
in the possession of the officer, reveals a fraudulent evasion of
taxes, there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article, and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the officer,
or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make the
deductions required by this section, there shall be no limitation.
(5) This section shall not be construed to limit the Board from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by the
Act.
C. The officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund, provided such
suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that the suit
may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of the refund
was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
A. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 1/2 of
1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof
during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected.
Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable
therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the
interest and penalties herein imposed.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A, the Township may, by
ordinance, establish a one-time period during which interest or interest
and penalties that would otherwise be imposed for the nonreporting or
underreporting of earned income tax liabilities or for the nonpayment of
earned income taxes previously imposed and due shall be waived in
total or in part if the taxpayer voluntarily files delinquent returns and
pays the taxes in full during the period so established. The Township
shall adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this subsection.
C. The provisions of Subsection B shall not affect or terminate any
petitions, investigations, prosecutions or other proceedings pending
under the provisions of this article, or prevent the commencement or
further prosecution of any proceedings by the proper authorities for
§ 155-21 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-22
155:366
§ 155-23. Violations and penalties.
§ 155-24. Effect on prior ordinances.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board that this article replace
in its entirety all prior ordinances adopted by, motions approved, or other
actions taken by the Board levying an earned income tax, and/or in any
manner affecting the specific terms or provisions of said earned income
tax as levied, the provisions of which shall remain in full force and effect
through June 30, 2003.
violations of this article. No proceedings shall, however, be commenced
on the basis of delinquent returns filed pursuant to Subsection B if the
returns are determined to be substantially true and correct and the
taxes are paid in full within the prescribed time.
A. Any person who fails, neglects, or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees, or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees, any person who refuses to permit the officer or any agent
designated by him to examine his books, records, and papers, and any
person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent
return, or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full
disclosure of the amount of his net profits or earned income in order to
avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this
article, shall, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice or
court of competent jurisdiction in Butler County, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $500 for each offense, and costs, and in default of
payment of said fine and costs to be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
District Justice or court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $500 for each offense, and costs, and in default of
payment of said fines and costs to be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
§ 155-22 TAXATION § 155-24
155:367

ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 1-19-2005 by Ord. No. 102; amended in its entirety
11-21-2007 by Ord. No. 114]
§ 155-25. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13
[relating to earned income taxes] of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of
Dec. 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession; or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 [relating
to earned income taxes] of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of Dec. 31,
1965, P.L. 1251, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received; whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Township of Middlesex.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 155-26 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year;
beginning in 2008 and subsequent calendar years.
§ 155-26. Levy of tax.
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging
§ 155-25 TAXATION § 155-26
155:369
§ 155-27. Exemption and refunds.
in an occupation with a primary place of employment within the
political subdivision during the tax year. Each natural person who
exercises such privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall
pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52.00 assessed on a pro rata
basis, in accordance with the provisions of this article. This tax may be
used solely for the following purposes as the same may be allocated by
the Township from time to time:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes; or
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S. Ch. 85, Subch. F
(relating to homestead property exclusion).
B. The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other
taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the political
subdivision. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each
calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person maybe employed.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 dollars
for any calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the
payment of the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following
persons are exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total 100% disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
§ 155-26 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-27
155:370
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of
all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
§ 155-27 TAXATION § 155-27
155:371
§ 155-28. Duty of employers to collect.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Township, in consultation with the Collector and DCED,
shall establish procedures and regulations for the processing of refund
claims for overpayment and/or for any tax paid by any person who is
eligible for exemption, which procedures shall be in accord with 53
Pa.C.S. §§ 8425 and 8426 and provisions of the General Municipal Law
relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The Township or the Collector shall determine eligibility
for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest onehundredth
of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll
period basis for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in
an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For
purposes of this subsection, combined rate shall mean the aggregate
annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
§ 155-27 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-28
155:372
§ 155-29. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 155-30. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the thirtieth day following the
end of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 155-31. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the thirtieth day following the end of each quarter.
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and
a statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person maybe employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or plates of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 155-27B of
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 155-28 TAXATION § 155-32
155:373
§ 155-32. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 155-33. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 155-34. Administration of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision; and
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer of self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to proscribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
§ 155-32 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-34
155:374
§ 155-35. Suits for collection.
§ 155-36. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 155-37. Interpretation.
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred, and which
regulations shall specifically provide for the processing of refund claims
for overpaid local services taxes in any calendar year consistent with 53
Pa.C.S. §§ 8425 and 8426. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
Collector shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas
of Butler County as in other cases provided.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such
tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of
this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
§ 155-34 TAXATION § 155-37
155:375
§ 155-38. (Reserved)
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
C. Except as set forth hereafter, all ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. Nothing herein shall be
construed to repeal the imposition and collection of an occupation
privilege tax, plus applicable penalties and interest, for calendar year
2005 and all prior calendar years, or of an emergency and municipal
services tax, plus applicable penalties and interest, for calendar years
2006 and 2007, as the same exist prior to this amendment.
D. The tax imposed by this article shall be effective on January 1, 2008,
and all calendar years thereafter unless repealed or modified by
ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Middlesex.
§ 155-37 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-38
155:376
ARTICLE IV
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 155-39. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Township of Middlesex."
§ 155-40. Statutory authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Township of Middlesex, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements
on such transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, "Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax," 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 155-41. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust,
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States, or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 155-40 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of
its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of
each class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members
of the same family. The business of agriculture shall include the leasing to
members of the same family of property which is directly and principally
used for agricultural purposes. The business of agriculture shall not be
deemed to include:
§ 155-39 TAXATION § 155-41
155:377
FAMILY FARM PARTNERSHIP — A partnership of which at least 75% of
its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of
the interests in the partnership are continuously owned by members of
the same family. The business of agriculture shall include the leasing to
members of the same family of property which is directly and principally
used for agricultural purposes. The business of agriculture shall not be
deemed to include:
LIVING TRUST — Any trust, other than a business trust, intended as a
will substitute by the settlor which becomes effective during the lifetime
of the settlor, but from which trust distributions cannot be made to any
beneficiaries other than the settlor prior to the death of the settlor.
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
ORDINARY TRUST — Any trust, other than a business trust or a living
trust, which takes effect during the lifetime of the settlor and for which
the trustees of the trust take title to property primarily for the purpose
of protecting, managing or conserving it until distribution to the named
beneficiaries of the trust. An ordinary trust does not include a trust that
has an objective to carry on business and divide gains, nor does it either
expressly or impliedly have any of the following features: the treatment of
beneficiaries as associates, the treatment of the interests in the trust as
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
§ 155-41 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-41
155:378
personal property, the free transferability of beneficial interests in the trust,
centralized management by the trustee or the beneficiaries, or continuity of
life.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Township of
Middlesex including without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures,
mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or
lower boundaries, trees, and other improvements, immovables or
interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance or
land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in
an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate, or
perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
§ 155-41 TAXATION § 155-41
155:379
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting, or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
§ 155-42. Imposition of tax; interest.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate; provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executor
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for, and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof,
a tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by
such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the recorder whereon the date
§ 155-41 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-42
155:380
§ 155-43. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 155-44. Excluded transactions.
of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer then the tax levied by the Township of Middlesex under the
authority of that Act shall during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate and
such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part of
the Township of Middlesex, provided, however, that the Township of
Middlesex and any other political subdivision which imposes such tax
on the same person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their
respective rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will impose
respectively different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the
maximum rate permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by section shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Township of Middlesex is prohibited from
taxing under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
§ 155-42 TAXATION § 155-44
155:381
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries that are entitled to receive the property
or proceeds from the sale of the property under the trust, whether
or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically named. A
trust clause which identifies the contingent beneficiaries by
reference to the heirs of the trust settlor as determined by the laws
of the intestate succession shall not disqualify a transfer from the
exclusion provided by this clause. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of a
living trust from the settlor of the living trust. No such exemption
shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a
copy of the living trust instrument.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of
an ordinary trust to a specifically named beneficiary that is entitled
to receive the property under the recorded trust instrument or to a
contingent beneficiary where the transfer of the same property
would be exempt if the transfer was made by the grantor of the
property into the trust to that beneficiary. However, any transfer of
real estate from a living trust during the settlor's lifetime shall be
§ 155-44 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-44
155:382
considered for the purposes of this article as if such transfer were
made directly from the settlor to the grantee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of
a living trust after the death of the settlor of the trust or from a
trustee of a trust created pursuant to the will of a decedent to a
beneficiary to whom the property is devised or bequeathed.
(12) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from the trustee
of a living trust to the settlor of the living trust if such property was
originally conveyed to the trustee by the settlor.
(13) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(14) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or agreement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(15) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(16) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(17) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(18) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
§ 155-44 TAXATION § 155-44
155:383
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(19) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(20) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transfer or for
commercial purposes.
(21) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, [68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its
primary purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational,
scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities; or a transfer from
such a conservancy to the United States, the commonwealth or to
any of their instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions; or
any transfer from such a conservancy where the real estate is
encumbered by a perpetual agricultural conservation easement as
defined by the act of June 30, 1981 (P.L. 128, No. 43), known as the
"Agricultural Area Security Law," and such conservancy has owned
the real estate for at least two years immediately prior to the
transfer.
(22) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(23) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm partnership by a member of the same family, which
family directly owns at least 75% of the interests in the
partnership.
(24) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company, family farm corporation or family
farm partnership which owns real estate.
(25) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(26) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 155-44 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-45
155:384
§ 155-45. Documents relating to associations or corporations.
Except as otherwise provided in § 155-44, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 155-46. Acquired company.
§ 155-47. Credits against tax.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. A family farm partnership is an acquired company when, because of
voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm
partnership or when, because of transfer of partnership interests or
because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the
business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm partnership under this article.
D. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
§ 155-45 TAXATION § 155-47
155:385
§ 155-48. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 155-49. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds or any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or other
officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 155-50. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Township
of Middlesex based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer
tax, without compensation from the Township of Middlesex.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
§ 155-47 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-50
155:386
§ 155-51. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete
value thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject
to tax under this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax
Statement of Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of
this subsection shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which
are exempt from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents
presented for affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy
of the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 155-52. Civil penalties.
§ 155-53. Tax to become lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Township of Middlesex all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2%
for use of the county, together with a report containing the information
as is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent
commission shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 155-50 TAXATION § 155-53
155:387
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Township of Middlesex, which
lands, tenements, hereditaments, or interest therein, are described in or
conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax
imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time
when the tax under this article is due and payable, and continue until
discharge by payment, or in accordance with the law, and the solicitor
is authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common
Pleas of Butler County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
§ 155-54. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 155-55. Regulations.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Middlesex is charged with
enforcement and collection of the tax and is empowered to regulate and
enforce reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax.
The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into
and made a part of this article.
§ 155-53 MIDDLESEX CODE § 155-55
155:388
Chapter 162
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Impact fees — See Ch. 97.
§ 155-55 TAXATION § 155-55
155:389

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 162-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 162-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Township of Middlesex.
§ 162-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 162-4. Experimental regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq. (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except
that in this chapter the word "street" may be used interchangeably with
the word "highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word
"highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Township shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Township and the police in the same manner as permanent regulations.
Any person who drives or parks a vehicle in violation of any such
regulation or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign
or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature.
A. The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, designate places upon
and along the streets in the Township where, for a period of not more
§ 162-1 TAXATION § 162-4
155:391
§ 162-5. Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events.
§ 162-6. Authority of police officers.
The police shall have authority to direct traffic on the streets in the
Township, at intersections in public and in other places where the Vehicle
Code or this chapter applies.
than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate those
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in
this chapter. No person shall drive or park a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made
by authority of this section. Any person who violates any provision of
this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty set out in the
law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station police officers at each end of the closed portion, while
construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is
being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
under way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
§ 162-4 MIDDLESEX CODE § 162-6
155:392
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 162-7. Speed limits.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in this section is hereby established at the rate of speed
indicated in said schedule. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle at a higher speed than the maximum prescribed for that street or
part of a street.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph)
Alderson Road 25
Ashmont Drive 25
Bowers Road 25
Brownshill Road 25
Buckingham Drive 25
Central Drive 25
Chan Mowr Drive 25
Colonial Drive 25
Davidson Road 25
Davis Road 25
Deer Creek Road 25
Denny Road 25
Dwellington Drive 20
East Cruikshank
Road
25
Forest Drive 25
Forsythe Road 25
Fraser Road 25
Fulton Drive 25
Georgian Drive 25
Harbison Road 25
Hill View Drive 25
Homestead Drive 25
Homestead Way 25
Jason Drive 25
Jones Road 25
Keithwood Drive 20
§ 162-7 TAXATION § 162-7
155:393
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph)
Kozy Korner Road 25
Kyle Road 25
Leslie Road 25
List Hill Road 25
Logan Road 25
Love Road 25
Lowery Drive 25
Manor Drive 25
Maple Drive 25
McFann Road 25
Mekis Road 25
Morrows Way 25
Murray Drive 25
North Drive 25
Oak Hill Drive 25
Oakwood Drive 25
Old Glade Mill Road 25
Old Route 8 North 25
Old Route 8 South 25
Overbrook Road 25
Park Drive 25
Park Place 25
Parks Road 25
Pointe Drive 25
Ridge Road 25
Rolling Mills Drive 25
Ruth Lane 25
Sandy Hill Road 25
Sheldon Road 25
South Drive 25
Spring Street 25
State Road 25
Steiner Bridge Road 25
Tanglewood Drive 25
§ 162-7 MIDDLESEX CODE § 162-7
155:394
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph)
Thorn Drive 25
Truver Road 25
Twinbrook Road 25
Valley Drive 25
West Cruikshank
Road
25
Windemere Drive 25
§ 162-8. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
the following streets:
Location
Route 8 intersection with Brownshill Road
Route 8 intersection with Route 228 East
Route 8 intersection with Route 228 West and Overbrook Road
§ 162-9. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
into another one-way street) when facing a steady red signal at any of the
following locations:
Location
Brownshill Road at intersection with Route 8
Route 8 at intersection with Brownshill Road
§ 162-10. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in this section (in addition to intersections with
the through streets established by this chapter) are hereby established as
stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected in such a position
upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the second-named
street in the direction or directions indicated in said schedule. Every driver
of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street,
in the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall come to a full stop
before entering any such intersection.
§ 162-7 TAXATION § 162-10
155:395
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Ashmont Drive North Brownsdale Road
Bowers Road East Steiner Bridge Road
Bowers Road West Overbrook Road
Brownshill Road South Leslie Road
Brownshill Road South Overbrook Road
Brownshill Road South Sandy Hill Road
Central Drive East Maple Drive
Central Drive West Route 8
Chan Mowr Drive North Denny Road
Colonial Drive North Dwellington Drive
Davidson Road North Davis Road
Davis Road South Forsythe Road
Davis Road South Route 228
Davis Road West Sheldon Road
Deer Creek Road North Love Road
Deer Creek Road South Love Road
Denny Road East Route 8
Denny Road East State Road
Denny Road West State Road
Dwellington Drive West Route 8
Dwellington Drive West Route 8
Forest Drive West Old Route 8 North
Forsythe Road North McFann Road
Forsythe Road South Davis Road
Fraser Road West Route 8
Fulton Drive East Old Route 8 South
Georgian Drive North Ashmont Drive
Harbison Road North Forsythe Road
Harbison Road South Route 228
Homestead Drive North Dwellington Drive
Homestead Drive North Dwellington Drive
Jones Road South West Cruikshank Road
Keithwood Drive West Tanglewood Drive
Kozy Korner Road West Logan Road
§ 162-10 MIDDLESEX CODE § 162-10
155:396
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Kyle Road East Deer Creek Road
Kyle Road West Sandy Hill Road
Leslie Road East Deer Creek Road
Leslie Road East Sandy Hill Road
Leslie Road West Route 8
List Hill Road East Sheldon Road
Logan Road South Route 228
Love Road East Deer Creek Road
Love Road West Sandy Hill Road
Lowery Drive South Brownshill Road
Manor Drive North Denny Road
Maple Drive North North Drive
McFann Road East Old Route 8 North
McFann Road East Route 8
McFann Road West Sheldon Road
Mekis Road North East Cruikshank Road
Mekis Road South Route 228 East
Middlesex Street North Ridge Road
Morrows Way East Overbrook Road
Morrows Way West Brownshill Road
North Drive West Central Drive
Oak Hill Drive North Denny Road
Oak Hill Drive South Hillvue Drive
Old Glade Mill Road East Route 228 East
Old Glade Mill Road East Route 228 East
Old Glade Mill Road West Route 228 East
Old Glade Mill Road West Route 228 East
Old Route 8 North North East Cruikshank Road
Old Route 8 North North McFann Road
Old Route 8 North North Route 8
Old Route 8 North North Route 228 East
Old Route 8 North South East Cruikshank Road
Old Route 8 North South McFann Road
Old Route 8 North South Route 8
§ 162-10 TAXATION § 162-10
155:397
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Old Route 8 North South Route 228 East
Old Route 8 South North Fulton Drive
Old Route 8 South North Route 8
Old Route 8 South North Route 228 West
Old Route 8 South South Fulton Drive
Old Route 8 South South Parks Road
Overbrook Road East Brownshill Road
Overbrook Road North Route 228 East
Overbrook Road North Steiner Bridge Road
Overbrook Road South Steiner Bridge Road
Overbrook Road West Brownshill Road
Park Drive South Overbrook Road
Parks Road North Route 228 West
Pointe Drive West State Road
Ridge Road East State Road
Ridge Road West State Road
Rolling Mills Drive North Route 228 East
Sandy Hill Road North Kyle Road
Sandy Hill Road North Steiner Bridge Road
Sandy Hill Road South Brownshill Road
Sandy Hill Road South Kyle Road
Sandy Hill Road South Steiner Bridge Road
Sheldon Road North West Cruikshank Road
South Drive East Maple Drive
South Drive North Central Drive
Spring Street West East Cruikshank Road
State Road North Denny Road
State Road North Parks Road
State Road South Denny Road
State Road South Ridge Road
Tanglewood Drive South Dwellington Drive
Truver Road North Overbrook Road
Truver Road South Leslie Road
Twinbrook Road West Old Route 8 North
§ 162-10 MIDDLESEX CODE § 162-10
155:398
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Valley Drive West State Road
West Cruikshank
Road
East Sheldon Road
West Cruikshank
Road
West Sheldon Road
Windemere Drive West Forsythe Road
§ 162-11. Closing of certain streets to certain vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle, except a passenger
vehicle (but not including any passenger vehicle drawing any trailer or
towing any other vehicle), upon any of the following streets or parts of
streets:
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 162-10 TAXATION § 162-11
155:399

ARTICLE III
Weight Limits
§ 162-12. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by the Vehicle
Code, Act of 1976, June 17, P.L. 1962, No. 81, Section 1, effective July 1,
1977 (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.), as amended, and is intended to include
and be subject to all provisions of Section 4902 of the Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 4902, and all Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
regulations promulgated or to be promulgated under the Vehicle Code, by
way of illustration and not limitation, under Sections 4902(f) and 6103 [75
Pa.C.S.A. §§ 4902(f) and 6103].
§ 162-13. Definitions.
The following words when used in this article shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — A fire department vehicle, police vehicle,
ambulance, blood delivery vehicle, Armed Forces emergency vehicle, one
private vehicle of a fire or police chief or assistant chief, or ambulance corps
commander or assistant commander, or of a river rescue commander, used
for answering emergency calls, or other vehicle designated by the state
police under Section 6106 of the Vehicle Code (relating to designation of
emergency vehicles by Pennsylvania State Police).
LOCAL TRAFFIC — Emergency vehicles and school buses, defined
hereinafter, vehicles and combinations or governmental entities and utilities
where their contractors are engaged in construction or maintenance on a
posted highway or in a location which can be reached only via a posted
highway, and vehicles and combinations going to or coming from a
residence or farm located on a posted highway or which can be reached
only via a posted highway.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle or combination as defined and/or governed
by the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., as amended.
SCHOOL BUS — A motor vehicle designated for carrying more than 10
passengers, exclusive of the driver, and used for the transportation of school
children.
§ 162-14. Weight restrictions established.
The Board of Supervisors has determined and hereby determined based
upon engineering studies conducted by Killam Associates and otherwise
that the following roads may be damaged or destroyed unless the
permissible weight of motor vehicles is restricted to the weight limits listed:
§ 162-12 TAXATION § 162-14
155:401
Street Name
Route
Number Between
Weight Limit
(tons)
Ashmont Drive T-920 Brownsdale Road to end 12
Browns Hill Road T-480 Sandy Hill Road to
Route 8
12
Central Drive T-393 Route 8 to Maple Drive 12
Davidson Road T-502 Davis Road to Adams
Township line
15
Davis Road T-382 Route 228 West to
Adams Township line
12
Deer Creek Road T-840 Love Road to West Deer
Township line
12
Denny Road T-395 Route 8 to Adams
Township line
12
Dwellington Circle T-403 Route 8 to Dwellington
Drive
12
Dwellington Drive T-404 Route 8 to end 12
East Cruikshank
Road
T-487 Route 8 to Penn
Township line
12
Forsythe Road T-448 Davis Road to McFann
Road
12
Fraser Road T-711 Route 8 to end 12
Glade Mill Circle T-491 Route 228 East to Route
228 East
12
Harbison Road T-383 Route 228 West to
Forsythe Road
12
Jason Drive T-792 Monks Road Township
line to end
12
Kozy Korner Road T-563 Logan Road to Clinton
Township line
12
Kyle Road T-489 Sandy Hill Road to West
Deer Township line
12
Leslie Road T-830 Route 8 to Clinton
Township line
12
List Hill Road T-401 Sheldon Road to Adams
Township line
12
Logan Road T-486 Route 228 East to Penn
Township line
12
Love Road T-483 Sandy Hill Road to
Clinton Township line
12
§ 162-14 MIDDLESEX CODE § 162-14
155:402
Street Name
Route
Number Between
Weight Limit
(tons)
McFann Road T-492 Forsythe Road to
intersection Sheldon
Road
5
McFann Road T-492 Old Route 8 to Sheldon
Road
12
Mekis Road T-566 Route 228 East to East
Cruikshank Road
12
Old Glade Mill Road T-490 Old Route 8 to Route
228 East
12
Old Route 8 North T-747 Route 8 to Route 8 12
Old Route 8 South T-482 Route 8 to Park Road 12
Overbrook Road T-641 Route 8 to Route 228
East
12
Parks Road T-481 Route 8 to Route 228
West
12
Rolling Mills Drive T-800 Route 228 East to end 12
Sandy Hill Road T-484 West Deer Township line
to Clinton Township line
12
Sheldon Road T-384 Davis Road to Penn
Township line
10
State Road T-380 Richland Township line
to Parks Road
12
Steiner Bridge Road
Ext.
T-485 Old Glade Mill Road to
Clinton Township line
12
Truver Road T-567 Overbrook Road to
Leslie Road
12
§ 162-15. Vehicle weight limits established.
A. Pursuant to the findings under § 162-14 above, and by authority of
Section 4902 of the Vehicle Code and regulations promulgated
thereunder, no motor vehicle or combination shall be operated upon
any of the roads listed in § 162-14 with gross weight in excess of the
weight limits listed for said road in § 162-14.
B. Local traffic as defined herein shall be exempted from the restrictions
imposed under Subsection A above. However, if the Board of
Supervisors determines that any local traffic is likely to damage the
road, the Board of Supervisors will so notify the registrants of the motor
vehicle or combination. After two business days following delivery of
the notice, or after five days following mailing of the notice, such local
§ 162-14 TAXATION § 162-15
155:403
§ 162-16. Permits and security.
The Board of Supervisors of Middlesex Township may issue permits for
the movement of motor vehicles or combinations with weights in excess
of the restrictions imposed under § 162-14 above, and may require such
undertaking or security as it deems necessary to cover the costs of
anticipated or probable repairs and restoration necessitated by the
permitted movement of vehicles. All actions taken under the authority of
this section shall be taken in accordance with the rules and regulations
adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Transportation, as found in Title 67 of the Pennsylvania Code.
§ 162-17. Erection of signs.
The Township shall erect or cause to be erected and maintained restriction
signs designating the restrictions at the end of the portion of road restricted
as provided in this article. In the case of a restriction on a road which has
not begun or ended at an intersection with an unrestricted highway, the
Township shall also place an advance informational sign at the intersection
nearest each end of the restricted portion of the road which would allow
drivers to avoid the restricted portion of road.
§ 162-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person operating a motor vehicle or combination upon a road or bridge
in violation of a prohibition or restriction imposed under § 162-14 is guilty
of summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of $75, except that any person convicted of operating a vehicle with a gross
weight in excess of a posted weight shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to
pay a fine of $150 plus $150 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess
of 3,000 pounds over the maximum allowable weight.
traffic vehicles shall not exceed the weight limits except in accordance
with § 162-17 hereof.
§ 162-15 MIDDLESEX CODE § 162-18
155:404
ARTICLE IV
Parking Regulations
§ 162-19. Parking prohibited at all times. [Amended 3-20-2019 by
Ord. No. 133]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following streets
or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Adair Avenue*
Alderson Road
Ashmont Drive
Bald Eagle Court*
Blackberry Lane
Blackhawk Drive*
Blue Heron Court
Bowers Road
Brownshill Road
Buckingham Drive
Central Drive
Chan Mowr Drive
Colonial Drive
Condor Drive
Davidson Road
Davis Road
Deer Creek Road
Denny Road
Dwellington Drive
Eagle Ridge Drive
East Cruikshank Road
Falcon Drive
Forest Drive
Forsythe Road
Fraser Road
Fulton Drive
Georgian Drive
Harbison Road
§ 162-19 TAXATION § 162-19
155:405
Name of Street
Hardin Way*
Hawkeye Drive
Hill View Drive
Homestead Drive
Homestead Way
Humbolt Place*
Jason Drive
Jones Road
Keithwood Drive
Kozy Korner Road
Kyle Road
Leslie Road
List Hill Road
Logan Road
Love Road
Lowery Drive
Manor Drive
Maple Drive
Marsh Drive
McFann Road
Mekis Road
Morrows Way
Murray Drive
Nightingale Drive
North Drive
Oak Hill Drive
Oakwood Drive
Old Glade Mill Road
Old Route 8 North
Old Route 8 South
Overbrook Road
Park Drive
Park Place
Parks Road
§ 162-19 MIDDLESEX CODE § 162-19
155:406
Name of Street
Pelican Drive
Pointe Drive
Ridge Road
Ringold Court*
Rolling Mills Drive
Ruth Lane
Sandy Hill Road
Shelby Way*
Sheldon Road
South Drive
Spring Street
State Road
Steiner Bridge Road
Tanglewood Drive
Thorn Drive
Tilly Drive*
Truver Road
Twinbrook Road
Valley Drive
Weatherburn Drive
West Cruikshank Road
Windemere Drive
Wing Shadow Court*
* Subject to subsequent adoption by the Township.
§ 162-20. Winter parking.
A. Following the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to park,
or allow to be parked, any motor vehicle or other vehicle on any street
within the Township following the deposit or accumulation of ice or
snow of three inches or greater in depth until the snow has been
completely plowed for the full width of the cartway. Within one hour
after the commencement of each fall of snow in the Township of
Middlesex, it shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or operator of any
vehicle which has been parked upon any street or highway in the
Township to remove said vehicle from the public streets and highways
of the Township.
§ 162-19 TAXATION § 162-20
155:407
§ 162-21. Penalties for parking violations.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to
the appropriate penalties set forth in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or other applicable law.
B. On those streets within the Township where only on-street parking is
available, the following regulations shall apply when the deposit or
accumulation of ice or snow is three inches or greater: all motor
vehicles shall be parked on the even-address side of the street on evennumbered
calendar days following such accumulation as is mentioned
above and on the odd-address side of the street on odd-numbered
calendar days following such accumulation.
§ 162-20 MIDDLESEX CODE § 162-21
155:408
ARTICLE V
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 162-22. Authority to remove and impound.
The Township shall have authority to remove and impound or to order the
removal and impounding of any vehicle parked illegally.
§ 162-23. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles shall be done only by approved storage
garages that shall be designated from time to time by the Board of
Supervisors. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the Board of
Supervisors that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an
amount satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors as sufficient to indemnify
owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those vehicles
while in the custody of the garagekeeper for the purpose of towing or
storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to the Board of
Supervisors its schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles under
this article, and when the schedule is approved by the Board of Supervisors,
those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage garage. No
different schedule of charges shall be adopted without approval of the
Board of Supervisors, and no different charges shall be demanded of or
collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or impounded under
this article by any approved storage garage. The Board of Supervisors shall
delete from its list of approved storage garages any garage that makes any
unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle removed or impounded
under this article.
§ 162-24. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that the vehicle was removed shall
be sent by the Township to the owner of record of the vehicle. The notice
shall designate the place from which the vehicle was removed, the reason
for its removal and impounding and the garage in which it was impounded.
§ 162-25. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this article
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive and
shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If
payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a District Justice. Payment
of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any
vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision
of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 162-22 TAXATION § 162-26
155:409
§ 162-26. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Township shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded
under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the
owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to
the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 162-27. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in
charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 162-26 MIDDLESEX CODE § 162-27
155:410
ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 162-28. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or except as herein specified, every person
convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, or any supplement
thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of $25 and costs of prosecution.
§ 162-28 TAXATION § 162-28
155:411
Chapter 164
VEHICLES, JUNKED OR ABANDONED
§ 164-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be:
§ 164-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section.
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which:
INOPERABLE — As applied to a motor vehicle under this chapter:
A. To prevent the accumulation or storage of junked or abandoned motor
vehicles which create a hazard or danger to the health and welfare of
the citizens of Middlesex Township.
B. To prevent the accumulation or storage of junked or abandoned motor
vehicles which provide a breeding area for rodents and other
unhealthful animals.
C. To prevent the accumulation or storage of junked or abandoned motor
vehicles which create an attractive nuisance for children who are not
aware of the danger involved therein.
D. To allow the removal of junked or abandoned motor vehicles or
operable motor vehicles which create a hazardous or dangerous
condition for the safety of the citizens and of public employees when a
vehicle is parked in a public right-of-way during road work and snow
removal activity by the Township.
E. To promote ecological and environmental principles by preventing
accumulation or storage of junked or abandoned motor vehicles.
Is inoperable and is left unattended on a public street, road, highway or
public property for more than 48 hours;
A.
Has remained illegally on a public street, road, highway or other public
property for a period of more than 48 hours; or
B.
Has remained on private property without consent of the owner or
person in control of that property for more than 48 hours.
C.
A motor vehicle that does not have a current registration plate and a
current inspection sticker;
A.
A motor vehicle that does not have the required number of tires or
wheels, does not have one or more of its doors or windows, does not
have an engine, or does not have a battery, or lacks any other part
B.
§ 162-28 MIDDLESEX CODE § 164-2
164:412
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon private land, public
highways, streets or roads, which is self-propelled, except by human power
alone, or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle.
PERSONS — Any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation,
company, limited liability company, limited liability partnership or other
organization of any kind or nature whatsoever. When used in any provision
prescribing a fine or penalty, the word "persons" as applied to partnerships
shall mean the partners thereof and as applied to "firm, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind" it shall mean the officers
thereof.
§ 164-3. Prohibitions.
The following provisions shall apply to motor vehicles within the Township
of Middlesex:
which is necessary to self-propel it and to operate in accordance with
any laws of the Township or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Is inoperable and has been stored or kept outside and not enclosed
within a building on any private property for more than 10 days;
provided, however, that an inoperable motor vehicle held or stored on
the property of a person engaged in the business of servicing, repairing,
storing or disposing of inoperable motor vehicles in conformity with
the zoning laws of the Township of Middlesex shall not be considered
a junked motor vehicle for the purpose of this chapter as long as it is
screened from view from the abutting properties; or
A.
Is stored or kept in such a manner as to cause loud noises or offensive
odors or attract vermin or is otherwise a detriment to the environment
or danger to those who may be in close proximity or a nuisance in any
other manner.
B.
A. No person shall store, maintain or park outdoors or permit the storage,
maintenance or collection of any abandoned motor vehicle or junked
motor vehicle upon his or her premises or property, or any premises or
property under his or her control, or in any other place within the
Township of Middlesex, unless the vehicle is within a building so as to
not be visible from the street or neighboring properties.
B. No person shall perform major repair or body work on any motor
vehicle unless the vehicle is within a building so as to not be visible
from the street or neighboring properties and the vehicle is titled to the
owner or resident of the premises or property where such major repairs
or body work are being performed.
C. No person shall park, store or place any abandoned motor vehicle,
junked motor vehicle, or any motor vehicle, in a public right-of-way
when the Board of Supervisors has requested such vehicle be moved in
§ 164-2 VEHICLES, JUNKED OR ABANDONED § 164-3
164:413
§ 164-4. Exemptions.
The following exemptions shall be available to the prohibitions provided in
§ 164-3 of this chapter:
§ 164-5. Enforcement of remedies.
order for the Township to perform road work in the public right-of-way
and/or snow removal activities in the public right-of-way. For road work
activities, the Township roadmaster or other Township official shall
inform a property owner of the proposed Township road work activities
either orally or in writing. For snow removal activities, residents shall
remove vehicles from the public right-of-way whenever snow or ice is
accumulating on a public right-of-way.
A. Authorized vehicle repair shops or scrap yards. An abandoned motor
vehicle or junked motor vehicle may be parked on the exterior premises
of a properly zoned and permitted motor vehicle repair shop or scrap or
junk yard, provided that the operator of the motor vehicle repair shop
or the scrap or junk yard is in compliance with the provisions of their
approval to operate such business under the Township of Middlesex
Zoning Ordinance.136
B. Property owner exemption. A property owner shall be allowed to store
one operable motor vehicle on his property that is without a current
registration and a current inspection, provided said vehicle or vehicles
are maintained in a good repair and the owner files an application to
retain the vehicle for a period of one year, and said exemption shall be
renewable annually upon application to the Board of Supervisors.
C. Farm equipment. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a farm
tractor, farm trailer and/or other motorized farm vehicle, provided the
farm tractor, farm trailer and/or motorized farm vehicle is owned by the
person where the farm tractor, farm trailer and/or other motorized farm
vehicle is stored.
A. Enforcement notice.
(1) If it appears to the Township that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceeding by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
(2) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the violator and, if
applicable, the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation
has occurred, or to any person who has filed a written request to
receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and any other
person requested in writing by the owner of record.
(3) The enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Zoning.
§ 164-3 MIDDLESEX CODE § 164-5
164:414
Chapter 168
(a) The name of the violator and, if applicable, the owner of record
and any other person against whom the Township intends to
take action.
(b) The location of the violation and, if applicable, the property in
violation.
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing the applicable provisions of
this chapter.
(d) The date by which the person must commence steps for
compliance with this chapter and the date before which
compliance must be achieved.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has a right to appeal to the
Board of Supervisors within a period of 30 days.
(f) That the failure to comply with this notice within the time
specified, unless extended by appeal to the Board of
Supervisors, constitutes a violation with possible sanctions
clearly prescribed.
B. Enforcement remedies. Any person who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter, shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a civil penalty in the amount of $500
and, for each and every subsequent offense, a penalty of $1,000, plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
Township as a result of any enforcement action commenced hereunder.
Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
violation. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Magistrate. If the person found liable neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment of the District Magistrate, the Township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. The
Township may commence an equity action in the Court of Common
Pleas for purposes of obtaining an injunction to force the removal of
junked or abandoned motor vehicles or to prohibit the further storage
of junked or abandoned motor vehicles against any person.
C. In the event a motor vehicle is encroaching on a public right-of-way and
is either an abandoned motor vehicle or a junked motor vehicle or an
operable motor vehicle that remains in the public right-of-way during
road work or snow removal activities after an owner has been informed
to remove it, the Township may impound such motor vehicle and the
property owner shall be liable for all costs of impoundment as well as
any civil penalties that may arise hereunder.
§ 164-5 WATER § 164-5
168:415
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal authorities — See Ch. 7.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 134.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 144.
§ 164-5 MIDDLESEX CODE § 164-5
168:416
ARTICLE I
Connection Requirements
[Adopted 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 62]
§ 168-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to mandate the connection of occupied
buildings to the public water system that is available in the Township. These
mandatory connections shall continue as long as there is available capacity
in the public water system. Mandatory connections are deemed necessary
in order to assure the financial stability of the public water system within
Middlesex Township.
§ 168-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 168-3. Mandatory connection.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — The Oakmont Water Authority.
INSPECTOR — The person appointed or employed by the Oakmont
Water Authority or by the Township of Middlesex to inspect water lines
and all other connections between occupied homes or other buildings
and the public water lines.
LEAD-FREE — When used with respect to solders and flux, refers to
solders and flux containing not more than 0.2% lead and, when used
with respect to pipes and pipe fittings, refers to pipes and pipe fittings
containing not more than 8% lead.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, company,
corporation, municipality, municipal authority or political subdivision,
or any agency of the federal or state government. The term includes
the officers, employees and agents of any partnership, association,
company, corporation, municipality, municipal authority or political
subdivision, or any agency of the federal or state government.
PLUMBING SYSTEM — All piping, fixtures and appurtenances used to
transport water to, within and from a building, including all residential
and nonresidential facilities and source, transmission, treatment and
distribution facilities of public water systems.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — A public water system as defined in the
Safe Drinking Water Act.137
WATER SUPPLIER — Any person who owns or operates a public water
system.
B. "May" is permissive.
137. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 721.1 et seq.
§ 168-1 WATER § 168-3
168:417
§ 168-4. Prohibition against cross-connections.
When connection has been made with the public water system, the owner
or owners of such property shall forthwith disconnect all wells, springs or
other water sources and such wells, springs or other water sources shall
not be permitted to connect to any plumbing system which carries water
supplied by the public water system. It shall be a violation of this article for
any person to permit a plumbing system to receive water from both a public
water line and a private well, spring or other water source.
§ 168-5. Regulations for connection; fees and charges.
§ 168-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a District Justice under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
A. Within 60 days after the passage of this article, the owner or owners of
all occupied buildings located on premises now accessible to a public
water line shall connect or cause to be connected the said building or
buildings with the public water line to which the property is accessible
in accordance with the rules and regulations and specifications
established by the Authority.
B. As public water lines are laid and provided in other and additional areas
of the Township of Middlesex, the owners of all occupied buildings
accessible to such public water lines shall, within 60 days of water
service being available on said lines, connect or cause to be connected
all occupied buildings with the public water line to which the property
is accessible, in accordance with the rules and regulations and
specifications of the Authority.
A. All connections to the public water system shall be in accordance with
the rules and regulations and specifications established by the
Authority.
B. In addition to any fees assessed by the Township of Middlesex for such
connection, including but not limited to assessments established
against property owners on account of the laying of any public water
lines, any person connecting to the public water system shall be
responsible for the payment of any tapping fees or other charges
assessed by the Authority. Such fees charged by the Authority shall be
payable directly to the Authority.
§ 168-3 MIDDLESEX CODE § 168-6
168:418
Chapter 175
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 53.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 65.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 84.
Grading, excavation and fill — See Ch. 89.
Impact fees — See Ch. 97.
Improvement design standards — See Ch.
101.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 144.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
150.
§ 168-6 WATER § 168-6
168:419

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 175-1. Title.
The official title of this chapter is: "Middlesex Township Zoning Ordinance."
§ 175-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted by virtue of the authority granted to the Township
by the commonwealth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988 (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as
may be amended from time to time).
§ 175-3. Interpretation.
§ 175-4. Purposes.
These regulations are deemed necessary in order to:
A. In the event of conflicts between the provisions of this chapter and any
other ordinance or regulation, the more restrictive provisions shall
apply.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be considered minimum requirements adopted for the promotion
of the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
C. In interpreting the language of this chapter to determine the extent of
the restriction upon the use of property, the language shall be
interpreted, where doubt exists as to the intended meaning of the
language written and enacted by the Township Supervisors, in favor of
the property owner and against any implied extension of the restriction.
A. Promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Township and of the public, generally;
B. Encourage and facilitate orderly community growth and development;
C. Conserve and stabilize property values through encouragement of the
most appropriate use of land in relation to adjacent land uses;
D. Secure safety from fire and prevent adequate open space for light and
air;
E. Facilitate the economic provision of adequate transportation, water
supply, sewage disposal, schools, parks and other public requirements;
F. (Reserved)
G. Prevent blight, the overcrowding or incompatible development or use of
land, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, and the loss
of health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
§ 175-1 WATER § 175-4
168:421
§ 175-5. Community development objectives.
In addition to the general purposes of this chapter stated in § 175-4, the
following specific community development objectives have been considered
as a basis upon which the regulations and controls of this chapter are
derived:
H. Preserve forests, recreation and agricultural lands from conflict with
urban development; and
I. Promote conservation of the environment and other natural and historic
features.
A. The present rural atmosphere of the Township should be maintained
and development channeled into a logical sequence rather than
permitted to occur in a haphazard arrangement across the Township.
B. Areas which are actively being farmed and which are particularly wellsuited
to farming because of soil types, size or location should be
protected and preserved.
C. Higher-density residential growth should be channeled into areas
where public water and public sewer service is anticipated to be
extended in the future or where PA-DER-approved community
treatment and distribution systems are provided in the interim.
D. Within the capability of existing or anticipated public facilities, services
and streets, a range of housing types and densities oriented towards the
changing needs of those seeking housing in the Township should be
encouraged.
E. The provision of new streets, services and utilities within a developing
plan should be the responsibility of the developers.
F. Interconnecting new highways and streets shall be planned to serve the
future development of the Township in a logical and continuous manner.
Planning shall be the responsibility of the Planning Commission and
streets and highways shall meet the standards of construction set forth
by the Township.
G. Development standards should encourage a variety of site design
opportunities, both on individual lots and in planned communities of
many units, while at the same time maintaining adequate health and
safety standards.
H. Commercial growth should be related to the needs of the expanding
residential and institutional activities in the Township and adjoining
townships rather than to speculative development.
I. Commercial expansion should be encouraged to develop in depth,
rather than in a linear pattern along the highway, and adequate parking
areas, loading positions and means of safe access should be provided at
each commercial property. Points of access to commercial
§ 175-4 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-5
168:422
§ 175-6. Compliance required.
No structure shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved,
altered, converted or enlarged; nor shall any structure or land be used or be
designed to be used, except in full compliance with all the provisions of this
chapter and after the lawful issuance of all permits and certificates required
by this chapter.
developments on the same highway should be designed to avoid
congestion.
J. Industrial expansion should be encouraged where adjacent adequate
highway and/or air transportation facilities exist and where the impact
of such development will not deteriorate nearby residential or
institutional growth.
K. Recreational development shall provide for the expanded needs of the
Township, and recreation and playground areas shall be located to
serve the maximum number of residents.
§ 175-5 WATER § 175-6
168:423

ARTICLE II
Word Usage; Definitions
§ 175-7. Word usage
All words used in this chapter shall carry their customary meanings except
where specifically defined herein. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future. The singular number shall include the plural, and the
plural the singular. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not
permissive; the word "may" is permissive. The words "used" or "occupied"
as applied to any land or structures shall be construed to include the
words "intended, arranged, designed to be used or occupied." The word
"person" shall include an individual, corporation, Partnership, incorporated
association or any other entity. Words in the masculine gender shall include
the feminine gender.
§ 175-8. Terms defined.
The following words and phrases shall have the particular meanings
specified for the purpose of this chapter.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building which is on the same lot with, but
detached from, the principal building and which is customarily incidental
and subordinate to the principal building, including, but not limited to,
private garages, storage sheds and the like.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure which is on the same lot with, but
detached from, the principal building and which is customarily incidental
and subordinate to the principal building, including, but not limited to,
swimming pools, satellite dish antennas, fences and the like.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use and located on the same lot as the principal use.
ADULT BOOKSTORE/VIDEO STORE — Any commercial establishment in
which more than 5% of the inventory offered for sale or rental to the
public consists of books, publications, films or other media which are
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting or describing sexual
conduct or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein.
ADULT BUSINESS — An adult bookstore/video store, adult live theater,
adult motel, adult movie theater or adult movie house, as defined herein.
ADULT LIVE THEATER — Any commercial establishment which features, on
a regular basis, live shows for public viewing in which all or some of the
performers are displaying specified anatomical areas or engaging in sexual
conduct, as defined herein.
ADULT MOTEL — A motel which offers adult movies by means of closed
circuit television which have a dominant theme or are characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
§ 175-7 WATER § 175-8
168:425
ADULT MOVIE THEATER or MOVIE HOUSE — Any movie theater, including
mini-theaters, which on a regular and continuing basis shows films rated "X"
or any equivalent successor rating by the Motion Picture Coding Association
of America, or any movie theater, including mini-theaters, which presents
for public viewing on a regular, continuing basis adult films which have
a dominant theme or present material characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical
areas, as defined herein.
AGRICULTURE — Any use of land or structures for farming, dairying,
pasturage, agronomy, horticulture, floriculture, arboriculture, or animal
or poultry husbandry. Accessory uses permitted in conjunction with an
agricultural use may include barns, stables, corn cribs, silos, greenhouses
and any other use or structure that is clearly related to an agricultural
operation.
AISLE — The area within a parking lot directly abutting parking spaces
which is designed to provide a connection between the parking spaces and
the public street or between the parking spaces and a driveway which
provides access to the public street.
ALLEY — A public right-of-way providing a secondary means of access to a
property or properties.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL — See "structural alteration."
AMENDMENT — Any change to this chapter or to the Zoning District Map
which is incorporated in this chapter by reference thereto subject to the
procedure outlined in Article VIII of this chapter.
ANCILLARY COMMERCIAL USES — Commercial uses authorized in a
planned residential development of a certain size whose only function is to
supply services and/or products to the residents, including and limited to
the following: branch bank or automated teller machine, convenience store,
day-care center, florist, laundry or dry cleaner pickup, personal services,
pharmacy and professional offices.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application for
development, including his heirs, successors and assigns, as the case may
be.
ARCHITECT — A professional licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
AREA, LOT — See "lot area."
ARTERIAL STREET — A public street which serves large volumes of highspeed
and long-distance traffic. Streets classified as arterial in the Township
are: PA Route 8 and PA Route 228 East and PA Route 228 West.
ASSESSED RATABLY — Divided proportionately according to the current
assessed valuation.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — A retail place of business, engaged
primarily in the sale of motor fuels or supplying goods and services
generally required in the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles and
§ 175-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-8
168:426
fulfilling of motorist's needs, including one or more of the following: the
sale of petroleum products; sale and service of tires, batteries, automotive
accessories and replacement items; washing and lubrication services; the
supplying of other incidental automotive customer services and products;
and the performing of automotive maintenance and repair, excluding such
repairs as spray painting, body, fender, axle, frame, major engine overhaul
or recapping/retreading of tires. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
BASEMENT — A story having more than 50% of its clear height below
finished grade.
BILLBOARD — A sign displaying changeable advertising copy which
pertains to a business, organization, event, person, place, service or product
not principally located or sold on the premises upon which said sign is
located.
BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board established by this chapter.
BUFFER YARD — A landscaped area of a certain depth specified by this
chapter which shall be planted and maintained in trees, grass, ground
cover, shrubs, bushes or other natural landscaping material or an existing
natural or constructed natural barrier which duplicates the effect of the
required buffer yard.
BUILDING — A roofed structure, enclosed by walls, to be used for shelter,
enclosure or protection of persons, goods, materials, equipment or animals.
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF — The line of that face of the building nearest
the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors, covered porches and
covered patios, whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include steps.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
finished elevation at the front of the building to the highest point on the roof
for flat roofs, to the deck line for mansard roofs, to the mean height between
the eaves and the ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs and to the highest
point for any other type of roof.
BUILDING LINE (SETBACK) — A line parallel to, or concentric with the
front lot line, the measurement of which is the front yard depth.
BUILDING PERMIT — Written authorization issued by the Zoning Officer
which documents compliance with the terms of this chapter prior to the
enlargement, structural alteration, construction, reconstruction, removal or
relocation of any structure.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — See "principal building."
BUSINESS SERVICES — Establishments engaged in providing services
to business offices on a fee or contract basis, including, but not limited
to, advertising and public relations; management and consulting services;
employment services; building security and maintenance services;
equipment servicing, rental/leasing and sales; computer and data
processing services; mailing, photocopying, quick printing and fax services;
sale of office supplies; and similar business services; but not including the
rental, sales or repair of vehicles or heavy equipment.
§ 175-8 WATER § 175-8
168:427
CAR WASH — A structure or area used for the purpose of cleaning or
reconditioning the exterior and interior surfaces of automotive vehicles but
not including an incidental one-bay washing facility in a gasoline service
station where washing facilities are accessory to the operation of said
service station. A self-operated vehicular laundering facility not requiring
attendants or employees, regardless of capacity, is also considered to be a
car wash. No vehicle repairs shall be performed in association with the car
wash.[Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
CENTER LINE — An imaginary line running parallel to a street right-of-way
or easement boundary, equidistant from each side line of the easement or
right-of-way or an imaginary line equidistant from the sides of a physical
feature such as a stream.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — Written authorization issued by the
Zoning Officer which documents compliance with the terms of the building
permit, or where no building permit has been issued, with the requirements
of this chapter prior to the use and/or occupancy of any land or structure.
CLINIC — Any establishment where human patients are examined and
treated by doctors or dentists, but not hospitalized overnight.
CLINIC, VETERINARY — An establishment where animals are examined
and treated by veterinarians and which may include kennels for temporary
boarding of animals during treatment.
COLLECTION AND RECYCLING FACILITY — A center for the acceptance
and processing of recyclable materials from the public. Recyclable
materials shall be limited to glass containers, plastic containers, aluminum
beverage cans, steel/bimetal containers, newsprint, high-grade office paper
and corrugated paper. Processing of recyclable materials shall be limited to
crushing, baling, chipping, shredding or other operations which physically
reduce the mass of the materials but which do not alter their composition in
any way.
COLLECTOR STREET — A public street which, in addition to giving access
to abutting lots intercepts local streets and provides a route for carrying
considerable volumes of local traffic to community facilities and arterial
roads. Streets classified as collector in the Township for the purposes
of interpreting this chapter are: SR-3012 (West Cruikshank Road), T-380
(McFann Road), T-395 (Denny Road), T-480 (Browns Hill Road), T-480/T-484/
T-486 (Sandy Hill Road), T-482 (Logan Road), T-485 (Steiner Bridge Road),
T-490 (East Cruikshank Road) and T-830 (Leslie Road).
COMMERCIAL RECREATION — See "recreation, commercial."
COMMERCIAL SCHOOL — An establishment providing nonacademic
training, vocational or trade educational courses and programs.
COMMERCIAL SUPPLY YARD — An establishment storing or offering for
sale building supplies, steel supplies, equipment, feed and grain, and similar
goods. Any materials produced on site shall be considered accessory to such
sale. Supply yards do not include the wrecking, salvaging, dismantling or
storage of automobiles and similar vehicles.
§ 175-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-8
168:428
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A lot or portion thereof or body of water or a
combination thereof within a development site for the use and enjoyment
of the residents of a planned residential development, not including streets,
off-street parking areas and areas set aside for facilities for the general
public.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — An instrument intended for use in the
wireless transmission or in the gathering of data, or relaying of any portion
of the electromagnetic spectrum, including television, radio, telephonic,
cellular, or any other type of communicative transmission which is to be
affixed to a building or structure, including the equipment necessary for its
use, but not including structures for signal reception only.
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — Any communications tower and its
associated structures operated by any person, agency or corporation, not
otherwise a public utility, as defined herein, who or which furnishes mobile
domestic cellular radio telecommunications services. See "communications
tower."
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure used for public or private
communication purposes and regulated by the Federal Communications
Commission. Communications towers shall be considered to be a different
and distinct use than a radio or television antenna not permitted as
accessory uses but considered to be a principal use of a lot.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan of the Township
which guides the physical development of the Township and which consists
of maps, charts and textual matter in accordance with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
CONDITIONAL USE — An authorized use which may be granted only
by the Township Supervisors pursuant to express standards and criteria
prescribed in this chapter, after review, public hearing and recommendation
by the Township Planning Commission and public hearing by the Township
Supervisors.
CONFERENCE or TRAINING CENTER — A facility used for corporate or
professional meetings, seminars and/or employee training, and which may
include supporting dining and lodging facilities and related recreational
facilities as accessory uses.
CONTOUR — An imaginary line connecting all points with the same
elevation above or below a fixed base point whose elevation is known.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail establishment which does not exceed
10,000 square feet in gross floor area and which offers grocery, household
and personal items for quick purchase and food preparation and which may
include the dispensing of gasoline and other fuels.[Amended 3-20-2019
by Ord. No. 133]
CONVERSION APARTMENT — A dwelling unit, as defined herein,
established within an existing single-family dwelling.
§ 175-8 WATER § 175-8
168:429
CORNER LOT — See "lot, corner."
COUNTRY CLUB/GOLF COURSE — A recreational facility operated by a
public or private entity which has as its principal use facilities for playing
golf and which may include one or more of the following accessory uses: a
clubhouse and/or restaurant, locker rooms, pro shop, swimming pool, and
facilities for racquet sports.
COUNTY — County of Butler, Pennsylvania.
COVENANT — An agreement legally binding successor owners of property
to certain conditions regarding the use of the property stipulated by the
original owner.
COVERAGE — See "lot coverage."
CUL-DE-SAC — A street closed at one end with a vehicular turnaround
provided at the closed end.
CUT — The excavation of preexisting earth material in the process of
grading.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility, licensed by the commonwealth, located
within a building which is not used as a dwelling unit, for the care during
part of a twenty-four-hour day of children under the age of 16 or
handicapped or elderly persons.
DAY-CARE HOME — A facility, licensed by the commonwealth, located
within a dwelling, for the care on a regular basis during part of a twentyfour-
hour day of not more than six children under 16 years of age, excluding
care provided to children who are relatives of the provider. Such use shall
be secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and no more than
one person who does not reside in the dwelling shall be employed.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A graphic and written presentation of a planned
residential development, a subdivision or land development and all
provisions relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other
structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, parking
facilities, common open space and public facilities.
DOMESTIC PETS — Animals, fish or fowl customarily found in a dwelling
and kept for company or pleasure, including, but not limited to dogs, cats,
hamsters, parakeets or canaries and the like, but not in sufficient number
to constitute a kennel, as herein defined.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY — A business that orients the sale of goods or
service to those remaining in their cars while business transactions occur.
DRIVEWAY — A private vehicular access route serving only one parcel or lot
which provides access to a public street, but which does not provide access
to any other lot or parcel under separate ownership.
§ 175-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-8
168:430
DRUGSTORE — A retail establishment in excess of 10,000 square feet of
gross floor area which sells prescription drugs, patent medicines, surgical
and sickroom supplies and which also may sell cosmetics, household goods
and a limited selection of food products.
DUPLEX — See "dwelling, two-family."
DWELLING — Any building designed or used as permanent living quarters
for one or more families, but not including hotels, motels, lodging or
boardinghouses.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms which are used as living quarters
for one family and which have permanent facilities for sleeping, cooking and
eating, as well as separate sanitary facilities.
DWELLING UNIT DENSITY — The number of dwelling units authorized by
this chapter per acre of land.
EASEMENT — A nonpossessor interest in land; a grant of one or more
property rights by the property owner to and for the use by the public, a
corporation or another person or entity within which no permanent building
may be erected, the use of which shall not be inconsistent with the rights of
the grantee.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A residential building containing one
dwelling unit and which is the only principal building on the lot.
A.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A residential building containing two
independent dwelling units, each having a separate entrance, and
which is the only principal building on the lot.
B.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A residential building or portion thereof
containing three or more dwelling units, including garden apartments
and townhouses.
C.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A multifamily residential building no more
than three stories in height containing five or more dwelling units
which share a common entrance to the outside, usually through a
common corridor, and which dwelling units may have other dwelling
units either above or below them.
D.
TOWNHOUSE — A multifamily residential building no more than three
(3) stories in height which contains at least two (2), but no more than
five (5), dwelling units, each of which are separated from the adjoining
unit or units by a continuous, unpierced vertical wall extending from
the basement to the roof, each unit having independent access directly
to the outside and having no other units above or below. [Amended
8-21-2019 by Ord. No. 134]
E.
QUAD-PLEX — A detached building designed for or occupied
exclusively as a residence and where the building is divided by two
common party walls into four distinct dwelling units where each
dwelling unit has direct access to the outdoors.
F.
§ 175-8 WATER § 175-8
168:431
EMPLOYEE CAFETERIA/DINING ROOM — An eating establishment located
within a business establishment which is restricted to employees of the
business establishment and their invited guests.
ENGINEER — A professional licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania
ENVIRONMENTAL ACTS — All statutes enacted by the Commonwealth
relating to the protection of the environment or the protection of public
health, safety and welfare that are administered and enforced by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or by another
commonwealth agency, including an independent agency, and all federal
statutes relating to the protection of the environment, to the extent those
statutes regulate oil and gas operations.[Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No.
127]
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The provision of distribution systems by public
utilities, municipal or other government units regulated by the Public
Utilities Commission (PUC) or other governmental agencies of underground
or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water pipes, sewers, conduit, fire
alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and
accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the
furnishing of adequate services by such public utilities or municipal or
governmental units or for the public health and safety or general welfare.
EXCAVATION — The removal of earth or mineral material from a site when
such removal is not necessary to prepare the site to receive a structure or
structures.
FACADE — The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view.
FAMILY — One of the following:
FARM — Any lot or group of contiguous lots under single ownership
containing at least 10 acres which is used for agriculture, as defined by this
chapter.
FARM ANIMALS — Any animal normally raised for its meat, milk, skins or
other products or for its ability to perform work, including, but not limited
to, horses, cows, pigs, goats, sheep, llamas, donkeys, chickens, roosters,
rabbits, ducks, geese, pigeons, bees and the like. Farm animals shall be
restricted to farms, as defined herein, and shall not be considered domestic
pets, except that no more than one rabbit and/or one duck may be kept as
domestic pets.
All persons living in the same household who are related by birth,
marriage or adoption; or
A.
Those defined as such by the United States Code of Federal Register;
or
B.
No more than four unrelated individuals occupying a premises and
living as single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group
occupying a boardinghouse, group home, hotel or the like.
C.
§ 175-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-8
168:432
FENCE — A structure erected to restrict or prevent passage between
adjoining properties or areas within a property.
FILL — Earth material excavated from elsewhere and deposited during the
process of grading.
FINAL APPROVAL — The ultimate approval of a planned residential
development granted by the Board of Supervisors which follows tentative
approval and filing of an application for final approval, all granted in
accordance with Article XI of this chapter.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS — Banks, savings and loan associations and
similar PA licensed or regulated institutions that lend money or are engaged
in a finance-related business.
FLEX SPACE — Any building which is designed to accommodate a
combination of office and warehousing or office and manufacturing or
assembly.
FLOOR AREA — See "gross floor area” and “net leasable floor area."
FOOD STORE — A retail establishment which has a gross floor area of no
more than 10,000 square feet and which offers for sale specialty or gourmet
food items or meats and groceries which are packaged and which are not
available for consumption on the premises.
FORESTRY — The management of forest and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involve any land development.
FREIGHT TERMINAL — A building and adjacent loading area where cargo
is stored and where commercial vehicles load and unload cargo on a regular
basis which may or may not include facilities for maintenance, fueling,
storage, or dispatching of the vehicles.
FRONTAGE — See "lot frontage."
FRONT LOT LINE — See “lot line, front.”
FUNERAL HOME — A building used for the embalming of deceased human
beings for burial and for the display of the deceased and ceremonies
connected therewith before burial or cremation.
GARDEN APARTMENT — See "dwelling, garden apartment."
GARDEN CENTER — A retail establishment that sells flowers, plants,
shrubs, trees and other natural flora and products which aid their growth
and care and which may include a greenhouse or the growing of plant
material outside on the lot.
GRADING — The process by whatever means of changing the natural and/
or existing contour and/or surface of the land.
GROCERY STORE — A retail establishment in excess of 10,000 square feet
of gross floor area which primarily sells meat and food products but which
§ 175-8 WATER § 175-8
168:433
may also include as accessory uses a pharmacy, a florist, a travel agency,
video rental (excluding an adult video store), banking and copy/fax services.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the horizontal areas of the several
stories of a principal building or buildings on the same lot. All dimensions
shall be measured between exterior faces of walls.
GROUP CARE FACILITY — A facility which provides room and board and
specialized services for more than eight residents who are mentally or
physically handicapped; or any number of permanent residents who are
dependent and/or delinquent children under the age of 18 adjudicated by
the court system; or any number of mentally disturbed persons of any
age who are in need of supervision and staff qualified by the sponsoring
agency who may or may not reside at the facility and who provide health,
social and/or rehabilitative services to the residents under the supervision
of a governmental agency, its licensed or certified agents or any other
responsible nonprofit social services corporation.
GROUP HOME —
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — See "building height."
HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE, OTHER THAN A BUILDING — The vertical
distance measured from the average finished grade around the entire
perimeter of the structure to the highest point of the structure.
HELIPAD — A helicopter landing pad owned by a private entity for use by
helicopters owned or invited by such entity which is licensed by the Bureau
of Aviation, Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and regulated by
the Federal Aviation Administration.
HIDDEN SOURCE — A location for lighting a sign, building or other object
on a property that is designed so that the lights themselves are not visible
from any point outside the property.
HOBBY FARM — A lot with a minimum area of 10 acres where agricultural
activities are conducted by the residents thereof, but where such activities
are not the principal source of employment or income.
HOME-BASED BUSINESS, NO IMPACT — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
A dwelling unit where room and board is provided to not more than
eight permanent residents who are mentally or physically handicapped
persons of any age, who are in need of supervision and specialized
services and no more than two supervisors on any shift who may or
may not reside in the dwelling and who provide health, social and/
or rehabilitative services to the residents under the supervision of a
governmental agency, its licensed or certified agents, or any other
responsible nonprofit social services corporation.
A.
A group home shall be considered a single-family dwelling and shall be
authorized wherever a single-family dwelling is permitted subject to the
requirements of the district applicable to single-family dwellings.
B.
§ 175-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-8
168:434
patient, traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated
with residential use, and which otherwise comply with the requirements of
this chapter.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use that is secondary to the principal
use of a dwelling for living purposes contributing either entirely or partly to
the livelihood of a person living in the dwelling and which does not comply
with the requirements of a no-impact home-based business.
HOSPITAL — An establishment (including sanitariums) for the short-term
care of patients suffering from physical or mental illnesses, but not
including narcotics addiction or those found to be criminally insane, and
which may or may not include facilities for major surgery and which may be
publicly or privately operated.
JUNK VEHICLE — A vehicle which is inoperative or unable to meet the
vehicle registration and inspection standards under Part IV (Section 4101 et
seq.) of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.138 The term does not include
a vehicle which would qualify as an antique or classic vehicle except for its
lack of restoration or maintenance.
JUNKYARD — Land or structure used for the collection, storage, processing
and/or sale of scrap metal, scrapped, abandoned, or junked motor vehicles,
machinery, equipment, wastepaper, glass, rags, containers, and other
discarded materials. Under this chapter, two or more scrapped, abandoned
or junked motor vehicles shall constitute a junkyard. Refuse or garbage
kept in a proper container for prompt disposal shall not be regarded as a
junkyard.
KENNEL — Any household or establishment where more than four dogs
or more than six cats or any combination of dogs and cats exceeding four
animals who are more than six months old are kept, bred, trained and/or
boarded at any one time, whether for profit or not.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
138. Editor's Note: See 75 P.S. § 4101 et seq.
§ 175-8 WATER § 175-8
168:435
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan prepared in accordance with the
application requirements of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance140 for approval of a land development, as defined
herein.
LANDFILL — Any site licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources (PA DER) for the disposal of solid waste, other
than hazardous waste, as defined and regulated by federal statute.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in the land.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A professional licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LANDSCAPE BUSINESS — A business offering off-site delivery of products
and services to clients, including installation and/or maintenance and repair
of trees, shrubs, flowers, ground cover and grasses and/or design and
construction of outdoor spaces, including yards, retaining walls, patios,
decks, fencing, lighting and other outdoor elements.[Added 3-28-2012 by
Ord. No. 123]
LANDSCAPING PLAN — A plan prepared by a registered landscape
architect or certified nurseryman identifying each tree and shrub by size,
type and scientific name, the location of each, including a planting diagram
and such other diagrams or reports as are necessary to show the method of
planting, staking and mulching, grass seeding specifications and mixtures
and existing trees to be preserved.
LARGE LAND DEVELOPMENT OR USE CENTER — Any nonresidential or
mixed use development that has a building area of 50,000 square feet or
more or a gross floor area of 50,000 square feet or more.[Added 7-29-2015
by Ord. No. 128]
LOADING SPACE — A portion of a lot used for the standing, loading, or
unloading of motor vehicles.
LOT — A tract of land in a plan of subdivision or any other parcel of
land described in a deed or legal instrument pursuant to the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania intended to be used as a unit for
development or transfer of ownership.
LOT AREA — That area measured on a horizontal plane bounded by the
front, rear and side lot lines, exclusive of any area within a street right-ofway.
Development in accordance with § 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.139
C.
139. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
140. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 175-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-8
168:436
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the intersection of, and fronting on, two or more
street rights-of-way.
LOT COVERAGE — That portion of the lot area covered by all principal and
accessory structures, expressed as a percentage of the total lot area.
LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE — A lot having two or more of its nonadjoining
property lines abutting on a street, usually having front and rear street
frontage.
LOT, FLAG — An interior, unconventional lot for a single-family detached
dwelling which has direct access to a public or private street by way of a
minimum of a fifty (50') foot access strip. No part of the flag stem or access
strip shall be included in determining the area of the flag lot. No building or
structure shall be permitted in any portion of the flag stem or access strip.
The front building setback line of the required front line shall be measured
only from the interior front line and not from the street line or right-of-way
line. A flag stem or access strip providing access to a flag lot may not exceed
500 feet in length as measured from the street right-of-way to the interior
lot line.[Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
LOT FRONTAGE — The distance between the side lot lines measured along
the front lot line.
LOT LINE — That line which describes the limits of a lot and separates it
from adjoining properties or rights-of-way.
LOT LINE, FRONT — That line which bounds the lot contiguous with the
street right-of-way line or through which the lot has access to a street rightof-
way.
LOT LINE, REAR — That line which is generally opposite to the front lot
line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD — Any lot which individually or as a part of a subdivision,
has been recorded in the Office of Recorder of Deeds of the county.
LOT WIDTH — The straight line distance between the points of intersection
of the building line with the side lot lines.
MANEUVERING SPACE — A portion of a loading area set aside so that
trucks may enter and leave the loading area moving in a forward direction.
MANUFACTURING — Any activity that receives raw or partially prepared
materials from elsewhere for production into finished or partially finished
products or any activity that provides a service in connection with an
industrial process.
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute
mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and
settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement which the
parties themselves create and consider acceptable.
METHADONE TREATMENT FACILITY — A facility owned and operated by
a private for-profit entity, a private nonprofit entity or the Butler County
§ 175-8 WATER § 175-8
168:437
Department of Human Services Bureau of Drug and Alcohol, or equivalent
entity, where the drug methadone or similar substance is prescribed and
administered for the treatment, maintenance or detoxification of persons.
MINERAL REMOVAL — Any extraction of any mineral for sale or other
commercial purposes which involves removal of the surface of the earth or
exposure of the mineral or subsurface of the earth to wind, rain, sun or
other elements of nature. The term "mineral" includes, but is not limited
to, anthracite and bituminous coal, lignite, limestone and dolomite, sand,
gravel, rock, stone, earth, slag, ore, vermiculite, clay and other mineral
resources. Mining activities carried out beneath the surface of the earth
by means of shafts, tunnels or other underground mine openings are not
included in this definition.
MINI-WAREHOUSE/SELF-STORAGE BUILDING — A building or group of
buildings in a controlled access and fenced compound that contains various
sizes of individualized, compartmentalized and controlled access stalls and/
or lockers leased by the general public for a specified period of time for the
dead storage of personal property.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation in a mobile home park.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erections thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which have
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MOTEL/HOTEL — An establishment which provides transient lodging
accommodations to the general public and which may provide such
additional supporting services as restaurants, meeting rooms, recreation
facilities and living quarters for a resident manager or proprietor.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — See "dwelling, multifamily."
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164) known as the "Municipal
Authorities Act of 1945."141
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as amended.
MUNICIPAL RECREATION — See "recreation, municipal."
141. Editor's Note: See Pa C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 175-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-8
168:438
NATURAL GAS — A fossil fuel consisting of a mixture of hydrocarbon
gases, primarily methane, and possibly including ethane, propane, butane,
pentane, carbon dioxide, oxygen, nitrogen and hydrogen sulfide and other
gas species. The term includes natural gas from oil fields known as
"nonassociated" gas, coal beds, shale beds and other formations. The term
does not include coal bed methane.[Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
NATURAL GAS COMPRESSOR STATION — A facility designed and
constructed to compress natural gas that originates from an oil and gas
well site development or collection of such wells operating as a midstream
facility for delivery of natural gas to a transmission pipeline, distribution
pipeline, natural gas processing plant, or underground storage field,
including one or more natural gas compressors, associated buildings, pipes,
valves, tanks and other equipment.[Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
NATURAL GAS PROCESSING PLANT — A facility that is not a natural
gas compressor station and which is designed and constructed to remove
materials and gases such as ethane, propane, butane, and other
constituents or similar substances from natural gas to allow such natural
gas to be of such quality as is required or appropriate for transmission or
distribution to commercial markets.[Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
NET LEASABLE FLOOR AREA — The total floor area of a building designed
for tenant occupancy, excluding halls, corridors, stairwells, elevator shafts,
equipment rooms, restrooms, interior vehicular parking and loading areas
and other areas used in common by tenants of the building, expressed
in square feet and measured from the center line of joint partitions and
exteriors of outside walls.
NONCOMMERCIAL RECREATION — See "recreation, noncommercial."
NONCONFORMING LOT — Any lot which does not comply with the
applicable area and bulk provisions of this chapter or an amendment
hereafter enacted, which lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this
chapter or any subsequent amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure, or part of a structure,
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable area, bulk or other
provisions in this chapter or an amendment hereafter enacted, which
lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter or any subsequent
amendment. Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to,
nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or
an amendment hereafter enacted, which lawfully existed prior to the
enactment of this chapter or any subsequent amendment.
NURSERY SCHOOL — A facility licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania designed to provide daytime care and educational instruction
for compensation to children who are not related to the operator.
§ 175-8 WATER § 175-8
168:439
NURSING HOME — A facility licensed to operate as such by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the purpose of providing skilled or
intermediate nursing care and related medical or other health services.
OFFICES, BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL — Any office of recognized
professions such as doctors, lawyers, architects, engineers, real estate
brokers, insurance agents, and others who, through training, are qualified
to perform services of a professional nature and other offices used primarily
for accounting, corresponding, research, editing or other administrative
functions, but not including banks or other financial institutions.
OFF-STREET PARKING — A paved area of a size specified by this chapter
located entirely outside any public street right-of-way which has direct
access via a driveway or access aisle to a public street.
OIL AND GAS WELL SITE DEVELOPMENT — The term includes the
following: well location assessment, including seismic operations, well site
preparation, construction, drilling, water or fluid storage operations,
hydraulic fracturing and site restoration associated with an oil and gas well
of any depth. The term includes conventional (vertical) and nonconventional
(horizontal) methods of drilling.[Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or
enjoyment.
PA DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or any
successor agency or agencies.
PARAPET — A low wall projecting above the roof of a flat-roofed building,
usually as an extension of the side walls.
PARCEL — A lot or tract in single ownership or under single control.
PARKING LOT — An area utilized to meet the parking requirements of this
chapter, including the parking aisles that provide access to the parking
spaces, but not including any streets or driveways that provide access to the
parking lot.
PATIO — A paved, at-grade open area without permanent covering, no part
of which is more than three feet above the surrounding ground level.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or any
successor agency or agencies.
PERIMETER SETBACK — A line parallel to the exterior property lines which
form the boundary of the site of a mobile home park or planned residential
development, the depth of which is the required distance specified by this
chapter and in which area no structures, streets (other than crossings),
stormwater detention facilities or parking are permitted, but which may
include landscaping, buffer yards, common open space, and underground
piping or lines for water, sewer, gas and electric collection and/or
distribution.[Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
§ 175-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-8
168:440
PERMITTED USE — A use authorized in a zoning district which is subject to
review and approval by the Zoning Officer for compliance with all applicable
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
PERSONAL CARE BOARDING HOME — A facility licensed by the
commonwealth located within a dwelling where room and board is provided
to more than three permanent residents who are not relatives of the
operator and who are mobile or semi-mobile and require specialized
services in such matters as bathing, dressing, diet and medication
prescribed for self-administration for a period exceeding 24 hours, but who
are not in need of hospitalization or skilled or intermediate nursing care.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Any enterprise providing services pertaining to
the person, their apparel, or personal effects commonly carried on or about
the person, including, but not limited to, shoe repair, tailoring, clothes
cleaning, watch repairing, barbershops, beauty parlors and related
activities.
PHARMACY — A retail establishment which does not exceed 10,000 square
feet of gross floor area and which primarily sells prescription drugs, patent
medicines, surgical and sickroom supplies.
PILOT MANUFACTURING — An establishment or part thereof used to
test concepts and ideas, determine physical layouts, material flows and
processes, types of equipment required, costs and other information
necessary prior to undertaking full-scale production.
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY — A public or private lot of land, building or
structure that is designed for the assembly or collection of persons, for
civic, political, religious, educational, social purposes and where recreation,
amusement or dining occur as accessory activities.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — An institution of any denomination where people
regularly observe, practice or participate in religious or spiritual services,
meetings and/or activities.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — An industrial development
which is under single ownership and control at the time of an application for
development and which is planned and developed as a single unit wherein
several buildings or lots utilize a common means of access and may share
other common facilities, such as parking and signs.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land controlled
by a single landowner and developed as a single entity for a number of
dwellings or a combination of residential and nonresidential uses, the plan
for which does not necessarily correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling
unit or use, density or intensity, lot coverage or required open space to any
one district in this chapter.
PLANNED SHOPPING CENTER — A site under single ownership and
control which is developed as a unit for two or more retail establishments
in one or more buildings and designed so that parking, loading and access
facilities are shared.
§ 175-8 WATER § 175-8
168:441
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Middlesex Township Planning
Commission, Butler County, Pennsylvania.
PORCH — A permanent structure attached to a principal building which is
covered by a roof, but which is not enclosed by complete side walls.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The building or buildings on a lot in which the
principal use or uses are conducted.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — The structure or structures in which the
principal use or uses are conducted.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominant use of any lot or structure.
PRIVATE STABLE — The keeping of horses and/or ponies for the personal
use of the residents of a lot, not including any profit-making activities.
PRIVATE STREET — See "street, private."
PROPERTY LINE — All or part of the boundary describing the limits of a
property.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency, federal,
state, county or local.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
governing body or planning agency, intended to inform and obtain public
comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under Chapter 7 of
Title 65 Pa. C.S.A.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not
be more the 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC RECREATION — See "recreation, public."
PUBLIC STREET — See "street, public."
PUBLIC UTILITY —
Any person or corporation now or hereafter owning or operating in this
commonwealth equipment or facilities for:
Producing, generating, transmitting, distributing or furnishing
natural or artificial gas, electricity or steam for the production of
light, heat or power to or for the public for compensation.
(1)
Diverting, developing, pumping, impounding, distributing or
furnishing water to or for the public for compensation.
(2)
(3) Transporting passengers or property as a common carrier.
A.
§ 175-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-8
168:442
PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDING — Any administrative, maintenance, storage or
service building operated by a public utility.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A single axle or multiple axle structure
mounted on wheels or otherwise capable of being made mobile, either
with its own motive power or designed to be mounted on or drawn by
an automotive vehicle for the purpose of travel, camping, vacation and
recreational use, including, but not limited to, travel trailers, motor homes,
tent trailers, boats, boat trailers, pickup truck or van campers and horse
trailers, but not including mobile homes.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL — An enterprise operated by other than a
public entity for profit for the indoor or outdoor pursuit of sports, recreation
and leisure activities, including, but not limited to, such establishments as
miniature golf, golf or batting practice facilities, ice or roller rinks, playing
fields, racquet clubs, swimming pools, amusement parks, arenas, stadiums,
amphitheaters, racetracks and similar facilities.
RECREATION, MUNICIPAL — An enterprise operated by the Township,
available to the general public, whether or not an admission fee is charged,
including either indoor or outdoor facilities for the pursuit of sports,
recreation or leisure activities, including but not limited to parks,
Use as a canal, turnpike, tunnel, bridge, wharf and the like for the
public for compensation.
(4)
Transporting or conveying natural or artificial gas, crude oil,
gasoline or petroleum products, materials for refrigeration, or
oxygen or nitrogen or other fluid substance by pipeline or conduit
for the public for compensation.
(5)
Sewage collection, treatment or disposal for the public for
compensation.
(6)
Conveying or transmitting messages or communications, except as
excluded below, by telephone, telegraph or domestic public land
mobile radio service, including, but not limited to, point-to-point
microwave radio service for the public for compensation.
(7)
The term "public utility" shall not include any of the following:
Any person or corporation, not otherwise a public utility, who or
which furnishes services only to himself or itself.
(1)
Any bona fide cooperative association which furnishes service only
to its stockholders or members on a nonprofit basis.
(2)
Any producer of natural gas not engaged in distributing such gas
directly to the public for compensation.
(3)
Any person or corporation, not otherwise a public utility, who or
which furnishes mobile domestic cellular radio telecommunications
service.
(4)
B.
§ 175-8 WATER § 175-8
168:443
playgrounds, playing fields, golf courses, golf or batting practice facilities,
ice rinks, tennis courts, swimming pools and similar facilities.
RECREATION, NONCOMMERCIAL — An enterprise operated by an
individual, association or corporation, other than a public entity, whether or
not for profit and whether or not the facilities are advertised to the general
public, including either indoor or outdoor facilities for the pursuit of sports,
recreation and leisure activities, the use of which is limited to members and
their guests, including, but not limited to, such establishments as country
clubs, golf courses, sportsmen's clubs, golf practice facilities, playing fields,
tennis or racquet clubs, fitness clubs, swimming pools and similar facilities.
RECREATION, PUBLIC — An enterprise operated by a public entity,
available to the general public, whether or not an admission fee is charged,
including either indoor or outdoor facilities for the pursuit of sports,
recreation or leisure activities, including, but not limited to, parks,
playgrounds, playing fields, golf courses, golf or batting practice facilities,
ice rinks, tennis courts, swimming pools and similar facilities.
REHEARING — Reconsideration after a specified period of time by the
Township Supervisors or the Zoning Hearing Board of an application or
appeal previously not decided in favor of the applicant, but resubmitted
because of changed circumstances or new information affecting the original
application or appeal.
REQUIRED PARKING — The number of off-street parking spaces specified
by this chapter to be provided to accommodate the specific use of the
property.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT — Any establishment which carries on
investigation in the natural, physical or social sciences or engineering
and development as an extension of such investigation with the objective
of creating end products and which may include pilot manufacturing, as
defined by this chapter, as an accessory use.
RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY — A processing facility that provides for
the extraction and utilization of materials or energy from municipal waste
which is generated off site, including, but not limited to, a facility that
mechanically extracts materials from municipal waste, a combustion facility
that converts organic fraction of municipal waste to usable energy and any
chemical or biological process that converts municipal waste into a fuel
product.
RESTAURANT — An establishment whose principal business is the sale of
foods, desserts or beverages to customers in a ready-to-eat state, including
but not limited to conventional or fast-food restaurants.
RETAIL STORE — A business establishment located entirely within an
enclosed building which sells goods, services or merchandise to the general
public for personal, household or office consumption and which shall not
include wholesaling, manufacturing or processing of the goods offered for
sale
§ 175-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-8
168:444
RIGHT-OF-WAY — An area of land reserved or dedicated for public purposes
to provide access across private property.
SCHOOL — A place of instruction operated by a public or religious
organization, having regular sessions, with regularly employed instructors
and meeting all of the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Education for providing primary, secondary, vocational or postsecondary
education. This definition shall not include privately operated, commercial
schools of trade, vocation, avocation or business.
SEMIPUBLIC — Any activity that is operated for the benefit of a
membership or a group on a nonprofit basis, but which may utilize public
funds to finance part of its operation.
SERVICE STATION — See "automobile service station."
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Patently offensive representations or descriptions
of human genitals in a state of sexual arousal or stimulation, ultimate
sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, and patently offensive
representations, descriptions or acts of masturbation, excretory functions,
homosexuality, sodomy, sexual intercourse or fondling or other erotic
touching of a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks
or, if such person be female, breasts.
SIGN — Any structure or device used to attract attention by word or graphic
display.
SIGN, SURFACE AREA OF — See "surface area of sign."
SITE — The original tract of land which exists prior to any subdivision
activity and which is the subject of a preliminary application for
development, as defined by the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.142
SITE AREA — The total area of all lots, rights-of-way, easements, open space
and other features contained within the boundaries of a site.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — See "use by special exception."
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks, female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely or opaquely covered.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above
it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it, including
basements.
STREET — All land between right-of-way lines, whether public or private
and whether improved or unimproved, which is intended to accommodate
vehicular traffic, including an avenue, drive, boulevard, highway road,
freeway, parkway, lane, viaduct or other vehicular way.
142. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 175-8 WATER § 175-8
168:445
STREET, PRIVATE — A street, including the entire private right-of-way,
which is privately owned and maintained through private agreement and
which is intended for private use of the adjoining property owners and their
customers and/or invited guests.
STREET, PUBLIC — A street, including the entire public right-of-way, which
has been dedicated to and accepted by the Township or which has been
devoted to public use by legal mapping, use or other means.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the support members of a
building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders; changes in the
means of ingress and/or egress; enlargement of floor area or height of a
structure; or relocation of a structure from one position to another.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS — The Middlesex Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.143
SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Middlesex,
Butler County, Pennsylvania.
SUPPLY YARDS — A commercial establishment storing or offering for sale
building supplies, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain,
and similar goods. Supply yards do not include the wrecking, salvaging,
dismantling or storage of automobiles and similar vehicles.
SURFACE AREA OF SIGN — That area enclosed by one continuous line,
connecting the extreme points or edges of a sign. The area shall be
determined using the largest sign area or silhouette visible at any one time
from any one point. This area shall not include the main supporting sign
structure, but all other ornamental attachments, inner connecting links,
etc., which are not part of the main supports of the sign shall be included in
determining the surface area of a sign. For two-sided signs, only one face is
counted in computing the surface area.
SURVEYOR — A professional licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
TATTOOING/BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT — Any business or part
thereof, subject to all applicable county and/or state health and licensing
requirements, where the piercing of skin related to tattooing and/or jewelry/
metal is performed for artistic and/or recreational purposes.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE or TEMPORARY USE — A building, structure
or land use activity intended to be active or operated for a period of six
months or less, including but not limited to construction or land sales
trailers, tents, bleachers, air-supported structures, seasonal displays and
similar structures.
143. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 175-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-8
168:446
TENTATIVE APPROVAL — Approval prerequisite to final approval of a
planned residential development granted by the Board of Supervisors in
accordance with Article XI of this chapter.
THEATER — An establishment, other than an adult movie theater or movie
house, inside a completely enclosed building devoted to showing pictures
and/or live dramatic or musical performances.
TOWER SITE — Any lot or parcel on which communications facilities, as
defined herein, are located or proposed to be located.
TOWNHOUSE — See "dwelling."
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middlesex, Butler County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, with training and experience in civil
engineering, duly appointed by the Township Supervisors to serve as the
engineer for the Township.
TOWNSHIP SUPERVISORS — See "supervisors."
TRANSFER FACILITY — A facility licensed by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Resources (PADER) which receives and temporarily stores
solid waste at a location other than the generation site, and which facilitates
the bulk transfer of accumulated solid waste to a facility for further
processing and disposal.
TRANSITIONAL DWELLING — A dwelling unit occupied on a short term
basis by persons assigned by a court of law, or public or semipublic agency
responsible for the occupants' care, safety, conduct, counseling and
supervision for a specified period of time, including alcoholic recovery,
shelters for battered persons and their children, community re-entry
services following incarceration or other court-ordered treatment, and
other such short-term supervised assignments.
TRUCK TERMINAL — A facility to accommodate the service, repair and
storage of trucks and other motorized equipment and trailers, and which
may incidentally provide warehousing activities and transfer facilities.
UNDISTURBED SOIL — Ground surface which has not been altered in
connection with grading for construction nor previously altered for a period
of at least two years prior to such grading.
USE — Any activity, business or purpose for which any lot or structure is
utilized.
USE BY SPECIAL — Exception: An authorized use which may be granted
only by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with express standards and
criteria specified in this chapter after public hearing.
VARIANCE — A departure from the strict letter of the Zoning Ordinance,
as it applies to specific properties, as authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with the terms of this chapter and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 175-8 WATER § 175-8
168:447
VEHICLE REPAIR GARAGE — A building, or part thereof, used for the
servicing and repairing of motor vehicles, including engine overhaul, body
work and repairing/retreading of tires and where all storage of parts and
dismantled vehicles and all repair work are conducted entirely inside an
enclosed building.
VEHICLE SALES — A retail establishment which may include one or more
of the following: an open area, other than a street, for the display and
sale of new or used automobiles and light-duty trucks; buildings which
may contain offices and showrooms; an area within a completely enclosed
building where reconditioning, preparation, accessory installation, repairs
and/or servicing of such vehicles may be performed.
WAREHOUSING — The storage and handling of freight or merchandise, but
not including the maintenance or fueling of commercial vehicles.
WHOLESALE BUSINESS — A business primarily engaged in selling
merchandise to retailers, institutional, commercial or professional business
customers or other wholesalers, rather than to the general public, which
includes the warehousing of merchandise and which may include
distribution of such merchandise on the site of the principal business.
YARD — A required open space located on a lot which is unobstructed by
any portion of a principal structure other than certain projections expressly
permitted by this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full lot width and abutting the
front lot line. The depth measurement required by this chapter for the front
yard shall be the horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line
parallel or concentric thereto known as the "building line."
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the width of the lot between the
side yards and adjoining the rear lot line. The minimum depth measurement
required by this chapter shall be the horizontal distance between the rear
lot line and a line parallel thereto.
YARD SIDE — A yard extending between the building line and the rear yard
line parallel to the side lot line. The minimum width measurement required
by this chapter shall be the horizontal distance between the side lot line and
a line parallel thereto.
ZONING CLASSIFICATION — The zoning district designation assigned to a
particular property shown on the Zoning District Map.
ZONING DISTRICT — Administrative areas within the Township
designating the uses to which land can legally be utilize and within which
are specified a uniform set of controls and for which the boundaries are
shown on the Zoning District Map.
ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARY — A line on the Zoning District Map which
separates one Zoning District from another.
ZONING DISTRICT MAP — The official map delineating the Zoning Districts
of Middlesex Township, Butler County, Pennsylvania, together with all
amendments subsequently adopted incorporated as part of this chapter.
§ 175-8 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-8
168:448
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of Middlesex
Township, Butler County, Pennsylvania.
ZONING OFFICER — The designated official or an authorized
representative appointed by the Supervisors whose duty it shall be to
administer this chapter.
§ 175-8 WATER § 175-8
168:449

ARTICLE III
Map; Districts; Boundaries; General Regulations
§ 175-9. Zoning District Map.
A map entitled "Middlesex Township Zoning District Map" is hereby
adopted as part of this chapter.144 The Zoning District Map shall be kept on
file available for examination at the office of the Zoning Officer. The Map
shall be signed and attested by the Township Secretary and shall bear the
Seal of the Township. All amendments affecting district boundaries shall be
noted on the Map by the Township Engineer, including date of adoption, and
shall be attested to by the Township Secretary.
§ 175-10. Enumeration of districts; general concepts.
A. The Township is divided into the districts stated in this Ordinance as
shown by the district boundaries on the Zoning Map. The Districts are:
[Amended 11-21-2012 by Ord. No. 125; 11-16-2016 by Ord. No.
130; 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
AG-A Rural Residential District
R-AG Residential Agricultural District
AG-B Agricultural District
R-1 Suburban Residential District
R-2 Moderate-Intensity Residential District
TC Town Center District
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
C-2 Highway Commercial District
C-3 Regional Commerce District
I-1 Restricted Industrial District
ADO Airport District Overlay
Route 228
COD
Route 228 Corridor Overlay District
B. The following descriptions summarize the general concepts for each of
the Township's existing and proposed zoning districts. [Amended
11-21-2012 by Ord. No. 125; 11-16-2016 by Ord. No. 130;
3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
(1) AG-A Rural Residential District. The purpose of this district is to
provide for agricultural uses and estate-type single-family
residential development in rural areas where public utility facilities
may not be immediately available and to provide for compatible
public, semipublic and accessory uses.
144. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 175-9 WATER § 175-10
168:451
(2) AG-B Agricultural District. The purpose of this district is to provide
for the continuation of large farms and to authorize estate-type
single-family development in areas outside the service area if
public utilities are provided within the Township or in areas
expected to be served by the extension of public utilities from
adjoining communities and to authorize compatible public,
semipublic and accessory uses complementing agricultural and low
density residential development.
(3) R-1 Low Intensity Residential District. The purpose of this district
is to accommodate areas with existing residential development of
low-intensity adjacent to the regional transportation network and
easily served by the future extension of public utilities in the
Township.
(4) R-2 Moderate-Intensity Residential District. The purpose of this
district is to accommodate areas of moderate-intensity singlefamily
and multifamily residential development that complement
existing residential development patterns and infrastructure
availability.
(5) TC Town Center District. The purpose of this district is to provide a
mixture of residential, retail shopping, consumer service and
personal service uses intended to serve household needs where
such land use activity, character and scale can be accessible for
pedestrians and vehicles to and from adjacent residential areas as
well as considers the Township's historic development patterns
while accommodating modern trends.
(6) C-1 Neighborhood-Scale Commercial District. The purpose of this
district is to provide retail shopping and service facilities which
serve immediate households' needs, do not adversely impact
neighboring residential uses and are appropriate to smaller
properties that accommodate uses of a limited type and size which
do not generate large amounts of traffic.
(7) C-2 Community-Scale Commercial District. The purpose of this
district is to provide for retail and consumer and personal serviceoriented
facilities which serve the needs of the general community
and are located in high-volume traffic corridors to promote
convenient access and minimize the traffic impact on
neighborhoods and local roads.
(8) C-3 Regional Commerce District. The purpose of this district is to
accommodate larger-scale nonresidential facilities, generally
located in high-volume traffic corridors, and where such uses are
primarily retail, office, research and development, and limited
industrial in nature and geared to the needs of both the community
and the region.
(9) I-1 Restricted Industrial District. The purpose of this district is to
provide for light industrial uses in appropriate locations adjacent to
§ 175-10 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-10
168:452
§ 175-11. District boundaries.
the regional transportation network consistent with sound planning
and environmental controls.
(10) R-AG Residential Agriculture District. The purpose of this district is
to provide for agricultural uses, low-density residential
development and planned higher density development in areas
where the general character is defined by rural areas which are in
close proximity to major roads, infrastructure and areas near
existing concentrated residential development and to provide for
compatible public, semipublic and accessory uses as conditional
uses or uses by special exception.
(11)ADO Airport District Overlay. The purpose of this district is to
consider safety issues around the Pittsburgh-Butler Regional
Airport, to regulate and restrict the heights of constructed
structures and objects of natural growth, create appropriate zones,
establish the boundaries thereof and provide for changes in
restrictions and boundaries of such zones, create the permitting
process for use within said zones and provide for enforcement,
assessment of violation penalties, an appeals process, and judicial
review.
(12) Route 228 COD Route 228 Corridor Overlay District. The purpose
of this overlay district is to provide a land use management tool to
guide new development in a manner consistent with the Township's
Comprehensive Plans to maintain the Township's unique rural
character while allowing for economic growth that will benefit the
Township, neighboring communities, and the larger region. The
MPC provides in Section 605(2)145 for the establishment of
additional zoning classifications (overlay districts) to be made
within any zoning district for the regulation, restriction or
prohibition of uses and structures at, along, or near major
thoroughfares, their intersections and interchanges, and
transportation arteries. This portion of Route 228, between the
Township's western border and the intersection of Route 228 and
Route 8, is a major thoroughfare in need of special attention with
regard to land use and development in the Township.
A. District boundaries shown within the lines of roads, streams and
transportation rights-of-way shall be deemed to follow the center lines.
The vacation of roads shall not affect the location of such district
boundaries.
B. When the Zoning Officer cannot definitely determine the location of a
district boundary by such center lines, by the scale or dimension stated
on the Zoning District Map, or by the fact that it clearly coincides with a
property line, he shall refuse action, and the Zoning Hearing Board,
145. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10605(2).
§ 175-10 WATER § 175-11
168:453
§ 175-12. Regulations applicable in all districts.
These general regulations shall apply in all zoning districts.
upon appeal, shall interpret the location of the district boundary with
reference to the scale of the Zoning District Map and the purposes set
forth in all relevant provisions of this chapter.
A. Any use not expressly listed for a zoning district is not permitted in that
district, unless authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a
comparable use not specifically listed in accordance with the provisions
of § 175-105 of this chapter only in those districts where comparable
uses not specifically listed are expressly listed as a use by special
exception in the district.
B. Accessory structures which are customarily accessory to principal
structures or uses authorized as uses by special exception shall be
permitted as accessory uses by right.
C. In the AG-A, AG-B and R-AG Districts, principal farm buildings and
structures may occupy the same lot as a single-family dwelling. Two
single-family dwellings shall not occupy the same lot unless all
applicable requirements of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance are met. [Amended 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
D. In the R-1 District, a single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling shall
be the only principal structure on the lot. All dwelling units shall be
located within the same principal structure.
E. In all districts, all accessory structures shall be located on the same lot
with the principal structure to which they are accessory. When two
adjoining lots are in the same ownership, an accessory structure shall
not be constructed on a lot adjoining the lot on which the principal
structure is located. A consolidation plan for the two adjoining lots shall
be required so that the principal structure and accessory structure may
occupy the same lot.
F. In the C-1, C-2, I-1, C-3 and Route 228 Corridor Overlay Districts,
several authorized uses may occupy the same lot or structure, provided
all applicable requirements for each of the uses can be met on the lot.
[Amended 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127; 8-21-2019 by Ord. No.
134]
G. No part of any yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading
space required for any building or structure to comply with the
provisions of this chapter shall be included as part of a yard, open
space, off-street parking or loading space required for any other
building or structure.
H. All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the Township shall be
placed in the AG-B, Agricultural Zoning District, until the Planning
Commission has made a thorough study of the newly annexed area,
§ 175-11 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-12
168:454
reported its recommendations to the Township Supervisors, and the
Township Supervisors have adopted a final zoning district classification,
This study and report by the Planning Commission shall be made within
three months of the date of annexation.
§ 175-12 WATER § 175-12
168:455

ARTICLE IV
AG-A Rural Residential District
§ 175-13. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide for agricultural uses and lowdensity
residential development in rural areas where public sewer and/
or water facilities may not be immediately available and to provide for
compatible public, semipublic and accessory uses as conditional uses or
uses by special exception.
§ 175-14. Authorized uses.
In the AG-A Rural Residential District, the following uses are authorized:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Farms.
(b) Greenhouse or tree nursery.
(c) Single-family dwellings.
(d) Two-family dwellings.
(e) Government buildings.
(f) Municipal firehouses.
(g) Schools.
(h) Public utilities, except buildings.
(i) Municipal recreation.
(j) Oil and gas well site development, subject to § 175-155.2.
[Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Signs, subject to Article XIV.
(b) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article XIII.
(c) Private garages and storage sheds.
(d) Private residential swimming pools or tennis courts, subject to
§ 175-142C.
(e) Fences.
(f) Gardening as an avocation.
(g) Keeping of domestic pets.
§ 175-13 WATER § 175-14
168:457
(h) Private stables or hobby farms, subject to § 175-146.
(i) Sale of farm products, subject to § 175-145C.
(j) Construction trailer or temporary dwelling, subject to
§ 175-147.
(k) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district.
(l) Oil and gas well site development, subject to § 175-155.2.
[Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
(m) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district. [Added
8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
B. Conditional uses. [Amended 11-21-2012 by Ord. No. 125]
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Mobile home parks, subject to § 175-120.
(b) Golf courses and country clubs, subject to § 175-110.
(c) Public recreation, subject to § 175-126.
(d) Noncommercial recreation, subject to § 175-126.
(e) Public utility buildings, subject to § 175-127.
(f) Lakes, ponds and water impoundments, subject to § 175-117.
(g) Natural gas compressor station, subject to § 175-155.3.
[Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
C. Uses by special exception.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Kennels and veterinary clinics, subject to § 175-116.
(b) Horse boarding and riding academies, subject to § 175-114.
(c) Conversion apartments, subject to § 175-106.
(d) Places of worship, subject to § 175-101.
(e) Cemeteries, subject to § 175-100.
(f) Day-care center or nursery school in a place of worship or
school, subject to § 175-107.
(g) Nursing home, subject to § 175-102.
§ 175-14 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-14
168:458
§ 175-15. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 11-21-2012 by Ord.
No. 125]
In the AG-A Rural Residential District, all uses shall be subject to the
following regulations, or by the express standards and criteria for the
specific conditional uses or uses by special exception contained in Article
XI.
(h) Personal care boarding home, subject to § 175-111.
(i) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction trailer
or temporary dwelling subject to § 175-129.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Kennels and veterinary clinics, subject to § 175-116.
(b) Horse boarding and riding academies, subject to § 175-114.
(c) Home occupations, subject to § 175-113.
(d) Private use helipad, subject to § 175-125.
A. Minimum lot size:
(1) Farms: 20 acres.
(2) Single-family dwellings: [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
(a) On lots with both public water and public sewage: threequarters
(3/4) of an acre (32,670 square feet).
(b) On lots without public water or public sewage: one acre
(43,560 square feet).
(3) Two-family dwellings: [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
(a) On lots with both public water and public sewage: one and onehalf
(1.5) acres (65,340 square feet).
(b) On lots without public water or public sewage: two acres
(87,120 square feet).
(4) Schools: five acres.
(5) All other uses: one acre.
B. Minimum lot width:
(1) Farms: 200 feet.
(2) Single-family dwellings: 125 feet. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord.
No. 133]
(3) Two-family dwellings: 175 feet. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord.
No. 133]
§ 175-14 WATER § 175-15
168:459
§ 175-16. Parking and loading.
See Article XIII.
§ 175-17. Signs.
See Article XIV.
§ 175-18. Screening and landscaping.
See § 175-140.
§ 175-19. Steep slope controls.
See § 175-141.
(4) All other uses: 150 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage:
(1) Farms: 5%.
(2) All others: 20%
D. Minimum front yard: 50 feet from front lot line or 75 feet from street
center line, whichever is greater.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) Principal structures: 75 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: 10 feet.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Dwellings: 25 feet each side.
(2) Accessory structures: 10 feet each side.
G. Special yard requirements: See § 175-142.
H. Permitted projections into required yards: See § 175-143.
I. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: 35 feet and 2 1/2 stories.
(2) All accessory structures.
(a) Less than two acres: 15 feet.
(b) Two or more acres: 25 feet.
J. Height exceptions: See § 175-144.
§ 175-15 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-19
168:460
ARTICLE V
AG-B Agricultural District
§ 175-20. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide for the continuation of large farms
and to authorize low-density single-family development in areas outside the
service area if public utilities are provided within the Township or in areas
expected to be served by the extension of public utilities from adjoining
communities and to authorize compatible public, semipublic and accessory
uses as conditional uses or uses by special exception which complement the
agricultural and low-density residential development.
§ 175-21. Authorized uses.
In the AG-B Agricultural District, the following uses are authorized:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Farms.
(b) Greenhouse or tree nursery.
(c) Single-family dwellings.
(d) Two-family dwellings.
(e) Government buildings.
(f) Municipal fire houses.
(g) Schools.
(h) Public utilities, except buildings.
(i) Municipal recreation.
(j) Oil and gas well site development, subject to § 175-155.2.
[Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Signs, subject to Article XIV.
(b) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article XIII.
(c) Private garages and storage sheds.
(d) Private residential swimming pools or tennis courts, subject to
§ 175-142C.
(e) Fences.
(f) Gardening as an avocation.
§ 175-20 WATER § 175-21
168:461
(g) Keeping of domestic pets.
(h) Private stables or hobby farms, subject to § 175-146.
(i) Sale of farm products, subject to § 175-145C.
(j) Construction trailer or temporary dwelling, subject to
§ 175-147.
(k) Oil and gas well site development, subject to § 175-155.2.
[Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127146]
(l) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district.
B. Conditional uses. [Amended 11-21-2012 by Ord. No. 125]
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Mobile home parks, subject to § 175-120.
(b) Golf courses and country clubs, subject to § 175-110.
(c) Public recreation, subject to § 175-126.
(d) Noncommercial recreation, subject to § 175-126.
(e) Public utility buildings, subject to § 175-127.
(f) Lakes, ponds, water impoundments, subject to § 175-117.
(g) Natural gas compressor station, subject to § 175-155.3.
[Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
C. Uses by special exception.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Kennels and veterinary clinics, subject to § 175-116.
(b) Horse boarding and riding academies, subject to § 175-114.
(c) Mineral removal, subject to § 175-119.
(d) Landfill, subject to § 175-118.
(e) Conversion apartments, subject to § 175-106.
(f) Places of worship, subject to § 175-101.
(g) Cemeteries, subject to § 175-100.
146. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection A(2)(k) as Subsection
A(2)(1).
§ 175-21 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-21
168:462
§ 175-22. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 11-21-2012 by Ord.
No. 125]
In the AG-B Agricultural District, all uses shall be subject to the following
regulations or by the express standards and criteria for the specific
conditional uses or uses by special exception contained in Article XI.
(h) Day-care center or nursery school in a place of worship or
school, subject to § 175-107.
(i) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction trailer
or temporary dwelling, subject to § 175-129.
(j) Communications facilities, subject to § 175-132.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Kennels and veterinary clinics, subject to § 175-116.
(b) Horse boarding and riding academies, subject to § 175-114.
(c) Home occupations, subject to § 175-113.
(d) Private use helipad, subject to § 175-125.
A. Minimum lot size:
(1) Farms: 20 acres.
(2) Single-family dwellings: one acre (43,560 square feet.).
(3) Two-family dwellings: two acres (87,120 square feet.).
(4) All other uses: one acre (43,560 square feet.).
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage:
(1) Farms: 5%.
(2) All others: 20%.
D. Minimum front yard: 50 feet from front lot line or 75 feet from street
center line, whichever is greater.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) Principal structures: 75 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: 10 feet.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Dwellings: 25 feet each side.
(2) Accessory structures: 10 feet each side.
§ 175-21 WATER § 175-22
168:463
§ 175-23. Parking and loading.
See Article XIII.
§ 175-24. Signs.
See Article XIV.
§ 175-25. Screening and landscaping.
See § 175-140.
§ 175-26. Steep slope controls.
See § 175-141.
G. Special yard requirements: See § 175-142.
H. Permitted projections into required yards: See § 175-143.
I. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: 35 feet and 2 1/2 stories.
(2) All accessory structures.
(a) Less than two acres: 15 feet.
(b) Two or more acres: 25 feet
J. Height exceptions: See § 175-144.
§ 175-22 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-26
168:464
ARTICLE VI
R-1 Suburban Residential District
§ 175-27. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to accommodate areas with existing
development on smaller lots adjacent to the regional transportation network
and easily served by the future extension of public utilities in the Township.
§ 175-28. Authorized uses.
In the R-1 Suburban Residential District, the following uses are authorized:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Single-family dwellings.
(b) Two-family dwellings.
(c) Government buildings.
(d) Municipal firehouses.
(e) Schools.
(f) Public utilities, except buildings.
(g) Municipal recreation.
(h) Landscape business, subject to § 175-155.1. [Added
3-28-2012 by Ord. No. 123]
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Signs, subject to Article XIV.
(b) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article XIII.
(c) Private garages and storage sheds.
(d) Private residential swimming pools or tennis courts, subject to
§ 175-142C.
(e) Fences.
(f) Gardening as an avocation.
(g) Keeping of domestic pets.
(h) Construction trailers or temporary dwellings, subject to
§ 175-147.
§ 175-27 WATER § 175-28
168:465
§ 175-29. Area and bulk regulations.
In the R-1 Suburban Residential District all uses shall be subject to the
following regulations, except as they may be modified by Article X
governing planned residential development or by the express standards
and criteria for the specific conditional uses or uses by special exception
contained in Article XI.
(i) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Planned residential development, subject to Article X.
(b) Public recreation, subject to § 175-126.
(c) Noncommercial recreation, subject to § 175-126.
(d) Public utility buildings, subject to § 175-127.
C. Uses by special exception.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Places of worship, subject to § 175-101.
(b) Conversion apartments, subject to § 175-106.
(c) Day-care center or nursery school in a place of worship or
school, subject to § 175-107.
(d) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction trailer
or temporary dwelling, subject to § 175-129.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Home occupations, subject to § 175-113.
A. Minimum lot size:
(1) Single-family dwelling: 22,000 square feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(3) All other uses: one acre.
B. Minimum lot width:
(1) Single-family dwelling: 100 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 150 feet.
§ 175-28 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-29
168:466
§ 175-30. Parking and loading.
See Article XIII.
§ 175-31. Signs.
See Article XIV.
§ 175-32. Screening and landscaping.
See § 175-140.
§ 175-33. Steep slope controls.
See § 175-141.
(3) All other uses: 150 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
D. Minimum front yard: 50 feet from front lot line or 75 feet from street
center line, whichever is greater.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) Principal structures: 50 feet.
(2) All accessory structures: 10 feet.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Principal structures.
(a) Single-family dwellings: 15 feet each side.
(b) Two-family dwellings: 25 feet each side
(c) All other uses: 10 feet each side.
G. Special yard requirements: See § 175-142.
H. Permitted projections into required yards: See § 175-143.
I. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: 35 feet and 2 1/2 stories.
(2) All accessory structures: 15 feet.
J. Height exceptions: See § 175-144.
§ 175-29 WATER § 175-33
168:467

ARTICLE VII
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
§ 175-34. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide retail shopping and service
facilities to serve immediate household needs which are of a limited type
and size appropriate to smaller properties, which do not generate large
amounts of traffic and which do not adversely impact neighboring
residential uses.
§ 175-35. Authorized uses.
In the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District, the following uses are
authorized:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Bakery, candy, confectionery, ice cream or pastry retail sales,
including food processing of products sold on the premises and
excluding food processing of products for delivery elsewhere.
(b) Card and gift shop.
(c) Coin-operated laundry.
(d) Convenience store.
(e) Day-care enter.
(f) Dry cleaning pickup store.
(g) Financial institution.
(h) Florist shop, excluding greenhouse.
(i) Food store.
(j) Fruit and vegetable stand.
(k) Newsstand, excluding adult bookstore.
(l) Personal services.
(m) Pharmacy.
(n) Professional and business offices.
(o) Video store, excluding adult video store.
(p) Public utilities, except buildings.
(2) Accessory uses.
§ 175-34 WATER § 175-35
168:469
§ 175-36. Area and bulk regulations.
In the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District, all uses shall be subject to
the following regulations, except as they may be modified by the express
standards and criteria for the specific conditional uses and uses by special
exception contained in Article XI.
(a) Signs, subject to Article XIV.
(b) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article XIII.
(c) Construction trailer or temporary dwelling, subject to
§ 175-147.
(d) Accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the same lot
with any permitted use, conditional use or use by special
exception authorized in this district.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Drive-in facilities, subject to § 175-108.
(b) Public utility buildings, subject to § 175-127.
C. Uses by special exception.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Group care facility or transitional dwelling, subject to
§ 175-111.
(b) Clinics, subject to § 175-102.
(c) Places of worship, subject to § 175-101.
(d) Comparable uses not specifically listed, subject to § 175-105.
(e) Day-care center, subject to § 175-107.
(f) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction trailer
or temporary dwelling, subject to § 175-129.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Home occupation in a single-family dwelling which is a
nonconforming use, subject to § 175-113.
A. Minimum lot size: one acre (43,560 square feet).
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
§ 175-35 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-36
168:470
§ 175-37. Parking and loading.
See Article XIII.
§ 175-38. Signs.
See Article XIV.
§ 175-39. Performance standards.
See § 175-139.
§ 175-40. Storage.
See § 175-149.
§ 175-41. Screening and landscaping.
See § 175-140.
§ 175-42. Vehicular access.
See § 175-150.
D. Minimum front yard: 75 feet from front lot line or 100 feet from street
center line, whichever is greater
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) All principal structures: 75 feet.
(2) All accessory structures: 10 feet.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Principal structures.
(a) Adjoining AG or R District: 40 feet.
(b) All Others: 20 feet each side.
(2) Accessory structure: 10 feet.
G. Special yard requirements: See § 175-142.
H. Permitted projections into required yards: See § 175-143.
I. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: 35 feet and two stories.
(2) All accessory structures: 15 feet and one story.
J. Height exceptions: See § 175-144.
§ 175-36 WATER § 175-43
168:471
§ 175-43. Steep slope controls.
See § 175-141.
§ 175-43 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-43
168:472
ARTICLE VIII
C-2 Highway Commercial District
§ 175-44. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide for retail and service facilities
which serve the needs of the general community and which are located in
high-volume traffic corridors to allow convenient access and to minimize the
traffic impact on neighborhoods and local roads.
§ 175-45. Authorized uses.
In the C-2 Highway Commercial District, the following uses are authorized:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Any permitted use specifically listed in the C-1 District.
(b) Apparel and accessories store.
(c) Appliance, home furnishing store.
(d) Bakery, candy, confectionery, ice cream or pastry retail sales,
including food processing for sale on premises or delivery
elsewhere.
(e) Business services.
(f) Catering service, including rental hall.
(g) Drugstore.
(h) Grocery store.
(i) General merchandise store.
(j) Other retail stores.
(k) Business and professional offices.
(l) Business services.
(m) Commercial school.
(n) Restaurant.
(o) Funeral home.
(p) Garden center.
(q) Motel/hotel.
(r) Private club.
§ 175-44 WATER § 175-45
168:473
(s) Theaters, excluding adult theaters.
(t) Public utilities, except buildings.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Signs, subject to Article XIV.
(b) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article XIII.
(c) Construction trailer or temporary dwelling, subject to
§ 175-147.
(d) Accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the same lot
with any permitted use, conditional use or use by special
exception authorized in this district.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Automobile service station, subject to § 175-97.
(b) Billboards, subject to § 175-98.
(c) Car wash, subject to § 175-99.
(d) Commercial recreation, subject to § 175-104.
(e) Drive-in facilities, subject to § 175-108.
(f) New and used vehicle sales, subject to § 175-121.
(g) Outdoor sales of mobile homes, recreational vehicles or heavy
equipment, subject to § 175-122.
(h) Planned shopping center, subject to § 175-124.
(i) Vehicle repair garages, subject to § 175-130.
(j) Wholesale sales in conjunction with retail business subject to
§ 175-131.
(k) Commercial supply yard.
(l) Oil and gas well site development, subject to § 175-155.2.
[Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
(m) Large land development. [Added 7-29-2015 by Ord. No.
128]
C. Uses by special exception.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Clinic or hospital, subject to § 175-102.
§ 175-45 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-45
168:474
§ 175-46. Area and bulk regulations.
In the C-2 Highway Commercial District, all uses shall be subject to the
following regulations, except as they may be modified by the express
standards and criteria for the specific conditional uses and uses by special
exception contained in Article XI.
(b) Comparable uses not specifically listed, subject to § 175-105.
(c) Day-care center, subject to § 175-107.
(d) Group care facility or transitional dwelling, subject to
§ 175-111.
(e) Veterinary clinics, subject to § 175-116.
(f) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction trailer
or temporary dwelling, subject to § 175-129.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Home occupation in a single-family dwelling which is a
nonconforming use, subject to § 175-113.
(b) Private use helipad, subject to § 175-125.
A. Minimum lot size: one acre (43,560 square feet).
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
D. Minimum front yard: 75 feet from front lot line or 100 feet from street
center line, whichever is greater.
E. Minimum rear yard: 75 feet.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Adjoining AG or R District: 40 feet.
(2) All others: 20 feet each side.
G. Minimum distance between buildings: 20 feet (where there is more
than one building on a lot)
H. Special yard requirements: See § 175-142.
I. Permitted projections into required yards: See § 175-143.
J. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: 45 feet and three stories.
(2) All accessory structures: 20 feet and one story.
§ 175-45 WATER § 175-46
168:475
§ 175-47. Parking and loading.
See Article XIII.
§ 175-48. Signs.
See Article XIV.
§ 175-49. Performance standards.
See § 175-139.
§ 175-50. Storage.
See § 175-149.
§ 175-51. Screening and landscaping.
See § 175-140.
§ 175-52. Vehicular access.
See § 175-150.
§ 175-53. Steep slope controls.
See § 175-141.
K. Height exceptions: See § 175-144.
§ 175-46 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-53
168:476
ARTICLE IX
I-1 Restricted Industrial District
§ 175-54. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide for light industrial uses in
appropriate locations adjacent to the regional transportation network
consistent with sound planning and environmental controls.
§ 175-55. Authorized uses.
In the I-1 Restricted Industrial District, the following uses are authorized:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Business and professional offices.
(b) Freight and truck terminals.
(c) Laundry and dry cleaning plants.
(d) Manufacturing, as defined herein.
(e) Mini-warehouses.
(f) Printing or publishing plants.
(g) Research and development, including pilot manufacturing.
(h) Warehousing and distribution.
(i) Wholesaling.
(j) Public utilities, except buildings.
(k) Oil and gas well site development, subject to § 175-155.2.
[Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
(l) Natural gas compressor station, subject to § 175-155.3.
[Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Signs, subject to Article XIV.
(b) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article XIII.
(c) Employee cafeteria or dining room.
(d) Construction trailer or temporary dwelling, subject to
§ 175-147.
§ 175-54 WATER § 175-55
168:477
§ 175-56. Area and bulk regulations.
In the I-1 Restricted Industrial District, all uses shall be subject to the
following regulations, except as they may be modified by the express
standards and criteria for the specific conditional uses and uses by special
exception contained in Article XI.
(e) Accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the same lot
with any permitted use, conditional use or use by special
exception authorized in this district.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Billboards, subject to § 175-98.
(b) Collection and recycling facility, subject to § 175-103.
(c) Flex space, subject to § 175-109.
(d) Junkyard, subject to § 175-115.
(e) Planned industrial park, subject to § 175-123.
(f) Public utility buildings, subject to § 175-127.
(g) Resource recovery facility, subject to § 175-118.
(h) Supply yard, subject to § 175-128.
(i) Vehicular and heavy equipment repair garage, subject to
§ 175-130.
(j) Natural gas processing plant, subject to § 175-155.3. [Added
8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Private use helipad in an industrial park, subject to § 175-125.
C. Uses by special exception.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Adult business, subject to § 175-96.
(b) Comparable uses not specifically listed, subject to § 175-105.
(c) Hazardous waste, transportation, disposal, treatment or
storage facility, subject to § 175-112.
(d) Landfill, subject to § 175-118.
(e) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction trailer
or temporary dwelling, subject to § 175-129.
§ 175-55 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-56
168:478
§ 175-57. Parking and loading.
See Article XIII.
§ 175-58. Signs.
See Article XIV.
§ 175-59. Performance standards.
See § 175-139.
§ 175-60. Storage.
See § 175-149.
§ 175-61. Screening and landscaping.
See § 175-140.
A. Minimum lot size: one acre (43,560 square feet).
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
D. Minimum front yard: 75 feet from front lot line or 100 feet from street
center line, whichever is greater.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) Adjoining AG or R District: 100 feet.
(2) All others: 75 feet.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Adjoining AG or R District: 50 feet.
(2) All others: 35 feet.
G. Minimum distance between buildings: 20 feet (where there is more
than one building on a lot).
H. Special yard requirements: See § 175-142.
I. Permitted projections into required yards: See § 175-143.
J. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: 50 feet and three stories.
(2) All accessory structures: 30 feet and one story.
K. Height exceptions: See § 175-144.
§ 175-56 WATER § 175-62
168:479
§ 175-62. Vehicular accesses
See § 175-150.
§ 175-63. Steep slope controls
See § 175-141.
§ 175-62 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-63
168:480
ARTICLE X
Planned Residential Development
[Amended 10-3-2007 by Ord. No. 113; 11-21-2012 by Ord. No. 125;
3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
§ 175-64. Purpose; legislative authority.
§ 175-65. Design standards.
All design standards and improvements of the land development plan for a
proposed planned residential development shall also meet the requirements
set forth in the Middlesex Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,148 except as expressly stated in this ordinance. If the provisions
of this section are inconsistent with other provisions of this ordinance, the
provisions of this section shall apply.
A. The purpose of the Planned Residential Development District is to:
(1) Encourage innovations in residential development to meet the
growing demand for housing;
(2) Support greater variety in type, design and layout of dwelling units;
(3) Conserve open space and encourage a more efficient use of land,
public services and infrastructure;
(4) Promote increased flexibility of land development and density
regulations;
(5) Provide a procedure to relate the type, design and layout of
residential development to the characteristics of a particular parcel
to the characteristics of the Township's varying landscapes.
B. The authority for enacting these planned residential development
provisions is Article VII of the Municipalities Planning Code.147 All
procedures and requirements of Article VII of the Municipalities
Planning Code are incorporated herein.
A. Planned residential development parcel.
(1) Planned residential developments are permitted within the R-1, R-2
and R-AG districts.
(2) The minimum number of acres that may be developed as a planned
residential development parcel is 30 acres.
(3) The development parcel shall be serviced by public water and
public sewers approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP). Utilities within the development
147. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10701 et seq.
148. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 175-64 WATER § 175-65
168:481
parcel shall be provided by a public utility and/or a local municipal
authority. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
(4) The planned residential development parcel shall have a perimeter
setback, as defined by this chapter, which is a minimum of 50 feet
in depth around its entire boundary (except for street crossings),
which area shall not be included in any lot within the development.
[Added 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133149]
(5) No structures, stormwater detention facilities or parking are
permitted within the perimeter setback. Only landscaping, buffer
yards, common open space, and underground piping or lines for
water, sewer, gas and electric collection and/or distribution shall be
permitted within the perimeter setback. The impact of the
excavation for and location of utility lines on trees located on
neighboring properties shall be considered. [Added 3-20-2019 by
Ord. No. 133]
(6) Ancillary nonresidential uses may be permitted in a planned
residential development parcel only if all of the following criteria
are met:
(a) Construction of the ancillary nonresidential units shall not be
permitted until 80% of all proposed dwelling units in the
planned residential development are constructed and occupied
or ready for occupancy.
(b) The ancillary nonresidential uses shall be designed primarily to
serve residents of the planned residential development.
(c) The ancillary nonresidential uses shall be limited to the ground
or street floors of a residential building containing multifamily
dwelling units or to a single freestanding building on the
planned residential development parcel.
(d) The total floor area devoted to the ancillary nonresidential uses
shall not exceed 15% of the total floor area of all buildings
devoted to residential use in the planned residential
development.
(e) Any freestanding building proposed to contain ancillary
nonresidential uses shall not be located within 100 feet of any
existing or proposed single-family dwelling within the planned
residential development or outside the boundaries of the
planned residential development parcel.
(f) The maximum surface area of any business identification sign
for any ancillary nonresidential use shall not exceed 12 square
feet. Such signs shall not be illuminated.
149. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection A(4) as Subsection
A(6).
§ 175-65 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-65
168:482
(g) Off-street parking for the ancillary nonresidential uses shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of Article XIII of
this chapter for the uses.
B. Basic development parameters. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No.
133]
(1) Development Reference Table: Table 1.
Dwelling Unit
Type Land Uses
Open Space
Requirement
(percentage of
overall site
acreage)
Minimum Lot
Size
(square feet)
Type 1 Mixture of both of
the following
uses: detached
single-family and
attached singlefamily.
No one use
may exceed 75%
of the overall mix.
40% Single-family
detached in R-2
— 9,000 square
feet
In R-1 — 12,000
square feet
In R-AG — 15,000
square feet
Attached
multifamily in R-2
— 4,500 square
feet/unit
In R-1 — 6,000
square feet/unit
In R-AG — 7,500
square feet/unit
Type 2 Detached singlefamily
only
40% Single-family
detached in R-2
— 9,000 square
feet
In R-1 — 12,000
square feet
In R-AG — 15,000
square feet
(2) The minimum percentage of lots in the development which must
meet or exceed base zoning district (R-1, R-2, or R-AG) area and
bulk regulations (see §§ 175-29, 175-201, and 175-245), rather than
those standards in Table 1 above, is 35%.
§ 175-65 WATER § 175-65
168:483
(3) In order to encourage flexibility of development, variations shall be
permitted in the density and intensity of land use throughout the
entire planned residential development. Greater concentration of
density and intensity of land use may be permitted so long as the
overall density of the overall development defined in this
subsection is not exceeded.
(4) All single-family interior lots within a planned residential
development shall have a minimum lot width of seventy-five (75)
feet as measured at the building setback line.
(5) Other area and bulk regulations. In addition to the setback
requirements of § 175-68, development on a lot within the
development parcel shall conform to the lot requirements outlined
in Articles IV, VI, XIX and XXIII as applicable.
(6) All lots located within a planned residential development parcel
shall be contiguous. Where more than one lot exists, said lots may
not be divided by an existing right-of-way.
(7) Continuity of development.
(a) To maintain continuity between existing and proposed
development patterns throughout the Township and transitions
of density, if attached single-family units are proposed as part
of a planned residential development, said residential uses
shall be located between any nonresidential development
proposed as part of the planned residential development and
single-family residential development proposed as part of the
planned residential development. If nonresidential
development is not proposed, dwellings of greatest density
shall be located closest to the arterial street/collector street to
which the proposed development connects to as its primary
entrance.
(b) Access to attached single-family units from an arterial street or
collector street shall not be permitted. A minimum of four said
units shall be accessible from any one designated access point
along an arterial street or collector street.
C. Maximum permitted density for a planned residential development.
(1) R-AG Zoning District: three (3) dwelling units per acre. [Amended
3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
(2) R-1 Zoning District: four and one-half (4.5) dwelling units per acre.
[Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
(3) R-2 Zoning District: six (6) dwelling units per acre. [Amended
3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
(4) (Reserved)150
§ 175-65 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-65
168:484
§ 175-66. Common open space reservation.
(5) Calculation of maximum number of dwelling units. Fill in the
following table on the applicable official form as issued by
Middlesex Township.
3a Total site acreage acres
3b Minimum % of open space to be reserved %
3c Multiply Line 3a by Line 3b; subtract that
number from the total site acreage
identified in Line 3a. This equals the
maximum acreage to be disturbed for
development.
acres
3d Maximum number of units. Multiply Line 3c
by the density of the applicable district as
identified in § 175-65C(1).
units
3e Bonus number of units, if applicable, shall
be applied to the number of units
calculated in line 3d
bonus units
(6) When calculating density, a fractional dwelling unit of 1/2 (0.5) or
more shall be considered an entire dwelling unit, while a fractional
less than 1/2 (0.5) shall be disregarded.
(7) In the event that a planned residential development parcel includes
property in two or more zoning districts, the maximum number of
lots within the planned residential development shall not exceed
the proportionate share of the number of lots permitted if the
property was the subject of a standard subdivision in each of the
zoning districts.
(8) All data associated with the number of dwelling units shall be
denoted on the site development parcel (parent parcel) master plan
(development plan) to illustrate the location of dwelling units by
type and the quantity of dwelling units by type by phase of
development. In the event the applicant proposes to revise the total
and/or allocation of dwelling units by type within any and/or all
phase(s), the applicant shall resubmit the proposed overall master
plan as part of an application for tentative approval.
A. The common open space shall be so dedicated or otherwise preserved
and maintained so as to remain open and available for use by all
residents of the development area. The common open space shall
generally abut existing or potential open space land on adjacent lots or
development parcels, and shall be designed as part of any larger
150. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(4), which pertained to the density of planned
residential development parcels containing a minimum of 300 feet of frontage abutting a
publicly dedicated street, was repealed 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133.
§ 175-65 WATER § 175-66
168:485
contiguous and integrated greenway systems, as per the natural
resources recommendations of the Township's Comprehensive Plan.
B. Common open space shall not include space devoted to streets or
parking areas, but may include the portions of stormwater management
facilities including spillways which do not exceed a slope gradient of 5:1
or less.
C. Recreational facilities and structures located in common areas shall be
considered common open space, provided the total impervious surfaces
constitute no more than 5% of the total open space.
(1) For access and visibility, the common open space shall have a
minimum frontage of 100 feet on an existing or proposed street or
shall adjoin an existing park or common open space that is
accessible from a street. If such frontage is located on a private
street, the Township shall reserve the right to decline ownership
and maintenance responsibility for the common open space if
offered by the developer. The minimum width of the common open
space land shall be 50 feet at its narrowest dimension.
(2) Common open space shall be within 150 feet of an existing or
proposed public street or shall be visible from said street if the
recreation open space does not have frontage on said street.
(3) At least twenty-five percent (25%) of the common open space (10%
of the overall site) shall be in compact and contiguous areas.
[Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
D. At least twenty-five percent (25%) of the common open space shall be
located on generally level land. Generally level land shall be considered
as areas with natural and/or man-made slopes with a gradient less than
10%. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
E. In order to optimize safety and circulation of site development, the
Township may require a proposed PRD adjacent to an established PRD
or adjacent to land upon which a site development plan for another PRD
may occur to provide a publicly accessible vehicular access right-of-way
and/or road tap to the adjacent PRD and/or land. Said publicly
accessible right-of-way and/or road tap may bisect required open space
so long as the width of the bisect does not exceed 75 feet when
measured perpendicular to the parcel line. The landowner shall be
responsible for right-of-way, including road grading, clearing and a sign
noting the future connection along the parcel line in the event the
designated right-of-way does not currently connect to another
constructed road tap. If there is a road tap to connect to, road
construction of said tap must be provided.
F. For multi-phased developments, each respective phase shall include its
proportionate percentage of open space of the total open space
requirement as defined by this ordinance. See also §§ 175-80D and
175-81C.
§ 175-66 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-66
168:486
§ 175-67. Failure to maintain common open space.
In the event that the organization or any successor organization established
to own and maintain the common open space shall at any time fail to
maintain the same in accordance with the land development plan and
in reasonable order and condition, the Township shall have the right to
maintain the same and assess the cost of such maintenance on a prorata
basis and as a lien against the lots within the planned residential
development parcel that have a right of enjoyment of the common open
G. Method of ownership for common open space.
(1) The land and facilities to be used for common open space shall be
implemented in accordance with either of the two methods set
forth below, or a combination of the two methods, as determined by
the Board of Supervisors:
(a) The Board of Supervisors shall have the right of first refusal
regarding the dedication of the required open space for public
use to the Township. If the Township accepts such a dedication,
the Township agrees to operate and maintain the dedicated
land and facilities for the originally intended use as common
open space.
(b) If the Board of Supervisors refuses acceptance of the required
open space for public use to the Township, the land and/or
facilities shall be conveyed to an organization established for
the ownership and maintenance of the common open space.
[1] The organization shall covenant to operate and maintain
the land and facilities as a common open space; such
organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of
the common open space, by sale or otherwise (except to an
organization conceived and established to own and
maintain the common open space), without first offering to
dedicate the same to the Township.
[2] Common open space shall be recorded with Butler County
independently from other portions of the planned
residential development.
(2) The Township shall not be obligated to accept the dedication of the
common open space or any portion thereof, where the Board of
Supervisors determines that such dedication is not in the interest
of the Township.
H. All data and area associated with dedicated open space shall be
denoted on the plan to illustrate the location of said open space and the
quantity of said open space. The total area of dedicated open space
shall be provided on the plan as shall the minimum, and any amount in
excess of the minimum, of dedicated open space per phase of
development.
§ 175-66 WATER § 175-67
168:487
space, pursuant to the authority and in accordance with the procedures and
requirements contained in Section 705(f)(2) through (6) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code [53 P.S. § 10705(f)(2) through (6)], as
amended.
§ 175-68. Additional building setbacks.
A. Purpose.
(1) To accommodate the future expansion of the Township's roadways
in accordance with the Richland Township-Middlesex Township
Joint Comprehensive Plan, the Middlesex Township Official Map
and the recommendations outlined in the Township's
Transportation Impact Fee Program Road Sufficiency Analysis and
Capital Improvements Plan Reports;
(2) To protect private development from disturbances created by
future transportation improvements; and
(3) To preserve the rural and historic landscape character of the
Township's arterial and collector roadways.
B. Procedures.
(1) No lot that abuts a Township primary roadway as referenced in
Table 2151 hereof shall be approved or recorded, no lot shall be sold
nor any building or structure shall be built, altered, moved or
enlarged in any manner unless and until a land development plan
has been approved and recorded and until the improvements
required in connection therein have either been constructed or
guaranteed as herein provided. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord.
No. 133]
(2) If the provisions of this section are inconsistent with other
provisions of this ordinance, the provisions of this section shall
apply.
C. Standards.
(1) All development parcels abutting a roadway identified in Table 2152
shall provide a right-of-way setback in conformance to the
dimensions identified in Table 2. The right-of-way setback shall be
located between the right-of-way line of the primary roadway and
the lot's required yard setback. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord.
No. 133]
(2) Front setbacks. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
(a) Minimum front setbacks for lots within the development parcel
shall be: 40 feet.
151. Editor's Note: Table 2 follows Subsection C(5)(c).
152. Editor's Note: Table 2 follows Subsection C(5)(c).
§ 175-67 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-68
168:488
(b) Variable front setbacks. Variable front setbacks shall be
permitted. All lots must all meet the 40-foot setback, and a
variable front setback distance may be used measuring no less
than five (5) feet, but not more than fifteen (15) feet, in
variation from any adjacent lot.
(3) Rear setbacks. The minimum rear setback is 40 feet. [Amended
3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
(4) Front setbacks on single-family attached and multifamily lots shall
be measured from the front (exposed) face of the curb of the
common parking areas serving the dwelling units, where the
common parking areas intervene between the dwelling units and
the public or private street right-of-way. Where there is no
intervening common parking area, the setback shall be measured
from the edge of the public or private street right-of-way.
(5) Side setbacks.
(a) The minimum side setback for detached single-family
dwellings in R1 and R2 zoned districts shall be 10 feet per side.
(b) The minimum side setback for detached single-family
dwellings as permissible in R-AG zoned districts shall be 15
feet per side.
(c) The minimum side setback for attached single-family dwellings
as permissible in R1 and R2 zoned districts shall be 15 feet per
side.
Table 2: Roadway Setbacks [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
Arterial Roadways
Right-Of-Way Setback
Requirement
PA 8, PA 228 East, PA 228 West 35 feet
Collector Roadways Right-Of-Way Setback
Requirement
West Cruikshank Road 12 1/2 feet
East Cruikshank Road
Leslie Road
Sheldon Road
State Road
Steiner Bridge Road
Overbrook Road
Truver Road
McFann Road
Denny Road
§ 175-68 WATER § 175-68
168:489
§ 175-69. Landscaping, signs, parking and loading regulations.
Table 2: Roadway Setbacks [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
Browns Hill Road
Sandy Hill Road
Logan Road
(6) All yard setbacks that abut a primary roadway as defined by
§ 175-140 of this chapter shall provide a landscape screen in
conformance with the spacing standards of Buffer Yard C and
§ 175-40. All landscaping within this buffer yard should comply
with the suggested landscape palettes outlined in Table 2.153
A. All portions of the land development plan pertaining to landscaping,
signs, parking or safety shall conform to the regulations in the
Middlesex Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance154
and of this ordinance.
B. No parking area shall be closer than 15 feet to a principal building,
except driveways and internal garages, nor shall any parking interfere
with recreational areas in the development parcel. No parking areas
shall be leased to persons who are not residents of the planned
residential development. Parking may be provided in separate garages
or on the lowest floor or floors of the principal building or buildings,
provided such parking does not interfere with the basic residential use
and character of the building or buildings involved. Individual garages
shall be no more than two stories in height and shall be no closer than
50 feet to a residential building.
C. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided within the planned
residential development for each single-family dwelling unit
constructed. In addition, there shall be 1/2 spaces per attached singlefamily
dwelling unit provided for visitor parking located within 300 feet
of the dwelling units they are intended to serve. Parking spaces in
driveways, which block access to integral garages, shall not be
permitted.
D. All sidewalks, lighting and stormwater management facilities shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the
Middlesex Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.155
Adequate numbers and spacing of firesafety fixtures or equipment shall
be installed in accordance with requirements as defined by the Board of
Supervisors.
153. Editor's Note: Table 2 immediately precedes this subsection.
154. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
155. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 175-68 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-69
168:490
§ 175-70. Vehicular and pedestrian access.
§ 175-71. Screening. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
E. All uses which require off-street loading shall comply with the
requirements of this ordinance.
A. The planned residential development parcel shall have a frontage
abutting a publicly dedicated street and such frontage shall be a
minimum of 300 feet.
B. Principal vehicular access to the planned residential development shall
be at a minimum of two points from streets and roads capable of
supporting existing traffic and the traffic that will be generated by the
development, unless otherwise approved by the Board of Supervisors.
Access points shall be spaced a minimum of 150 feet on center. Access
points shall be designed to provide smooth traffic flow, controlled
turning movements, and minimum hazard to vehicular or pedestrian
traffic. Each access point includes both a point of ingress and a point of
egress, regardless of the number of turning and/or travel lanes.
Merging and turnout lanes and traffic dividers shall be provided where
existing or anticipated heavy flows of traffic indicate such need. Culsde-
sac shall be constructed in accordance with related Township
standards.
C. Sidewalks shall be provided along the frontage of residential and
nonresidential lots within the development parcel in accordance with
the requirements of the Middlesex Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.156 If, in addition, walkways are proposed
within the planned residential development parcel to provide access to
or communication through common open space or common facilities,
walkways shall form a logical, safe and convenient system. These
walkways shall be located to minimize contacts with normal automotive
traffic, with street crossings held to a minimum. The walkway system
shall be constructed of all-weather, durable hard surfaces approved by
the Township.
D. Upon dedication by the developer of the streets or roads to the
Township, the Township agrees to assume all maintenance
responsibilities for said streets and roads.
E. Specifications for street construction. All streets in a planned
residential development, whether public or private, shall be
constructed to the specifications of the Middlesex Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance157 for public streets.
156. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
157. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 175-69 WATER § 175-71
168:491
§ 175-72. Building spacing.
§ 175-73. Application for tentative approval.
A. To maintain adequate privacy and screening, structures on interior lots
which abut the perimeter of the development parcel(s) must be set back
in accordance with § 175-68C(3).
B. The perimeter setback of the planned residential development shall be
screened with two evergreen trees and three deciduous trees for every
one hundred (100) feet of length of the perimeter setback. The required
vegetation shall be planted in staggered rows or in groupings to create
a natural-looking landscape buffer. Where mature existing wooded
vegetation sufficient to serve as a visual screen exists along the
perimeter and no development is proposed within seventy-five (75) feet
of the lot line, a fifty-foot (50') preservation strip may be substituted.
Existing and planted trees shall comply with the requirements of
§ 175-140F and G.
A. The requirements determining the spacing of buildings shall be as
flexible as possible so as to encourage imaginative site design. The
spaces between buildings shall guarantee adequate light, air and
emergency access.
B. Buildings shall be so arranged so as to discourage the predominance of
garage faces and/or off-street parking from the public right-of-way.
[Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
C. The minimum distance between the nearest points of any exterior
building walls shall be not less than 30 feet, except that for residential
buildings not exceeding two stories in height, exterior end walls with no
openings therein shall be not less than 20 feet apart.
A. Overview.
(1) Combined zoning change and land development plan application. If
an application for a zoning change is made simultaneously with the
application for land development plan tentative approval, the two
shall be considered together.
(2) Tentative approval of the land development plan shall authorize the
development of the interior lot(s) in accordance with the approved
development plan, provided an application for final approval is
submitted which complies with the application granted tentative
approval. Failure to apply for Final Approval within 12 months or to
develop the land development plan as initiated by application for a
grading permit, a building permit or an occupancy permit to
undertake the construction or authorized occupancy approved and
as indicated in § 175-81G shall cause the abandonment of the land
development plan.
B. Filing.
§ 175-71 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-73
168:492
(1) A landowner and/or developer shall submit an application for
tentative approval of the land development plan. The application,
accompanied by the required application filing fee, shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer at least 21 days prior to the regular
meeting of the Planning Commission. Not less than eight printed
sets and one digital set in a form acceptable to the Township of the
land development plan shall be submitted to the Township for
distribution to Township Staff, identified review bodies and each
member of the Planning Commission. In addition to submission to
the Township, one printed set of the plans shall be submitted to the
County Planning Agency. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to submit said copy to the County Planning Agency.
(2) The Township Zoning Officer shall determine the completeness of
the application and either accept the application as complete and
properly filed or return the application to the applicant for
resubmission if the application is incomplete and improperly filed.
If the application is returned as incomplete, a written notice which
cites the specific requirements of this ordinance which have not
been met shall be sent to the applicant.
(3) The Planning Commission shall review the application at a public
meeting and shall forward written recommendations to the Board
of Supervisors prior to the public hearing conducted by the Board
of Supervisors on the application. One copy of the application for
tentative approval shall be forwarded by the Planning Commission
to the Board of Supervisors with its recommendations.
(4) The date of the Planning Commission meeting at which the
application is accepted as complete and properly filed shall be the
official date of filing and shall represent the beginning of the sixtyday
period for Planning Commission review and the public hearing
by the Board of Supervisors.
C. Fees. The application for tentative approval shall be accompanied by a
filing fee in accordance with the schedule affixed from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
D. Information required. The application shall contain, in the form
specified by the Planning Commission, the following information and
such additional information as may be required by the Planning
Commission to perform its duties:
(1) All data required for a preliminary plat, as specified in the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.158
(2) The location, size, existing topography, proposed topography and
the nature of the planned residential development proposed to be
developed.
158. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 175-73 WATER § 175-73
168:493
§ 175-74. Public hearings.
(3) The density of land use to be allocated to parts of the development
parcel to be developed.
(4) The location and size of the common open space and the form of
organization proposed to own and maintain the common open
space.
(5) The use and the approximate height, bulk and location of buildings
and other structures.
(6) The feasibility of proposals for water supply and the disposition of
sanitary waste and stormwater.
(7) The substance of covenants, grants of easements/rights-of-way or
other restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of the land,
buildings and structures, including proposed easements or grants
for public utilities.
(8) The provisions for parking of vehicles and the location and width of
proposed streets.
(9) The location and design of all screening, buffer yards and
landscaping, indicating the type, location and height of all
plantings.
(10) Any conflicts with the Township land use regulations otherwise
applicable.
(11) The feasibility of proposals for energy conservation and the
effective utilization of renewable energy sources.
(12) In the case of land development plans which call for development
over a period of years, a description of each section and a schedule
showing the proposed times within which applications for final
approval of all sections of the planned residential development
shall be filed, and this schedule must be updated annually, by the
anniversary of its previous approval, until the development is
completed and accepted.
(13) Statement of public interest. A written statement by the landowner
and/or developer setting forth the reasons why, in his opinion, a
planned residential development would be in the public interest
and would be consistent with the Richland Township-Middlesex
Township Joint Comprehensive Plan.
(14) True and correct copies of the complete text of all covenants,
easements, rights-of-way, and other restrictions applicable to the
common open space; private roads, walkways and/or private
parking facilities; recreational facilities; and all other land and/or
facilities included in the development plan to be held in common by
an appropriate organization or dedicated for public use.
§ 175-73 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-74
168:494
§ 175-75. Grant or denial of approval.
A. Within 60 days of the official date of filing of an application for tentative
approval of a planned residential development, a public hearing
pursuant to public notice on said application shall be held by the Board
of Supervisors.
B. The Chairman, or, in his absence, the acting Chairman, of the Board of
Supervisors may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing shall be given
under oath and every party of record at a hearing shall have the right to
cross-examine adverse witnesses.
C. All procedures governing the conduct of the public hearing shall be in
accordance with the procedures specified by Article IX of the
Municipalities Planning Code159 for Township Zoning Hearing Board
hearings and all references to the Board in that article shall be to the
Board of Supervisors for the purposes of interpreting this section.
D. The Board of Supervisors may continue the hearing from time to time,
and may refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for a report;
provided, however, that in any event, the public hearing or hearings
shall be concluded within 60 days after the date of the first public
hearing.
A. Action by Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors, within 60
days following the conclusion of the public hearing provided for in this
ordinance, by official written communication to the applicant shall
either:
(1) Grant tentative approval of the land development plan as
submitted;
(2) Grant tentative approval subject to the specified conditions not
included in the land development plan as submitted; or
(3) Deny tentative approval to the land development plan.
B. Failure to act. Failure to so act within 60 days shall constitute tentative
approval of the land development plan as submitted.
C. Approval with conditions. If tentative approval is granted subject to
conditions, the applicant may refuse to accept the conditions, in which
case the Board of Supervisors shall be deemed to have denied approval
of the development plan. The applicant shall reject these conditions by
written notification to the Board of Supervisors of his decision within 30
days after receiving a copy of the decision of the Board of Supervisors.
If the applicant does not, within the prescribed period, notify the Board
of Supervisors of his refusal to accept all the conditions, tentative
159. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
§ 175-74 WATER § 175-75
168:495
§ 175-76. Criteria for approval.
A land development plan may be tentatively approved only if it is found to
meet the following criteria:
§ 175-77. Findings of fact.
The decision granting or denying tentative approval shall be accompanied
by or include a detailed analysis containing findings of fact and relating to
the following criteria:
approval of the land development plan, with all attached conditions,
shall stand as granted.
A. The proposed land development plan shall preserve the objectives of
this ordinance and shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
B. It shall be fully served by public utilities without reducing the level of
service to the remainder of the Township.
C. It shall organize vehicular ingress, egress, and parking to minimize
traffic congestion in the neighborhood.
D. It shall be sited, oriented and landscaped to produce a harmonious
relationship of buildings and grounds within the development and to
the buildings and grounds of adjacent owners, and, to the fullest extent
possible, shall preserve the scenic, aesthetic, and historic features of
the landscape.
E. It shall not involve any element or cause any condition that may be
dangerous, injurious, or noxious to any other lot or persons.
A. A detailed itemization of aspects in which the proposed planned
residential development is consistent with the Richland Township-
Middlesex Township Joint Comprehensive Plan and the aspects in which
it is not so consistent.
B. Any aspects in which the proposed planned residential development
departs from zoning requirements for similar development in other
districts and the Middlesex Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance160 otherwise applicable to the subject lot,
including, but not limited to, density, bulk and use, and the reasons why
such departures are or are not deemed to be in the public interest.
C. The purpose, location and amount of the common open space in the
proposed planned residential development, the reliability of the
proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common open
space, and the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of
the common open space as related to the purpose, density and type of
residential development.
160. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 175-75 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-77
168:496
§ 175-78. Timing.
If a proposed planned residential development is granted tentative
approval, with or without conditions, the Board of Supervisors shall set
forth in the decision the time within which an application for final approval
shall be filed. In the case of a land development plan that provides for
development over a period of years, the periods of time in which
applications for final approval of each part thereof shall be filed may also
be established in the official written communication. Only with the consent
of the applicant may the time between grant of tentative approval and
application for final approval be less than 90 consecutive calendar days,
and, in the case of development over a period of years, the time between
applications for final approval of each part of a plan shall not be less than
12 months.
§ 175-79. Certification of decision.
The decision shall be in writing, signed by the Chairman of the Board of
Supervisors, attested by the Township Manager, and filed in the office of the
Township Manager, and a certified copy shall be mailed to the applicant.
§ 175-80. Status of plan after tentative approval.
D. The physical design of the proposed planned residential development
and the aspects in which said design does or does not make adequate
provision for public services, provide adequate control over vehicular
traffic, and further amenities of light and air, recreation, and visual
enjoyment.
E. The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed planned
residential development to the neighborhood in which it is proposed to
be established; and
F. The sufficiency of the terms and conditions intended to protect the
interest of the public and the residents of the planned residential
development and the integrity of the development plan.
A. Consent to revoke. Tentative approval of a land development plan shall
not qualify a plat of the planned residential development for recording,
authorize development, or authorize the issuance of any building
permits. A land development plan that has been given tentative
approval as submitted or with conditions accepted by the applicant
shall not be modified or revoked, by action of the Township pending an
application or applications for final approval. If the application for final
approval is filed within the periods of time specified in the decision
granting tentative approval, the Township shall act to modify or revoke
the tentative approval only for one or the other of the following reasons:
(1) Default or violation by the applicant of any of the conditions of
tentative approval.
§ 175-77 WATER § 175-80
168:497
§ 175-81. Application for planned residential development final
approval.
(2) Consent by the applicant to the modification or revocation.
B. Revocation of tentative approval. The tentative approval of the land
development plan may be revoked for either of the following reasons:
(1) The applicant notifies the Board of Supervisors in writing of the
intention to abandon the plans; or
(2) The applicant fails to file application for final approval within the
required time period. When tentative approval is revoked, all areas
included in the land development plan not granted final approval
shall be subject to all Township ordinances as though no
application had been filed.
C. Plan after tentative approval. A land development plan granted
tentative approval should be considered the overall plan of the
development. This plan may not be altered without the consent of the
applicant and the Board of Supervisors. The filing of an application for
final approval of the entire development or an approved phase shall be
consistent with the plan granted tentative approval.
D. Revisions. If there are any revisions to the plan affecting density/zoning
(i.e., units are added or deleted, affecting the overall amount of units
approved in the tentative approval), the approval must be amended.
The entire application submission must be revised and resubmitted to
the Township for an approval modification. At its request, additional
information may be required by the Township to determine the impact
of said revisions on the adjacent zoning districts, lots and/or applicable
infrastructure. A public hearing shall be required as part of a
resubmission.
A. Filing.
(1) Application for final approval shall be filed with the Township
Supervisors not later than 12 months following the grant of
tentative approval, unless otherwise specified by the Township
Supervisors. The application shall be submitted at least 21 days
prior to the regular meeting of the Planning Commission. The
application shall be comprised of one reproducible Mylar and eight
printed sets and one digital set in a form acceptable to the
Township of the land development plan, including the completion
bond and developer's agreement required by the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance161 for approval of a
final plat. The Planning Commission shall either accept the
application as complete and properly filed or return the application
to the applicant for resubmission if the application is incomplete
161. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 175-80 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-81
168:498
and improperly filed. If the application is returned as incomplete, a
written notice that cites the specific requirements of this ordinance
which have not been met shall be sent to the applicant.
(2) The date of the Planning Commission meeting at which the
application is accepted as complete and properly filed shall be the
official date of filing and shall represent the beginning of the fortyfive-
day period for review by the Planning Commission and action
by the Board of Supervisors.
B. Content of application for final approval. The application for final
approval shall include a land development plan, all required
supplementary data as specified herein, and a certificate of completion
of Improvements or a completion bond, as required by the Middlesex
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.162
(1) The land development plan shall include:
(a) All information as required for a final plat, as specified in the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance;
(b) Improvements and drawings which reflect the requirements of
the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
and other applicable Township design standards;
(c) Accurately dimensioned locations of all proposed structures,
parking areas, recreation areas and common open spaces;
(d) The use and number of families to be housed in each structure;
and
(e) The landscaping plan, including the location of sidewalks,
trails and buffer yards.
(2) Supplementary data shall include:
(a) In a form suitable for recording with the plat, any covenants,
grants of easements, rights-of-way or other restrictions to be
imposed on the use of the land and structures; and
(b) Provisions for the maintenance, ownership and operation of
common open spaces, common recreation facilities and other
improvements.
C. Final approval.
(1) If the application for final approval has been filed with all drawings,
specifications, other required documents in accordance with this
ordinance, and the official written communication of tentative
approval, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval of
said application to the Board of Supervisors. The Board of
162. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 175-81 WATER § 175-81
168:499
Supervisors shall, within 45 days of the filing of the application
with the Planning Commission, grant such land development plan
final approval.
(2) Revisions. If there are any revisions to the plan not affecting the
overall density (i.e., units are moved, added, or deleted, but do not
change the total amount of units approved in the tentative
approval), the final approval must reflect these changes when
submitted to the Township. At its request, additional information
may be required by the Township to determine the impact of said
revisions on the adjacent zoning districts, lots and/or applicable
infrastructure. A public hearing shall be required as part of the
submission.
D. Denial of approval. If the land development plan as submitted contains
variations from the land development plan given tentative approval, the
Board of Supervisors may refuse to grant final approval. It shall,
however, within 45 days from the filing of the application for final
approval, advise the applicant of the refusal, setting forth in the notice
why one or more of the variations are not in the public interest. In the
event of such refusal, the applicant may take action as provided for in
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
E. Recording. A land development plan, or any part thereof, which has
been given final approval shall be certified by the Board of Supervisors
and recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds before any
development shall take place. Said plan shall be recorded within 90
days of the date final approval is granted by the Board of Supervisors or
final approval shall automatically be rescinded.
F. Judicial review. Any decision of the Board of Supervisors granting or
denying tentative or final approval of a proposed planned residential
development shall be subject to appeal by the same procedures and
with the same limitations as provided for zoning appeals by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.163
G. Failure to develop. In the event that a land development plan, or a
section thereof, is given final approval and thereafter the applicant
shall abandon such plan or the section thereof that has been finally
approved, or, in the event the applicant shall fail to commence and
carry out the planned residential development in accordance with the
time provisions of Section 508 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code after final approval has been granted, or, in the event
that the applicant shall substantially fail to develop in accordance with
the land development plan given final approval, no development or
further development shall take place on the lot included in the land
development plan until after the said lot is reclassified by enactment of
an amendment to the Township Zoning Ordinance in the manner
163. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 175-81 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-81
168:500
§ 175-82. through § 175-91. (Reserved)
prescribed for such amendments in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
H. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
the planned residential development provisions of this ordinance
shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not
more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney
fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment
shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until the date
of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice,
determining that there has been a violation, further determines
that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or
corporation violating this ordinance to have believed that there was
no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have
been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of
the determination of a violation by the District Justice and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney
fees collected for the violation of this ordinance shall be paid over
to the Township. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may
grant an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine
pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this Section.
§ 175-81 WATER § 175-82
168:501

ARTICLE XI
Standards and Criteria for Conditional Uses and Uses by Special
Exception
§ 175-92. Approval of conditional uses; expiration. [Amended
7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
A. Approval of conditional uses. The Township Supervisors shall hear and
decide requests for conditional uses; however, the Township
Supervisors shall not approve a conditional use application unless and
until:
(1) A written application for conditional use approval is submitted to
the Zoning Officer no fewer than 10 working days prior to the work
meeting of the Planning Commission. The application shall indicate
the section of this chapter under which conditional use approval is
sought and shall state the grounds upon which it is requested. The
application shall include the following:
(a) A land development plan, including the following:
[1] A boundary survey of the property;
[2] Graphic scale, North point, date, legend;
[3] Names and addresses of the landowner and the developer;
[4] Where any grading or new construction is proposed,
existing and proposed contours shall be shown at intervals
of elevation of not more than five feet where the slope is
greater than 10% and at intervals of not more than two
feet where the slope is 10% or less;
[5] Zoning classification of property;
[6] Front building line;
[7] Proposed use, height, location, area and bulk of all existing
and proposed structures and the dimensions of all yards;
[8] Existing and proposed easements, showing location, size
and purposes;
[9] Existing and proposed streets, including right-of-way
width, paving width and curbs and sidewalks, if any;
[10] Layout of parking areas and computation of the number of
parking spaces required and provided;
[11] Patterns of vehicular and pedestrian circulation on the site
ingress and egress and circulation into and out of the site;
width and turning radii of points of access to the public
street;
§ 175-92 WATER § 175-92
168:503
[12] Location and specifications for site lighting, if any;
[13] Location, size and specifications for private improvements,
if any, such as streets, curbs, sidewalks, driveways,
parking areas, storm drainage, landscaping strips,
planters, wheelstops and the like; and
[14] Any other information necessary to demonstrate
compliance with the requirements of this chapter for the
proposed use.
(b) A written statement showing compliance with the applicable
express standards and criteria of this article for the proposed
use.
(c) A traffic report as described in § 175-66C(5) of this chapter, if
the proposal is for any use which according to the latest edition
of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip
Generation Manual will generate in excess of 250 vehicle trips
per day on an average weekday.
(d) The application fee required by § 175-187 of this chapter.
(2) Planning Commission review and comment or approval. The
Planning Commission shall review the application for development
and make a written recommendation to the Supervisors. If the
proposed development is also a land development, the Planning
Commission shall also make a recommendation under the
provisions of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.164
(3) Public hearing. The Township Supervisors shall hold a public
hearing, in accordance with Section 913.2 of the MPC, 53 P.S.
§ 10913.2, and provide public notice. The public hearing shall be
commenced by the Supervisors within 60 days from the date of an
applicant's request for a hearing.
(4) Conditions. In considering any conditional use, the Supervisors
may prescribe reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to
those expressed in this chapter, as the Supervisors deem necessary
to implement the purposes of the MPC in this chapter. A violation of
such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter.
(5) Written decision. The Supervisors shall render a written decision
or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the
conditional use application within 45 days after the last hearing
before the Supervisors. Where the application is contested or
denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact or
conclusions based thereon, together with any reasons therefor.
164. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 175-92 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-92
168:504
Conclusions based on any provision of this chapter or of any
ordinance, rule, or regulation shall contain a reference to the
provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed
appropriate in the light of the facts found. A copy of the final
decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be
delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him no later than
the day following its date.
(6) Action. If the Supervisors determine that the application for
conditional use meets all requirements of this chapter and receive
assurances that any additional conditions deemed necessary shall
be fulfilled and that the application is in conformity with the spirit
and intent of this chapter, they shall direct the Zoning Officer to
issue a zoning approval for such conditional use.
(7) Expiration. Conditional use approval shall expire automatically
without written notice to the applicant if no application for
subdivision and land development, zoning approval for structural
alteration or erection of structures, zoning approval for occupancy
and use or a grading or building permit to undertake the work
described in the conditional use approval has been submitted
within 12 months of said approval, unless the Supervisors, in their
sole discretion, extend the conditional use approval upon written
request of the applicant received prior to its expiration. The
maximum extension permitted shall be one twelve-month
extension. The Supervisors may grant an extension for good cause
shown by the applicant and provided that the extension will not be
contrary to the purposes of this chapter or detrimental to the
surrounding neighborhood.
(8) Effect on prior approvals. Conditional use approval, granted prior
to the effective date of this subsection, shall expire automatically
without written notice to the developer if no application for
subdivision and land development, zoning approval for structural
alteration or erection of structures, zoning approval for occupancy
and use, or a grading or building permit to undertake the work
described in the conditional use approval has been submitted
within 12 months of the effective date of this subsection or as
specified in the approval, unless the Supervisors, in their sole
discretion, expend the conditional use approval upon written
request of the applicant received prior to its expiration. The
maximum extension permitted shall be one twelve-month
extension.
(9) Modifications.
(a) The Supervisors shall consider whether proposed
modifications in any of the requirements of this chapter for
each zoning district contained in an application for
development for a conditional use will make for a more
efficient, attractive, and harmonious conditional use. If such
§ 175-92 WATER § 175-92
168:505
§ 175-93. Approval of uses by special exception; expiration.
modifications, in the judgment of the Supervisors, constitute
a more beneficial use of the site than provided for under the
requirements of the zoning district in which the site of the
conditional use is located, the Supervisors in their sole
discretion may grant the modifications for less strict
requirements; however, no modification shall be granted for
the following:
[1] Authorized uses shall be limited to those specified as
authorized uses or conditional uses in the zoning district in
which the site is located.
[2] No modification shall be granted for any construction,
development, use or activity within any floodway area.
[3] Under no circumstances shall a modification be granted to
the prohibitions of uses or activities in floodplain areas.
(b) Whenever a modification is granted to construct a structure
below the 100-year flood elevation, the Township shall notify
the developer in writing that:
[1] The granting of the modification will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance.
[2] Such modification increases the risk to life and property.
B. All provisions of Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance which
are not specifically modified by the Supervisors in approving a
conditional use shall apply to any conditional use involving subdivision
and land development.
C. Requests in writing. All requests for modifications or waivers shall be in
writing and shall accompany and be part of the application for
development. The requests shall state in full the grounds and facts of
hardship or evidence of equal or better result on which the request is
based, the provision or provisions of the chapter involved and the
minimum modification necessary.
D. Burden of proof. In any application for conditional use, the applicant
shall have the persuasion burden and presentation duty to show
compliance with this Code, and the applicant shall have the persuasion
burden to show the applicant's request is not detrimental to the health,
safety, and welfare.
A. Approval of uses by special exception. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
hear and decide requests for uses by special exception. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall not approve an application for a use by special
exception unless and until:
§ 175-92 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-93
168:506
(1) A written application for approval of a use by special exception is
submitted to the Zoning Officer. The application shall indicate the
section of this chapter under which approval of the use by special
exception is sought and shall state the grounds upon which it is
requested. The application shall include the following:
(a) A land development plan, including the following:
[1] A boundary survey of the property;
[2] Graphic scale, North point, date, legend;
[3] Names and addresses of the landowner and the developer;
[4] Where any grading or new construction is proposed,
existing and proposed contours shall be shown at intervals
of elevation of not more than five feet where the slope is
greater than 10% and at intervals of not more than two
feet where the slope is 10% or less;
[5] Zoning classification of property;
[6] Front building line;
[7] Proposed use, height, location, area and bulk of all existing
and proposed structures and the dimensions of all yards;
[8] Existing and proposed easements, showing location, size
and purposes;
[9] Existing and proposed streets, including right-of-way
width, paving width and curbs and sidewalks, if any;
[10] Layout of parking areas and computation of the number of
parking spaces required and provided;
[11] Patterns of vehicular and pedestrian circulation on the
site; ingress and egress and circulation into and out of the
site; width and turning radii of points of access to the
public street;
[12] Location and specifications for site lighting, if any;
[13] Location, size and specifications for private improvements,
if any, such as streets, curbs, sidewalks, driveways,
parking areas, storm drainage, landscaping strips,
planters, wheelstops and the like; and
[14] Any other information necessary to demonstrate
compliance with the requirements of this chapter for the
proposed use.
§ 175-93 WATER § 175-93
168:507
§ 175-94. General standards and criteria.
In addition to the specific standards and criteria listed for each use in
§ 175-95 et seq. below, all applications for conditional uses and uses by
special exception listed in each Zoning District shall demonstrate
compliance with all of the following general standards and criteria:
(b) A written statement showing compliance with the applicable
express standards and criteria of this article for the proposed
use.
(c) A traffic report as described in § 175-66C(5) of this chapter, if
the proposal is for any use which according to the latest edition
of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip
Generation Manual will generate in excess of 250 vehicle trips
per day on an average weekday.
(d) The application fee required by § 175-187 of this chapter.
(2) A public hearing is held by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to
public notice, as defined by this chapter, and written notification by
regular mail is given to all property owners within 450 feet of the
property at least two weeks prior to the public hearing.
(3) The public hearing shall be held by the Zoning Hearing Board
within 60 days of the date of submission of a complete and properly
filed application. Said hearing shall be conducted in accordance
with the procedures specified by § 175-177 of this chapter.
(4) In considering an application for approval of a use by special
exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards in conformity with the spirit and intent
of this article. A violation of such conditions and safeguards, when
made part of the terms and conditions under which approval of a
use by special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter.
B. Expiration of approval of use by special exception. Approval of a use by
special exception shall expire automatically without written notice to
the applicant if no application for a grading permit, building permit or
zoning certificate to undertake the construction or authorize the
occupancy described in the application for approval of the use by
special exception is submitted within six months of the effective date of
this chapter, unless the Zoning Hearing Board, in its sole discretion,
extends approval of the use by special exception upon written request
of the applicant received prior to its expiration. The maximum
extension permitted shall be one six-month extension.
A. The use shall not endanger the public health, safety or welfare nor
deteriorate the environment, if it is located on the site where it is
proposed.
§ 175-93 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-94
168:508
§ 175-95. Standards for specific uses.
In addition to the general standards and criteria for conditional uses and
uses by special exception listed in § 175-94, above, an application for any
of the following uses which are listed in any zoning district as a conditional
use or use by special exception shall comply with the applicable standards
and criteria specified below.
§ 175-96. Adult businesses.
Adult businesses, subject to:
B. The use shall comply with the performance standards specified in
§ 175-139 of this chapter.
C. The use shall comply with all applicable requirements of Article XIII
governing parking and loading, Article XIV governing signs, § 175-140
governing screening and landscaping, § 175-141 governing steep
slopes and § 175-149 governing storage.
D. Ingress, egress and traffic circulation on the site shall be designed to
ensure safety and minimize congestion and the impact on local streets.
E. Site lighting, if proposed, shall be shielded and reflected away from
adjacent residential properties and public streets.
A. Adult businesses shall include adult bookstores/video stores, adult
motels, adult movie theaters or movie houses and adult live theaters, as
defined herein.
B. Adult businesses, as described herein, shall be permitted only in the I-1
Zoning District.
C. Adult businesses shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any property
which is zoned AG-A, AG-B, R-AG or R-1. [Amended 7-29-2015 by
Ord. No. 128]
D. Adult businesses shall not be located within 500 feet of the property
boundary of any existing school, day-care center, hospital, group care
facility, personal care boarding home, group home, transitional
dwelling, public park, playground, or place of worship.
E. No adult business shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other
existing or proposed adult business.
F. The distances specified in Subsections C through E shall be measured
by following the shortest route of ordinary vehicular travel along the
public street from the principal vehicular entrance to a proposed
regulated use to the principal vehicular entrance to the existing
regulated use or, if no use exists on the property, to the nearest
property line of property zoned AG-A, AG-B, R-AG or R-1. [Amended
7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
§ 175-94 WATER § 175-96
168:509
§ 175-97. Automobile service stations.
Automobile service station, subject to:
G. Persons or owners who intend to operate an adult business shall obtain
a license to operate from the Township and shall pay an investigation
fee of $500 to the Township. In addition, such persons or owners shall
supply to the Township detailed information regarding the ownership
and financing of the proposed business as required on the licensing
application. Applications for licensing shall be filed with the Township
Zoning Officer.
H. An adult business shall be initially licensed when it has met the
requirements of this section. The license shall be valid through
December 31 of the year in which the license is initially issued. For each
year thereafter that the business intends to continue, the owner or
operator shall seek a renewal of the license. The application for renewal
shall be submitted to the Township Zoning Officer by November 1 of the
year preceding the year for which the license renewal is sought. The
lack of a license or failure to renew such license in a timely fashion shall
be grounds for the Township to deny or revoke the certificate of
occupancy for the adult business.
A. All minor repair work, vehicle washing, lubrication and installation of
parts and accessories shall be performed within an enclosed building.
B. All automobile parts, dismantled vehicles and similar materials shall be
stored within an enclosed building or totally screened from view by a
solid or privacy fence.
C. All vehicles awaiting repair shall be stored on site in approved parking
spaces, and, under no circumstances, shall said vehicles be stored on or
obstruct access to a public right-of-way.
D. Canopies over gasoline pumps shall be subject to the requirements of
§ 175-142C(6).
E. Gasoline pumps shall be located at least 30 feet from the edge of the
right-of-way of a public street.
F. All fuel, oil or similar substances shall be stored at least 25 feet from
any property line.
G. In addition to the signs authorized in Article XIV, any use which
dispenses gasoline or other fuel oil may have a minimum of one sign for
each three pumps indicating the price of the fuel. Said signs shall not
exceed 12 square feet in surface area.
H. All lighting shall be shielded and reflected away from adjacent
properties and streets.
§ 175-96 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-97
168:510
§ 175-98. Billboards. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128;
3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133165]
Billboards subject to:
I. Buffer Yard D, as defined by § 175-140B(4) of this chapter, shall be
provided along all property lines adjoining residential use or zoning
classification.
A. Location. Billboards are permitted as an authorized use only in i) the
C-2 Community-Scale Commercial District [conditional use; see
§ 175-45B(1)(b), but not in the Route 228 Corridor Overlay District; see
Ordinance No. 130, Section 1, Code §§ 175-252 and 175-258]; ii) the I-1
Restricted Industrial District [conditional use; see § 175-55B(1)(a)]; and
iii) the C-3 Regional Commerce District [use by special exception; see
§ 175-221B(1)] Zoning Districts, and not in any other zoning district.
(1) Billboards may not be placed within 750 feet of the property line of
any lot containing any residential structure, school, or place of
worship. Required spacing shall be measured from the closest
point of the billboard structure to the closest point of the property
line of any lot containing a residential structure, school, or place of
worship.
(2) The minimum front, side and rear yard requirements applying to a
principal use as set forth the zoning district in which the billboard
is to be located shall apply to each billboard structure.
(3) A billboard shall be considered a structure and shall be included in
the calculation of maximum building coverage as specified in this
chapter. The maximum lot coverage calculation shall be
cumulative, including the billboard and any other structures and
buildings on the same lot therewith.
(4) No billboard shall be erected in such a manner as to block the view
from the road or street of any existing business identification sign
or residential or nonresidential structure or to limit or reduce the
light and ventilation requirements as defined by this chapter.
(5) No billboard shall be constructed that obstructs visibility within the
clear sight triangle to a height of 25 feet from the average ground
elevation of the public street or road on which it is situated and
shall not in any case obstruct or impede traffic safety. Average
ground elevation shall be measured as the median between the
high point and low point found within the clear sight triangle area.
(6) Billboards shall maintain a lateral minimum spacing of 750 feet
between billboard structures. Required spacing shall be measured
165. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Section 12 of this ordinance, provisions in Article XIV (Signs),
with the exception of § 175-165, remain applicable to billboards to the extent not
inconsistent with the ordinance.
§ 175-97 WATER § 175-98
168:511
from a point perpendicular to the centermost point of the billboard
structure along the front lot line parallel to the center line of the
roadway to which the billboard is oriented. The applicant shall
document this spacing of any existing adjacent billboards.
(7) Billboards may not be mounted on the roof or project above the
parapet of a building wall.
(8) A detailed plan shall be submitted which indicates billboard size,
number of faces, landscaping, construction types and site plan
illustrating compliance with applicable setbacks and other
restrictions and/or conditions of use.
(9) Billboards shall not be part of a roof or wall, nor shall they be
mounted on the roof, wall, or other part of a building or any other
structure.
(10) A billboard with display lighting (i.e., indirect lighting to illuminate
the sign face) shall be constructed and maintained so that it does
not glare upon adjoining property and shall not exceed a maximum
of one footcandle upon an adjoining lot or street.
(11) Display lighting shall not operate between 12:00 midnight and 5:00
a.m., prevailing local time.
(12) The use of colored lighting for display lighting is not permitted.
(13)No billboard structure, sign face, or display lighting shall depict
image movement, flash, or emit noise.
(14)No billboard structure, sign face, or display lighting shall cause
distractions, confusion, nuisance, or hazard to traffic, aircraft or
other properties.
B. Size and height. A billboard shall have a maximum allowable gross
surface area of 750 square feet per sign face. A billboard shall have a
maximum of two sign faces per billboard structure.
(1) The billboard structure may have sign faces placed back-to-back or
in a V-shaped configuration on a single billboard structure.
(2) A billboard sign face shall be independently supported and have
vertical supports made of metal which are galvanized or otherwise
treated to prevent rust and corrosion.
(3) The vertical support(s) shall be capable of enabling the entire sign
face(s) to be able to withstand a minimum 75 miles per hour wind
load, or the minimum load requirement established by applicable
building code, whichever is greater.
(4) If the billboard foundation is visible from the right-of-way, the
entire base of the billboard structure shall be permanently
§ 175-98 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-98
168:512
§ 175-99. Car washes.
Car wash, subject to:
landscaped with a combination of deciduous and evergreen trees,
shrubs, ornamental grasses and ground covers.
(5) Grass, sod or turf shall not be considered an acceptable plant for
use within landscaped buffer yards.
(6) Landscaping shall be maintained by the billboard sign owner in an
attractive and healthy manner in accordance with accepted
conservation practices.
(7) Permanent landscaping shall form a base and/or backdrop to the
billboard sign when practical in the opinion of the Zoning Officer.
(8) All grading shall be in accordance with Township regulations.
(9) All earth cuts or fills are to be permanently seeded or planted to
prevent erosion.
C. Maintenance.
(1) A billboard structure shall be entirely painted every three years.
(2) Every 10 years the owner of the billboard shall have a structural
inspection made of the billboard by an engineer or an architect and
shall provide to the Township a certificate from an engineer or
architect attesting that the billboard is structurally sound.
(3) Annual inspections of the billboard may be conducted by the
Township to determine compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(4) Billboards found to be in violation of this chapter shall be brought
into compliance or shall be removed within 30 days upon proper
notification by the Township. Failure to comply shall be a violation
of this chapter.
(5) Billboards using removable paper or other materials shall be
maintained in such condition as to eliminate loose or frayed
material protruding or hanging from the structure.
A. All automated washing facilities shall be in a completely enclosed
building. All other car-washing facilities shall be under a roofed
structure which has at least two walls.
B. Drainage water from the washing operation shall be controlled so that
it does not flow or drain onto berms, streets or other property.
C. Standing spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
specified in § 175-108 for drive-in facilities.
§ 175-98 WATER § 175-99
168:513
§ 175-100. Cemeteries.
Cemeteries, subject to:
§ 175-101. Places of worship/places of assembly.
D. The facility shall be connected to public sewers.
E. Driveway entrances shall be located at least 30 feet from the right-ofway
line of the intersection of any public streets.
F. Any car wash which also dispenses gasoline shall meet all applicable
requirements of § 175-97 governing service stations.
A. A minimum site of 10 acres shall be required.
B. A drainage plan shall be submitted with the application for the use to
show existing and proposed runoff characteristics.
C. A groundwater study prepared by an hydrologist or registered
professional engineer qualified to perform such studies shall be
submitted with the application.
D. Plans for ingress/egress shall be referred to local police officials for
comments regarding public safety.
E. All property lines adjoining residential use or zoning classification shall
be screened by Buffer Yard D as defined by § 175-140B of this chapter.
F. Parking for principal structures, such as chapels or mausoleums, shall
be provided in accordance with the requirements of Article XIII.
G. All equipment shall be properly stored in an enclosed building when not
in use.
H. No burial sites or structures shall be located within 100 feet of any
adjacent property line.
A. The primary visitor drop-off and pick-up area shall be located in a
manner that minimizes detrimental traffic impacts (both pedestrian and
vehicular) on the surrounding neighborhood.
B. A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted where the
proposed development, according to the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE) standards, will generate 100 trips in addition to the
adjacent roadway's peak-hour volumes.
C. The number of points of ingress/egress shall be based upon projected
peak-hour traffic for the use and approved by the Township Engineer to
ensure employee and visitor safety.
D. Hours of operation and events shall be scheduled to minimize negative
impacts on the surrounding neighborhood.
§ 175-99 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-101
168:514
§ 175-102. Clinics, hospitals or nursing homes.
Clinic, hospital or nursing home, subject to:
§ 175-103. Collection and recycling facilities.
Collection and recycling facilities, subject to:
E. For parking demands greater than 300 automobiles, additional
setbacks, screening and buffering of off-street parking and loading
areas may be required to be provided in order to protect the
surrounding neighborhood from inappropriate noise, dust, light and
other disturbances.
A. The minimum site area required for a hospital shall be five acres. The
minimum site area required for a clinic or nursing home shall be one
acre.
B. The site proposed for any nursing home with a capacity of 30 or more
beds or for a clinic or hospital of any size shall be served by public
water and public sewers or a private sewage treatment or private water
distribution system approved by the PA Department of Environmental
Resources.
C. All hospitals and nursing homes shall be licensed by the
commonwealth.
D. Water pressure and volume shall be adequate for fire protection.
E. Ingress, egress and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to
ensure access by emergency vehicles.
F. The plan shall be referred to the Volunteer Fire Company for comments
regarding safety and emergency access.
G. Nursing homes shall have a bed capacity of at least 20 beds but no more
than 200 beds.
H. All property lines adjoining residential use or zoning classification shall
be screened by Buffer Yard B as defined by § 175-140B of this chapter
for facilities containing 30 or more beds.
I. A private use helipad, if proposed as part of a hospital, shall meet
standards of § 175-125 of this chapter.
A. Operations shall be regulated so that nuisances such as visual blight,
noise, odors, blowing debris and dust shall not be created.
B. Materials shall be stored in such a manner as to discourage the
presence of rodents and other disease-carrying animals. If, after
operations commence, the Zoning Officer determines that a vector
problem exists, the operator shall be responsible for taking whatever
measures are necessary to rid the premises of said nuisances.
§ 175-101 WATER § 175-103
168:515
§ 175-104. Commercial recreation.
Commercial recreation, subject to:
C. Adequate off-street loading areas shall be provided for loading and
unloading of recyclable materials. Under no circumstances shall
loading vehicles or other business vehicles be parked on a public rightof-
way.
D. All materials shall be stored within a completely enclosed building or
screened from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way with an
eight-foot high opaque fence.
E. Access shall be directly onto a collector or arterial road with sufficient
capacity to handle traffic generated by the facility.
F. In approving the use, restrictions may be imposed on access to the
facility, hours of operation or other such matters as deemed necessary
to insure that there is no adverse impact upon the functioning of the
neighborhood or adjacent parcels.
A. The minimum site area for stadiums, arenas, amphitheaters, racetracks
and similar large facilities which propose maximum occupancy for
5,000 or more persons shall be 25 acres. Other outdoor recreation
facilities shall have a minimum site of one acre. Indoor facilities shall
meet the minimum lot area required for the zoning district in which the
site is located.
B. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial
or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
C. Any use which proposes a maximum permitted occupancy of 200 or
more persons at any given time shall provide public water and public
sewers on the site. All other uses shall show evidence of PA Department
of Environmental Resources approved sewage treatment system and
water supply.
D. Adequate sanitary facilities available to the public shall be provided, as
approved by the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
E. Outdoor speakers shall not be permitted if there are dwellings within
500 feet of the site in any direction. If outdoor speakers are allowed, the
volume and direction shall be regulated to minimize the impact on
adjoining properties.
F. Location of buildings and facilities, traffic circulation and parking areas
shall be designed to provide adequate access for emergency medical
vehicles and fire-fighting equipment.
G. Any outdoor facility shall be completely enclosed by a fence at least six
feet in height with one or more locking gates which shall remain
secured when the facility is not in use.
§ 175-103 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-104
168:516
§ 175-105. Comparable uses not specifically listed.
Comparable uses not specifically listed, subject to:
§ 175-106. Conversion apartments.
Conversion apartments, subject to:
H. Any outdoor facility located within 200 feet of an existing dwelling shall
cease operations no later than 12:00 midnight.
I. Any use which includes a golf course or country club shall be further
subject to § 175-110.
J. Any use which proposes any drive-in facilities, including drive-in
theaters, shall be further subject to § 175-108.
A. Uses of the same general character as any of the uses authorized as
permitted uses by right or uses by special exception in the zoning
district shall be allowed, if the Zoning Hearing Board determines that
the impact of the proposed use on the environment and adjacent streets
and properties is equal to or less than any use specifically listed in the
zoning district. In making such determination, the Board shall consider
the following characteristics of the proposed use:
(1) The number of employees.
(2) The floor area of the building or gross area of the lot devoted to the
proposed use.
(3) The type of products, materials, equipment and/or processes
involved in the proposed use.
(4) The magnitude of walk-in trade.
(5) The traffic and environmental impacts and the ability of the
proposed use to comply with the performance standards of
§ 175-139.
B. The proposed use shall comply with all applicable area and bulk
regulations of the Zoning District in which it is located.
C. The proposed use shall comply with any applicable express standards
and criteria specified in this article for the most nearly comparable use
by special exception specifically listed in the zoning district in which it
is proposed.
D. The proposed use shall be consistent with the purpose statement of the
zoning district in which it is proposed and shall be consistent with the
community development objectives of this chapter.
A. Each dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 900 square feet of gross
floor area.
§ 175-104 WATER § 175-106
168:517
§ 175-107. Day-care centers or nursery schools.
Day-care center or nursery school, subject to:
§ 175-108. Drive-in facilities.
Drive-in facilities, subject to:
B. Each dwelling unit shall have separate living, sleeping, kitchen and
sanitary facilities.
C. The maximum number of dwelling units shall be two dwelling units in
the same building.
D. Conversion of basements, garages or other accessory structures to
dwelling units shall not be permitted.
E. Safe ingress and egress and adequate turnaround areas shall be
provided on the lot for circulation of automobiles owned by the
residents.
F. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
G. All units shall comply with all applicable requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.
A. The facility shall be licensed by the commonwealth.
B. In the AG-A, AG-B, R-AG and R-1 Districts, day-care centers shall only
be authorized to be established in an existing place of worship or school
building. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
C. Ingress and egress to the site shall be designed to assure safety and
safe areas for discharging and picking up children or older adults, as
the case may be, shall be provided which do not interfere with the free
flow of traffic on adjacent streets.
D. Outdoor play areas shall be provided for child day-care centers which
shall be secured by a fence with a self-latching gate.
E. Outdoor play areas which adjoin residential lots shall be screened by a
Buffer Yard D as defined by § 175-140B of this chapter.
F. The general safety of the site proposed for a day-care center shall be
evaluated as it relates to the needs of small children or older adults, as
the case may be.
G. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article XIII of this chapter.
A. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial
or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
§ 175-106 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-108
168:518
§ 175-109. Flex space.
Flex space, subject to:
§ 175-110. Golf courses or country clubs.
Golf course or country club, subject to:
B. In addition to the parking spaces required for the principal use, a
minimum of five standing spaces, in tandem, with a total length of 100
feet, in direct line with each window or stall shall be provided for
vehicles to wait in line. The standing spaces shall not interfere with the
use of any required parking spaces and shall not inhibit the free flow of
traffic on the site. The standing spaces shall be designed so that waiting
vehicles shall not stand in any right-of-way or overflow onto adjacent
properties, streets or berms.
C. Entrances, exits and standing spaces shall be adequately indicated with
pavement markings and/or directional signs.
D. Parking areas and circulation patterns shall be adequately striped and
marked to facilitate traffic circulation on the site.
A. Off-street parking shall be provided for each of the uses in accordance
with the requirements of Article XIII of this chapter.
B. Off-street parking for offices shall be located within 300 feet of the
entrance to the offices.
C. All materials and equipment shall be stored within a completely
enclosed building.
D. Any site which involves wholesale distribution shall have access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
E. No shipping or receiving shall be permitted within 300 feet of property
in a residential zoning district between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
F. All property lines adjoining residential use or zoning classification shall
be screened by Buffer Yard B, as defined by § 175-140B of this chapter.
A. Golf courses and country clubs shall have a minimum site of 10 acres.
B. Clubhouses shall be located at least 100 feet from any property line
adjoining an AG-A, AG-B, R-AG or R-1 Zoning District and at least 50
feet from all other property lines. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No.
128]
C. Where eating and/or drinking facilities are provided, parking
requirements for restaurants shall apply in addition to the parking
requirements for golf courses.
§ 175-108 WATER § 175-110
168:519
§ 175-111. Group care facilities, personal care boarding homes or
transitional dwellings.
Group care facility, personal care boarding home or transitional dwelling,
subject to:
D. Operations shall be discontinued between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m.
A. In the AG-A and R-AG Districts, the minimum site required for a
personal care boarding home shall be based on the number of residents
to be housed, as follows: [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
Number of Residents
Size of Site
(acres)
6 or fewer 1
7 to 12 2
13 to 19 3
20 or more 5
B. In all other Districts, the minimum site required for a group care
facility, personal care boarding home or transitional dwelling shall be
based on the number of residents to be housed, as follows:
Number of Residents
Size of Site
(acres)
Fewer than 20 1
20 to 40 5
41 to 100 10
Over 100 15
C. In all districts, any personal care boarding home proposed to house 30
or more residents shall provide public water and public sewers or a
private sewage treatment system and private water supply approved by
the PA Department of Environmental Resources.
D. A group care facility, personal care boarding home or transitional
dwelling shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector road as defined by this chapter.
E. No group care facility, personal care boarding home or transitional
dwelling shall be established within 1,000 feet of another existing or
proposed group care facility, personal care boarding home or
transitional dwelling. This distance shall be the nearest distance
between the property lines of the two properties in question as
measured in any direction.
§ 175-110 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-111
168:520
§ 175-112. Hazardous waste disposal, treatment, transportation or
storage.
Hazardous waste disposal, treatment, transportation or storage, subject to:
F. Adequate open space opportunities for recreation shall be provided on
the lot for the residents consistent with their needs, and the area shall
be secured by a fence with a self-latching gate.
G. Adequate provisions shall be made for access for emergency medical
and fire vehicles.
H. Twenty-four-hour supervision shall be provided by staff qualified by the
sponsoring agency.
I. The facility and staff shall demonstrate compliance with all the
qualifications of the sponsoring agency, and continued compliance shall
be maintained throughout the operation of the facility.
J. Where applicable, certification or licensing by the sponsoring agency
shall be prerequisite to obtaining a certificate of occupancy and a copy
of an annual report with evidence of continuing certification shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer in January of each year.
A. The applicant shall present evidence of valid licenses and/or permits
from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PA
DER) for the proposed transportation, storage, treatment or disposal of
hazardous waste.
B. Valid licenses and/or permits from PA DER shall be maintained
continuously throughout the operation of any transportation, storage,
treatment or disposal of hazardous waste. Any suspension or revocation
of the valid PA DER licenses and/or permits shall result in revocation of
Township zoning approval and shall represent a violation of this chapter
which shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
C. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed transportation,
storage, treatment or disposal of hazardous waste shall not adversely
affect any lawful or existing permitted uses of adjacent property.
D. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed transportation,
storage, treatment or disposal of hazardous waste shall not adversely
affect any stream or groundwater supply.
E. The applicant shall show the proposed routes of all trucks to be utilized
for hauling, if any; the estimated weights of the trucks; and the types of
hazardous waste to be hauled in those trucks. The applicant shall
comply with all weight limits on Township roads and shall design the
hauling routes to minimize the impact on local roads.
F. Posting of bond; spills.
§ 175-111 WATER § 175-112
168:521
(1) The applicant shall post a bond in an amount determined by the
Township Engineer to guarantee restoration of Township roads
used for hauling, if any, and to guarantee compensation of
Township employees and/or emergency medical and fire services
for clean-up or abatement of any hazardous waste spilled or
otherwise deposited on roads or properties within the limits of the
Township.
(2) Any person who intentionally, accidentally or negligently causes
any such spill or deposit shall be liable for all costs incurred by the
Township, including, but not limited to, traffic control, evacuation,
relocation, substance monitoring, establishment of medical care
facilities and repair or restoration of Township roads. The applicant
shall certify that an ordinary public liability insurance policy in an
amount determined by the Township to cover these potential costs
either is or shall be in effect during the operation.
G. Storage areas shall not be outside an enclosed building. The enclosed
building shall be constructed of brick or concrete block and shall
contain protective separations between different types of hazardous
wastes stored and between the storage area and areas devoted to other
activities in the building.
H. The hazardous waste storage area shall be visibly posted with warning
notices and shall be adequately secured at all times to protect public
safety.
I. The minimum site required for storage of hazardous waste when it is
the principal use on a site shall be 25 acres. The minimum site required
for storage of hazardous waste as an accessory use to another principal
use on a site shall be one acre.
J. The minimum site required for treatment and/or disposal sites shall be
100 acres.
K. Treatment and disposal facilities shall not be located within one mile of
any airport, school, community park, hospital, nursing home, place of
worship or retail center.
L. Storage sites, other than those which include treatment or disposal,
shall not be permitted within 500 feet of any residence or within 1/4
mile of any place of worship, school, hospital, nursing home, public
building, historic structure or municipal park.
M. Treatment and/or disposal sites shall be adequately secured and shall
be visibly posted to protect the public safety. Treatment and or disposal
areas shall be located no closer than 100 feet to any property line and
shall be adequately screened by an opaque fence or earthen mound at
least eight feet in height or landscaped with a dense, compact yearround
vegetative screen which attains at least eight feet in height
within three years of planting.
§ 175-112 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-112
168:522
N. Any change or expansion of the activity on a site which includes
transportation, storage, treatment or disposal of hazardous waste
which is not authorized by the original conditional use approval shall
require submission of a new use by special exception application for the
changed or expanded activity.
O. The application for the use shall include written and graphic materials
and a boundary and topographic survey of the property and shall
contain the following information:
(1) The location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures
on the site.
(2) The proposed location of the hazardous waste storage area on the
site and the distance from all residences located within 500 feet of
the proposed storage area and all schools, places of worship, public
buildings, hospitals, historic structures, municipal parks, streams,
floodplains and protected watersheds within 1/4 mile of the
proposed storage area.
(3) The location of any proposed treatment or disposal facility and the
distance from all residences within 500 feet and the distance from
any airport, school community park, hospital, nursing home, place
of worship or retail center within one mile.
(4) The uses of all adjacent properties within 500 feet of the entire
perimeter of the property. The names and addresses of all property
owners within 500 feet of the entire perimeter of the property.
(5) The location of all access and haulage roads and their intersection
with all existing public roads.
(6) A statement from a registered professional engineer certifying that
the proposed storage, treatment or disposal of hazardous waste
shall not have a deleterious effect on adjacent land uses, surface
water, groundwater or floodplains, if any.
(7) A copy of all applicable PA DER permits or licenses or a copy of the
application for such permits or licenses.
(8) The amount and type of performance bond to be posted and the
amount and type of liability insurance required in accordance with
the requirements of PA DER permits or licenses, if any.
(9) The duration of the proposed transportation, storage, treatment or
disposal activity and whether temporary or permanent.
(10) The type and amount of hazardous waste to be stored, the proposed
method of storage and the proposed method of treatment or
disposal of hazardous waste at the site, if any.
P. The applicant shall present evidence from a registered professional
engineer or other qualified expert whose credentials are acceptable to
§ 175-112 WATER § 175-112
168:523
§ 175-113. Home occupations.
Home occupation, subject to:
the Township to document compliance with these express standards
and criteria and whose fee shall be paid by the applicant.
A. The home occupation shall be carried on by a member of the family
residing in the dwelling unit, and no more than one person shall be
employed who is not a resident of the dwelling.
B. The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal
dwelling. The home occupation shall not be conducted in any accessory
structure.
C. No more than 20% of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling,
including an integral garage, shall be devoted to the conduct of the
home occupation.
D. Articles which are not produced on the premises shall not be sold on the
premises, except that supplies used in providing a service may be sold
to customers receiving the service, such as hair care products available
at a beauty shop.
E. There shall be no display of merchandise available for sale on the
premises; however, merchandise may be stored on the premises for
delivery to customers off the premises.
F. Exterior displays or signs other than those permitted in Article XIV,
exterior storage of material and exterior indication of the home
occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal
structure shall not be permitted.
G. Objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, electrical disturbance,
odors, heat, or glare shall not be produced. The use shall comply with
the performance standards of § 175-139 of this chapter.
H. The use shall not significantly intensify vehicular or pedestrian traffic
which is normal for the residences in the neighborhood.
I. The use shall not require internal or external alterations or construction
features which are not customary to a dwelling or which change the fire
rating of a structure.
J. There shall be no use of materials or equipment except that of similar
power and type normally used in a residential dwelling for domestic or
household purposes.
K. The use shall not cause an increase in the use of water, sewerage,
garbage, public safety or any other municipal services beyond that
which is normal for the residences in the neighborhood.
§ 175-112 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-113
168:524
§ 175-114. Horse boarding or riding academies.
Horse boarding or riding academies, subject to:
L. The use shall not cause a negative impact on property values in the
immediate neighborhood.
M. The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles in
excess of 11,000 pounds GVW for regular delivery of materials to or
from the premises and commercial vehicles in excess of 11,000 pounds
GVW shall not be parked on the premises.
N. The following uses shall not be considered home occupations and shall
be restricted to the districts in which they are specifically authorized as
permitted uses or uses by special exception, including, but not limited
to:
(1) Beauty shops or barbershops containing more than two chairs.
(2) Clinics, hospitals or nursing homes.
(3) Kennels, veterinary offices and clinics.
(4) Funeral homes.
(5) Private clubs.
(6) Private instruction to more than three students at a time.
(7) Restaurants or tearooms.
(8) Horse boarding or riding academies.
(9) Tourist or boarding homes.
(10) Vehicle or equipment rental, repair or sales.
(11) Vehicle repair garages, as defined by this chapter.
O. Day-care homes, as defined by this chapter, shall meet all of the
foregoing requirements for a home occupation, as well as the following
additional requirements:
(1) Adequate areas for outdoor recreation shall be provided and shall
be secured by a fence with self-latching gate.
(2) A safe area shall be provided for dropping off and picking up
children which does not obstruct the free flow of traffic on any
public street.
(3) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article XIII.
§ 175-113 WATER § 175-114
168:525
§ 175-115. Junkyards.
Junkyard, subject to:
A. Such use shall be accessory to a farm, as defined by this chapter, or,
when proposed as a principal use, shall have a minimum site of 10
acres.
B. No building housing animals shall be closer than 200 feet to any
property line.
C. All property lines adjoining a single-family dwelling on a lot which is
less than two acres or any property which is zoned AG-A, AG-B, R-AG, or
R-1 shall be screened by Buffer Yard D, as defined by § 175-140B of this
chapter. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
D. All training areas and bridal paths shall be adequately fenced to protect
adjoining properties.
A. The minimum site size shall be 10 acres.
B. The premises shall be maintained so as to not constitute a nuisance or a
menace to public health and safety.
C. No garbage, hazardous materials or hazardous waste as defined by
federal statute, or other organic waste shall be stored on the premises.
D. The manner of storage of junk or other materials shall facilitate access
for fire fighting, shall prevent hazards from fire or explosion and shall
prevent accumulation of stagnant water.
E. Junkyards shall comply with the performance standards of § 175-139.
F. No junk shall be stored or accumulated and no structure shall be
constructed within 100 feet of any dwelling unit or within 40 feet of any
property line or public street.
G. The premises shall be enclosed by a metal chain link fence not less than
eight feet in height supported on steel posts with self-latching gate.
H. The fence shall be supplemented with screening material which creates
a visual barrier that is at least 80% opaque.
I. All property lines adjoining residential use or AG-A, AG-B, R-AG or R-1
zoning district classification shall be screened by Buffer Yard A, as
defined by § 175-140B of this chapter. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord.
No. 128]
J. The site shall be designed utilizing natural topography and/or
constructed earthen mounds so as to not be visible from the adjoining
public streets.
K. The operator shall obtain a license from the Township prior to initiating
operations which shall be renewable annually upon payment of a
§ 175-114 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-115
168:526
§ 175-116. Kennels or veterinary clinics.
Kennel or veterinary clinic, subject to:
§ 175-117. Lakes, ponds or water impoundments.
Lake, pond or water impoundment, subject to:
§ 175-118. Landfills or resource recovery facilities.
Landfill or resource recovery facility, subject to:
license fee established by resolution of the Township Supervisors and
subject to inspection by the Zoning Officer to determine continuing
compliance with these standards.
A. In the AG-A, AG-B and R-AG Districts, kennels and veterinary clinics
shall be accessory to a farm or, when proposed as a principal use, shall
have a minimum site area of five acres. Veterinary clinics in the C-2
District shall have a minimum site area of one acre and shall not have
outdoor kennels. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
B. Outdoor kennels shall be located at least 200 feet from any property
line adjoining residential use or AG-A, AG-B, R-AG or R-1 zoning
classification and at least 50 feet from any other property line.
[Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
C. Outdoor runs and similar facilities shall be constructed for easy
cleaning, shall be adequately secured by a fence with self-latching gate
and shall be screened by Buffer Yard D as defined by § 175-140B of this
chapter.
A. The minimum lot area required to establish any lake, pond or water
impoundment, other than stormwater management facilities, shall be
two acres.
B. All regulations of the PA Department of Environmental Resources and
PA Department of Agriculture shall be met.
C. Lakes, ponds or water impoundments shall be located a minimum of 75
feet from all property lines.
D. Any lake, pond or water impoundment which is proposed to be used for
recreation by the public shall be subject to the applicable express
standards and criteria governing public recreation, noncommercial
recreation or commercial recreation contained in § 175-104 or
§ 175-126 of this chapter.
A. The minimum site area shall be 100 acres for a landfill and 50 acres for
a resource recovery facility.
B. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial
or collector road, as defined by this chapter.
§ 175-115 WATER § 175-118
168:527
C. The driveway or haul road entering the site from a public street shall be
paved for a distance of 500 feet from the public street.
D. A tire-washing station shall be located on the site to service trucks
exiting the facility.
E. The operator shall post a bond in favor of the Township and in a form
acceptable to the Township prior to beginning operations in the amount
of $100,000 for each mile of Township road or portion thereof proposed
to be traversed by vehicles traveling to the site. The term of the bond
shall begin on the date that the zoning certificate is issued. The bond
shall be returned to the operator upon completion of all operations and
any backfilling or reconstruction of a damaged roadway due to weight
in excess of the posted weight limits for the road. Any failure to
complete the reconstruction required by this chapter shall result in
forfeiture of the required bond. Those portions of the Township roads
which have been damaged shall be determined by inspection by the
Township Engineer and shall be reconstructed to current Township
specifications for street construction.
F. Landfill or transfer station operations shall not be conducted within 200
feet of any property lines adjoining residential use or zoning district
classification. Resource recovery facilities shall not be located within
500 feet of any property lines adjoining a residential use or AG-A, AG-B,
R-AG, or R-1 zoning district classification. [Amended 7-29-2015 by
Ord. No. 128]
G. All property lines adjoining residential use or AG-A, AG-B, R-AG, or R-1
zoning district classification shall be screened by Buffer Yard A as
defined by § 175-140B of this chapter. The buffer yard shall be
comprised of a combination of earthen mounding and the required
plantings. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
H. Fencing at least six feet in height shall be provided around any work
area for security and to control windblown refuse.
I. The applicant shall show compliance with applicable state and federal
laws regulating landfills and resource recovery facilities.
J. The applicant shall obtain the required permits from the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources (PA DER) and/or the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency prior to initiating any operation.
K. The required state or federal permits shall be maintained throughout
the duration of all operations.
L. Any suspension or revocation of the required state or federal permits
shall constitute a violation of this chapter and will result in the
suspension or revocation of the certificate of occupancy or enforcement
of the penalty provisions of this chapter, or both.
§ 175-118 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-118
168:528
§ 175-118.1. Large land development. [Added 7-29-2015 by Ord. No.
128]
§ 175-119. Mineral removal.
Mineral removal, subject to:
M. In January of each year, the operator shall apply to the Zoning Officer
for renewal of the certificate of occupancy and shall present evidence of
continuing compliance with all conditions of approval and required
state or federal permits.
A. The landscape plan shall show the screening of loading and service
areas and all planting areas and entrance treatments.
B. Ingress and egress provisions shall be adequate in the judgement of the
Township Supervisors to minimize congestion on adjacent highways
and local streets during peak periods.
C. Sidewalks shall extend from the main entry point and link to the public
sidewalk.
D. Building elevation drawings shall be required for all large land
developments.
E. The entire commercial component shall have a common architectural
character and be an integrated design.
F. Access from adjacent streets shall be carefully designed to minimize
congestion and confusion.
G. Areas not paved or occupied by structures shall be landscaped and
maintained, and the edges of paved areas abutting landscaped areas
shall be curbed.
H. The Township Supervisors may impose restrictions upon access to the
facility, storage of vehicles or materials on the premises, hours of
operation and such other matters as they deem necessary to ensure
that there is no adverse impact upon the functioning of the
development or adjacent parcels.
A. The minimum site required for mineral removal shall be 25 acres.
B. There shall be no removal of minerals or vegetative cover within 100
feet of the bank of any stream or natural watercourse identified on
maps prepared by the United States Geologic Survey (USGS).
C. Mineral removal shall be prohibited in watersheds of rivers or streams
now or hereafter designated by the Pennsylvania Fish Commission as a
"Wilderness Trout Stream," by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources as part of the Scenic Rivers System or
designated under the Federal Wild and Scenic Rivers Act.
§ 175-118 WATER § 175-119
168:529
D. No mineral removal shall be conducted within 300 feet of any public
building, school, place of worship, community or institutional building,
commercial building, public park or private recreational area.
E. No mineral removal shall be conducted within 100 feet of the outside
right-of-way line of any public road, except where access roads or
haulage roads join the right-of-way line and where the appropriate state
or federal agency having jurisdiction over the conduct of mineral
removal operations shall permit it in accordance with law.
F. No mineral removal shall be conducted which will adversely affect any
publicly owned park or places included in the National Register of
Historic Sites, unless approved by the governmental agency with
jurisdiction over the park or historic site.
G. No mineral removal shall be conducted within 100 feet of a cemetery.
H. No mineral removal shall be conducted within 300 feet of any occupied
dwelling, unless the consent of the owner of the dwelling has been
obtained in advance of the filing of the application for zoning approval.
I. The applicant shall present expert testimony to demonstrate that the
proposed mineral removal operation will not adversely affect any of the
following:
(1) Lawful existing or permitted use of adjacent properties.
(2) The quality or adequacy of any public or private water supply
source.
(3) Any flood-prone or landslide-prone areas within the Township.
J. The applicant shall present expert testimony to demonstrate that the
use of explosives, if proposed, shall not cause injury to any adjacent
structures or shall not substantially diminish underground water
resources.
K. If blasting is to be undertaken, a seismograph shall be placed on the
site of the operation during all times when blasting is performed which
shall be monitored by an independent engineering consultant whose
credentials are acceptable to the Township and whose fee is paid by the
applicant.
L. The applicant shall provide reclamation plans for the site which
demonstrate that the condition of the land after the operation is
completed will allow economically and ecologically productive uses of
the type permitted in the district in which the site is located.
Acceptance of the reclamation plan shall not constitute approval of any
aspect of any future development plan.
M. The applicant shall show the proposed routes of all trucks to be utilized
for hauling and the estimated weights of those trucks. The applicant
shall show evidence of compliance with designated weight limits on
§ 175-119 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-119
168:530
state, county and Township roads and shall design the hauling routes
for the mineral removal operation to minimize the impact on local roads
within the Township.
N. The operator shall post a bond in favor of the Township and in a form
acceptable to the Township prior to beginning operations in the amount
of $100,000 for each mile of Township road or portion thereof proposed
to be traversed for removing minerals from the site. The term of the
bond shall begin on the date the zoning certificate is issued. The bond
shall be returned to the operator upon completion of all operations, any
backfilling and any reconstruction of a damaged roadway due to excess
weight in excess of the posted weight for the road. Any failure to
complete the reconstruction required by this chapter shall result in
forfeiture of the required bond. Those portions of the Township roads
which have been damaged shall be determined by inspection of the
Township Engineer and shall be reconstructed to current Township
Specifications for Street Construction.
O. Portions of the site where mineral removal operations are conducted
may be required to be fenced or screened, as necessary, to provide
security and protect adjacent properties.
P. The applicant shall comply with all applicable state and federal
regulations and shall show evidence of obtaining the required state or
federal permits, including proof of insurability, before initiating any
work, and of maintaining the required permits throughout the duration
of all operations. Any suspension or revocation of the required state or
federal permits shall constitute a violation of zoning approval and will
result in the suspension or revocation of zoning approval and/or
enforcement of the penalty provisions of this chapter.
Q. Approval, of the use shall expire if work authorized in the application
for zoning approval is not commenced within 90 days of the date of
approval of the application unless the applicant submits a written
request for an extension to the Zoning Hearing Board prior to the
expiration of the 90 days explaining the reason for the delay in initiating
the work and the Board approves the request.
R. Once work is initiated under an approved application for a use by
special exception, zoning approval shall be valid for a period of one year
from the date of approval by the Zoning Hearing Board. An application
for renewal of zoning approval must be submitted prior to the date of
expiration of zoning approval and can be granted by the Zoning Officer
upon demonstration by the applicant that all conditions of approval of
the use by special exception and, the required federal and state permits
remain in full force and effect and that the applicant is diligently
pursuing the completion of the mineral removal operation. Upon
expiration or revocation of zoning approval for the use by special
exception, the applicant may reapply for approval of the use by special
exception.
§ 175-119 WATER § 175-119
168:531
§ 175-120. Mobile home parks.
Mobile home park, subject to:
§ 175-121. New and used vehicle sales and service.
New and used vehicle sales and service, subject to:
S. During the mineral removal operation, the Township Engineer may
inspect the site at the request of the Township to determine continuing
compliance with these standards and criteria and any conditions of
approval. The cost of inspection by the Township Engineer shall be
borne by the operator.
A. The minimum site area required for a mobile home park shall be 20
contiguous acres.
B. The minimum number of mobile home lots in a mobile home park shall
be 20 lots.
C. The minimum lot area required for each mobile home lot shall be
20,000 square feet.
D. The site of a mobile home park shall be serviced by public water or PADER-
approved private water system and public sewers or PA-DERapproved
private sewage disposal system.
E. The site of a mobile home park shall have frontage on and direct
vehicular access to an arterial or collector street.
F. A perimeter setback, as defined by this chapter, which is a minimum of
50 feet in depth shall be provided around the entire boundary of the
mobile home park site. Buffer Yard A, as required by § 175-140B of this
chapter shall be provided within the required perimeter setback area.
G. The mobile home park shall comply with all requirements of the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance166 governing
mobile home parks.
A. The minimum site area shall be two acres.
B. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial
or collector street.
C. The area used for display of merchandise offered for sale and the area
used for the parking of customer and employee automobiles shall be
continuously paved and maintained in either concrete over a base of
crushed stone compacted to not less than six inches in depth or other
surfacing of an equivalent or superior character, approved by the
Township Engineer.
166. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 175-119 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-121
168:532
§ 175-122. Outdoor sales of mobile homes, recreational vehicles
and heavy equipment.
Outdoor sales of mobile homes, recreational vehicles, heavy equipment and
similar merchandise, subject to:
D. All lots used for the outdoor display of automobiles shall have a
completely enclosed building on the same lot which has not less than
2,000 square feet of gross floor area where all repair, servicing, sales
and customer car washing shall be performed.
E. No vehicle or other merchandise displayed outdoors shall be less than
five feet from any property line. No vehicle shall be parked on adjacent
property or in any public street right-of-way.
F. No vehicle shall be displayed or offered for sale which does not have all
of the mechanical and body components necessary for the safe and
lawful operation thereof on the streets and highways of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
G. All lights and light poles shall be located at least 10 feet from any street
right-of-way or property line, and all lighting shall be shielded and
reflected away from adjacent streets and properties.
H. No oscillating or flashing lights shall be permitted on the lot, on any of
the structures or poles on the lot or on any merchandise displayed
outdoors.
I. No strings of lights or flags, flashers or other display paraphernalia
shall be permitted on the lot, on any of the structures or poles or on
merchandise displayed outdoors, except for such signs as may be
otherwise allowed by Article XIV of this chapter.
J. All required off-street parking spaces shall be reserved exclusively for
the parking of customer and employee vehicles and shall not be used
for the display of merchandise.
K. Customer vehicles with external damage awaiting repairs shall be
located either inside a building or in an outdoor area which is screened
by a six-foot hedge or opaque fence.
L. Buffer Yard C as defined by § 175-140B of this chapter shall be provided
along all property lines adjoining residential use or AG-A, AG-B, R-AG,
or R-1 zoning classification. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
A. The minimum site area shall be two acres.
B. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial
or collector street.
C. The area used for display of merchandise offered for sale and the area
used for the parking of customer and employee automobiles shall be
continuously paved and maintained in either concrete over a base of
§ 175-121 WATER § 175-122
168:533
§ 175-123. Planned industrial parks.
Planned industrial park, subject to:
crushed stone compacted to not less than six inches in depth or other
surfacing of an equivalent or superior character, approved by the
Township Engineer.
D. No vehicle or other merchandise displayed outdoors shall be less than
five feet from any property line. No vehicle shall be parked on adjacent
property or in any public street right-of-way.
E. No vehicle shall be displayed or offered for sale which does not have all
of the mechanical and body components necessary for the safe and
lawful operation thereof.
F. No strings of lights or flags, flashers or other display paraphernalia
shall be permitted on the lot, on any of the structures or poles or on
merchandise displayed outdoors, except for such signs as may be
otherwise allowed by Article XIV of this chapter.
G. All required off-street parking spaces shall be reserved exclusively for
the parking of customer and employee vehicles and shall not be used
for the display of merchandise,
H. All sales and service shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
building.
I. Buffer Yard C as defined by § 175-140B of this chapter shall be provided
along all property lines adjoining residential use or AG-A, AG-B, R-AG,
or R-1 zoning classification. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
A. The minimum site area required shall be 10 acres.
B. Once the improvements are completed in an approved planned
industrial park, lots within an approved and recorded planned
industrial park may be sold and developed as independent entities for
any authorized use in the district.
C. The site shall be designed so that properties adjacent to the planned
industrial park shall not be adversely affected.
D. Only the uses permitted by right or authorized as conditional uses or
uses by special exception in the district in which the planned industrial
park is located shall be permitted in the planned industrial park.
E. The planned industrial park shall be consistent with the purpose of this
chapter and the zoning district in which it is located.
F. The site plan shall be designed to minimize points of access to the
public street. Shared driveways shall be utilized, where feasible, and
cross easements dedicated for common access, where necessary.
§ 175-122 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-123
168:534
§ 175-124. Planned shopping centers.
Planned shopping center, subject to:
§ 175-125. Private use helipads.
Private use helipad, subject to:
G. The site shall be planned as a unit, and uniform signage and
landscaping and common parking and loading areas shall be proposed
to promote efficiency and preserve a common design theme.
H. Buffer Yard A, as defined by § 175-140B of this chapter, shall be
provided along all property lines adjoining residential use or AG-A, AGB,
R-AG, or R-1 zoning classification. Buffer yards shall not be required
between uses within the site of a planned industrial park. [Amended
7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
A. The site shall have frontage on, and direct or indirect vehicular access
to, an arterial or collector street as defined by this chapter. [Amended
8-21-2019 by Ord. No. 134]
B. The minimum site area required shall be five acres.
C. Once the improvements are completed in an approved planned
shopping center, lots within an approved and recorded planned
shopping center may be sold and developed as independent entities for
any authorized use in the district.
D. Only the uses permitted by right or authorized as conditional uses or
uses by special exception in the district in which the planned shopping
center is located shall be permitted in the planned shopping center.
E. The entire perimeter of a planned shopping center site shall be
screened by the buffer yards specified by § 175-140B of this chapter to
provide the separation required between the adjoining uses. Buffer
yards shall not be required between uses within the site of the planned
shopping center.
F. The site plan shall be designed to minimize points of access to the
public street. Shared driveways shall be utilized, where feasible, and
cross easements dedicated for common access, where necessary.
G. The site shall be planned as a unit, and uniform signage and
landscaping and common parking and loading areas shall be proposed
to promote efficiency and preserve a common design theme.
A. Helipads shall be located at least 250 feet from any property line or
public street.
B. Helipads accessory to any principal use in the AG-A, AG-B, or R-AG
Districts are limited to use by the owner of the property. The minimum
lot area required for a helipad accessory to any principal use in the AG-
§ 175-123 WATER § 175-125
168:535
§ 175-126. Noncommercial recreation.
Noncommercial recreation, subject to:
§ 175-127. Public utility buildings.
Public utility buildings, subject to:
A, AG-B, or R-AG Districts shall be five acres. [Amended 7-29-2015
by Ord. No. 128]
C. Helipads accessory to a hospital shall be limited to use by emergency
vehicles and health system personnel.
D. Only one private use helipad shall be authorized for each industrial
park, regardless of the number of businesses located in the industrial
park.
E. Evidence of compliance with all applicable regulations of the Federal
Aviation Administration and Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Bureau of Aviation shall be submitted.
F. The helicopter landing pad shall be clearly marked with the insignia
commonly recognized to indicate a private use helipad.
G. The helicopter landing pad shall be paved, level and maintained dirt
free. Rooftop pads shall be free of all loose stone and aggregate.
H. An application for a helipad on a roof shall be accompanied by a
certification by a registered engineer that the loads imposed by the
helicopter will be supported by the structure.
I. Lighting shall be shielded away from adjacent properties.
A. A minimum site of one acre shall be required.
B. Parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XIII.
C. Screening by Buffer Yard C, as defined by § 175-140B of this chapter,
shall be provided along all property lines adjoining residential use or
AG-A, AG-B, R-AG, or R-1 Zoning District classification. [Amended
7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
D. All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent streets and properties.
E. The use shall comply with the performance standards of § 175-139.
F. Any facility located within 200 feet of a property line adjoining a
residential use or AG-A, AG-B, R-AG, or R-1 zoning classification shall
cease operations at 12:00 midnight. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord.
No. 128]
A. If a building or outdoor storage area is proposed, the minimum site area
shall be two acres. If distribution equipment is the only type of
§ 175-125 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-127
168:536
§ 175-128. Supply yards.
Supply yards, subject to:
structure proposed, no minimum site size shall be required, provided
the required right-of-way or a parcel of the minimum size necessary to
efficiently install and maintain the equipment is provided and adequate
easements for vehicular access are provided.
B. Uses involving distribution equipment, other than towers, which is not
enclosed by a building shall be secured by a fence which is at least six
feet in height with self-latching gate. The fence shall be supplemented
with screening material which is at least 80% opaque or the fence shall
be screened by a six-foot compact hedge.
C. Uses involving towers or other distribution structures which exceed the
height limitations of the zoning district in which they are located shall
be designed so that in the event of collapse, the structure shall not fall
on any adjacent property.
D. Evidence regarding design, structural integrity and maximum wind
loads shall be submitted with any application which proposes one or
more towers.
E. The storage of movable equipment or material outside an enclosed
building shall be permitted only if the storage area is located a
minimum of 50 feet from any property line adjoining residential use or
AG-A, AG-B, R-AG, or R-1 zoning classification and is screened from
view from the public street and any adjacent residential property by a
six-foot hedge. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
F. If a building is proposed for human occupancy, parking shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of § 175-156B of this
chapter for offices or warehouses, whichever is applicable.
G. If a building is proposed for equipment maintenance and/or storage or
for the delivery of materials, off-street loading facilities shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of Article XIII of this
chapter.
H. Buffer Yard C as defined by § 175-140B of this chapter shall be provided
along all property lines adjoining residential use or AG-A, AG-B, R-AG,
or R-1 zoning classification. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
A. The minimum site required shall be two acres.
B. Outdoor display and equipment storage areas shall be secured by a
fence that is a minimum of eight feet in height and shall be screened
from any adjoining residential property by a six-foot compact hedge.
C. All outdoor display areas and equipment storage areas shall be located
a minimum of 25 feet from any property line adjoining residential use or
§ 175-127 WATER § 175-128
168:537
§ 175-129. Temporary uses or structures other than construction
trailers or temporary mobile homes.
Temporary uses or structures, other than construction trailers or temporary
mobile homes, subject to:
AG-A, AG-B, R-AG, or R-1 zoning classification. [Amended 7-29-2015
by Ord. No. 128]
D. Contractors' supply yards may also include an office for the conduct of
the business. Builders' or other supply yards involving retail or
wholesale sales shall include a completely enclosed building for the
conduct of the business.
E. Adequate paved access and maneuvering facilities for loading and
unloading trucks shall be provided so that trucks shall not back onto or
stand on the public right-of-way and dirt, debris or excess materials
shall not be deposited on any public right-of-way.
F. Any facility located on a lot where any lot line is located within 200 feet
of an existing dwelling shall cease operations between dusk and dawn,
prevailing time.
G. Buffer Yard A as defined by § 175-140B of this chapter shall be provided
along all property lines adjoining residential use or AG-A, AG-B, R-AG,
or R-1 zoning classification. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
A. Approval. Temporary uses may be permitted by the Board of
Supervisors on the basis of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking
provisions and traffic access and the absence of any undue adverse
impact on surrounding properties in the District. No temporary use
shall be operated without all of the required county and state approvals
and permits.
B. Vehicular access for all temporary uses or structures which are
proposed to be accessible to the public shall be designed to minimize
congestion on the site and not impede the free flow of traffic for any
other permanent use or structure on the site.
C. Before approving any temporary use, the Board of Supervisors shall
make an assessment of the total number of off-street parking spaces
which shall be reasonably required for the particular use, its intensity,
and the availability of other parking facilities in the area, and shall
approve such temporary use only if such reasonably requested offstreet
parking is provided.
D. All temporary uses or structures proposed to be used as principal uses
or structures shall comply with all applicable area and bulk regulations
for the zoning district in which they are located. All temporary uses or
structures which are proposed to be used as accessory uses or
structures shall comply with the requirements of the zoning district for
accessory structures.
§ 175-128 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-129
168:538
§ 175-130. Vehicle repair garage or heavy equipment repair.
Vehicle repair garage or heavy equipment repair, subject to:
§ 175-131. Wholesale sales in conjunction with retail business.
Wholesale sales in conjunction with retail business, subject to:
E. No temporary use shall be operated during any hours or on any days of
the week except such as are designated by the Board of Supervisors on
the basis of the nature of the temporary use and the surrounding
existing uses on adjoining and adjacent properties.
F. Temporary uses or structures shall be removed within 48 hours after
the completion of the event.
G. Temporary uses or structure which are proposed as principal uses or
structures and which are accessible to the public shall provide sanitary
facilities, unless such facilities already exist on the site.
H. Specific uses. (Reserved)
A. Buffer Yard B, as defined by § 175-140B of this chapter, shall be
provided along all property lines adjoining residential use or AG-A, AGB,
R-AG, or R-1 zoning classification. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord.
No. 128]
B. There shall be no storage of parts or dismantled vehicles outside an
enclosed building.
C. All repair work shall be performed within an enclosed building which
has adequate ventilation and fire protection provisions.
D. All towed vehicles shall be stored on the premises, and no vehicle shall
be stored or dismantled on any public street.
E. Vehicles or equipment awaiting repair shall be kept in an enclosed
building or in an outdoor area which is screened by a six-foot hedge or
opaque fence.
F. The premises shall be kept clean and shall be maintained so as not to
constitute a nuisance or menace to public health and safety.
A. Any site which involves wholesale distribution shall have direct access
to an arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
B. All materials and equipment shall be stored within a completely
enclosed structure or shall be limited to storage in the rear or side yard
if screened from view from the street or adjacent residential properties
by a six-foot hedge or opaque fence.
C. No shipping or receiving shall be permitted within 300 feet of property
in a residential zoning district between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
§ 175-129 WATER § 175-131
168:539
§ 175-132. Communication facilities.
D. All shipping and receiving facilities adjoining residential use or AG-A,
AG-B, R-AG, or R-1 zoning classification shall be screened by Buffer
Yard B, as defined by § 175-140B of this chapter. [Amended 7-29-2015
by Ord. No. 128]
E. Wholesale sales shall not exceed 25% of the gross sales of the retail
business.
F. The gross floor area devoted to wholesale warehousing shall not exceed
the gross floor area devoted to the retail business.
A. The minimum site area required shall be as follows:
(1) Single tower not exceeding 200 feet in height: one acre.
(2) Single tower exceeding 200 feet in height: two acres.
(3) Tower site proposed initially or cumulatively for two or more
towers: five acres.
B. Any existing or proposed tower site shall not be located within 2,000
feet off any other existing or proposed tower site, measured from
nearest property line to nearest property line.
C. Shared use of towers and tower sites shall be encouraged. If shared use
of an existing or approved tower or an existing or approved tower site is
not proposed, the applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
equipment cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower
or an existing or approved tower site for the following reasons:
(1) The proposed equipment would exceed the structural capacity of
the existing or approved towers, and reinforcement of the existing
or approved towers cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.
(2) The proposed equipment will cause RF (radio frequency)
interference with other existing or proposed equipment for that
tower or that existing or approved tower site, and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(3) Existing or approved towers or the existing or approved tower site
do not have adequate space to accommodate the proposed
equipment.
(4) Addition of the proposed equipment would result in NIER
(nonionizing electromagnetic radiation) levels which exceed any
adopted local, federal or state emission standards.
(5) There are other valid reasons that make it impractical to place the
proposed equipment on any existing or proposed tower or any
existing or approved tower site.
§ 175-131 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-132
168:540
D. Shared use shall be conditioned upon the applicant's agreement to pay
a reasonable fee and the cost of adapting existing facilities to the
proposed use reasonably required to accommodate the shared use.
E. Communications facilities and their associated structures may exceed
the height limitations of the district, provided they shall be set back
from any property line or public street right-of-way a minimum distance
of 50% of the tower height or greater, if necessary, to guarantee that in
the event of collapse, the structure shall not fall on any adjacent
property and all ice-fall or debris from tower failure shall be contained
on the tower site.
F. No communications facility shall be located within 500 feet of any
property line located in any AG-A, R-AG, or R Zoning District.
[Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
G. Unless the essential communications facility is located on a building,
the tower structure shall be completely enclosed by a six-foot high
chain link or similar fence with self-latching gate to limit accessibility to
the general public, unless the entire property is secured by such a
fence.
H. All guy wires and all guyed towers shall be clearly marked so as to be
visible at all times. All guy wires shall be located a minimum of 25 feet
from any property line.
I. The applicant shall submit evidence that the tower and its method of
installation has been designed by a registered engineer and is certified
by that registered engineer to be structurally sound and able to
withstand wind and other loads in accordance with accepted
engineering practice.
J. The tower shall be subject to any applicable Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) and airport zoning regulations.
K. No sign or other structure shall be mounted on the tower, except as may
be required or approved by the FCC, FAA or other governmental
agency.
L. All lighting shall be shielded and reflected away from adjoining
properties.
M. A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the
tower site, plus one off-street parking space for each on-site personnel.
N. Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible.
O. A minimum twenty-foot easement or right-of-way for access shall be
provided to the tower which is adequate to accommodate maintenance
and emergency vehicles and which is improved with a dust-free, allweather
surface sufficient to accommodate the weight of vehicles
proposed to use the easement or right-of-way subject to approval by the
§ 175-132 WATER § 175-132
168:541
§ 175-133. Manufacturing.
§ 175-134. Public recreation.
§ 175-135. Restaurants.
Township Supervisors. The right-of-way or easement shall be
maintained by the landowner or lessee.
A. Off-street parking shall be provided for each of the uses in accordance
with the requirements of Article XIII of this chapter.
B. Off-street parking for offices shall be located within 300 feet of the
entrance to the offices.
C. All materials and equipment shall be stored within a completely
enclosed building.
D. Any site which involves wholesale distribution shall have access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
E. No shipping or receiving shall be permitted within 300 feet of property
in a residential zoning district between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
F. All property lines adjoining residential use or zoning classification shall
be screened by Buffer Yard B, as defined by § 175-140B of this chapter.
A. All off-street parking areas located adjacent to existing residences shall
reduce exterior lights to half power after 11:00 p.m. and shall be
screened by Buffer Yard B.
B. Grass, sod or turf shall not be considered an acceptable plant for use
within landscaped buffer yards.
C. All off-street parking shall be located on the lot.
D. All lots used for recreation facilities shall have a minimum of two points
of ingress and egress.
E. All dumpsters, not incorporated into the principal building, shall be
located in the rear yard setback and shall be screened with masonry or
vegetation. All screens shall be a minimum of eight feet high and shall
have a minimum opacity of 80%.
A. The hours of operation and activities for a restaurant shall be
appropriately scheduled to protect adjoining neighborhoods from
detrimental noise, disturbance or interruption.
B. All off-street parking shall be provided on the lot. The number of offstreet
parking spaces shall be provided as defined in this chapter.
§ 175-132 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-135
168:542
§ 175-136. Vehicle sales.
§ 175-137. Commercial supply yards.
(Reserved)
C. As part of all land development, the developer shall provide a plan for
photometrics of the lot. To minimize undesirable impacts on adjacent
lots, illumination, when measured at a lot line, shall be a maximum of
one footcandle.
D. All dumpsters shall be located in the rear setback yard and shall be
screened. All screens shall have a height of eight feet high and shall
have a minimum opacity of 80%.
E. Mechanical equipment location(s) are subject to Township approval and
shall be designed and screened so that visibility from an adjacent
Residential Zoning District is minimized to the greatest extent possible.
A. All vehicle sales shall be located adjacent to an arterial or collector
street as defined by this chapter.
B. All vehicle sales shall have a maximum lot area of one acre.
C. Vehicle inventory shall be aligned and displayed in an orderly fashion so
that circulation for firesafety can be maintained at all times.
D. All outdoor display areas adjacent to a residence shall have the
luminosity of exterior lighting reduced by 50% after 11:00 p.m.
§ 175-135 WATER § 175-137
168:543

ARTICLE XII
Supplementary Regulations
§ 175-138. Applicability.
The supplementary regulations in this article supplement the requirements
of articles governing each zoning district and shall apply to all uses in all
zoning districts.
§ 175-139. Performance standards.
A. The following uses shall apply to all uses in the TC, C-1, C-2, C-3 and I-1
Districts. All conditional uses and uses by special exception shall
comply with the requirements of this section. In order to determine
whether a proposed conditional use or use by special exception will
conform to the requirements of this chapter, the Township Supervisors
or Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may be, may require a qualified
consultant to testify, whose cost for services shall be borne by the
applicant.
(1) Fire protection: Fire-prevention and -fighting equipment
acceptable to the Board of Fire Underwriters shall be readily
available when any activity involving the handling or storage of
flammable or explosive materials is carried on.
(2) Electrical disturbance: No activity shall cause electrical
disturbance adversely affecting radio or other equipment in the
vicinity.
(3) Noise. No operation or activity shall cause or create noise in excess
of the sound levels prescribed below:
(a) Residential districts. At no point beyond the boundary of any
lot within these districts shall the exterior noise level resulting
from any use or activity located on such lot exceed a maximum
of 60 dba for more than four hours during a twenty-four-hour
equivalent period.
(b) Commercial districts. At no point on or beyond the boundary of
any lot within these districts shall the exterior noise level
resulting from any use or activity located on such lot exceed a
maximum of 65 dba for more than eight hours during a twentyfour-
hour equivalent period.
(c) Industrial districts. At no point on or beyond the boundary of
any lot within these districts shall the exterior noise level
resulting from any use or activity located on such lot exceed a
maximum of 75 dba for more than eight hours during a twentyfour-
hour equivalent period.
§ 175-138 WATER § 175-139
168:545
(d) Where two or more zoning districts in which different noise
levels are prescribed share a common boundary, the most
restrictive noise level standards shall govern.
(e) The following uses or activities shall be exempted from the
noise regulations:
[1] Noises emanating from construction or maintenance
activities between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
[2] Noises caused by safety signals, warning devices and
other emergency-related activities or uses.
[3] Noises emanating from public or private recreational uses
between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(f) In addition to the above regulations, all uses and activities
within the Township shall conform to all applicable county,
state and federal regulations. Whenever the regulations
contained herein are at variance with any other lawfully
adopted rules or requirements, the more restrictive shall
govern.
(4) Vibrations. Vibrations detectable without instruments on
neighboring property in any district shall be prohibited.
(5) Odors: No malodorous gas or matter shall be permitted which is
discernable on any adjoining lot or property.
(6) Smoke, ash dust, fumes, vapors and gases. There shall be no
emission of smoke, ash, dust, fumes, vapors or gases which violates
applicable federal, state or county laws or regulations. No waste
material of any kind shall be burned in the open air on any
commercial or industrial property. In no case shall smoke emitted
from any heating or manufacturing process exceed a density
equivalent to Number 2 on the Ringlemann Smoke Detection Chart
published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines when observed from the
public street or any property line.
(7) Glare. Lighting devices which produce objectionable direct or
reflected glare on adjoining properties or thoroughfares shall not
be permitted.
(8) Erosion. No erosion by wind or water shall be permitted which will
carry objectionable substances onto neighboring properties.
(9) Water pollution. Water pollution shall be subject to the standards
established by the PA DER.
(10) Solid and liquid waste.
(a) Solid wastes shall not be permitted to accumulate in an open
storage area on any property. In no case shall liquid wastes be
§ 175-139 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-139
168:546
dumped or permitted to flow or seep into a stream or
drainageway. Liquid wastes that cannot be disposed of on site
shall not be permitted to accumulate.
(b) Industrial wastewater shall be pretreated in accordance with
the requirements of PA DER regulations prior to discharge into
the sanitary sewer system. The industrial operator shall
provide a chemical analysis of the proposed sewage to the
operators of the public or community sewage treatment system
into which they intend to discharge and such discharge shall
be subject to their approval.
(c) Outdoor storage of liquids shall be either in vented
underground tanks, required if liquids are flammable, or in
tanks set at grade, surrounded by a dike of sufficient size and
bulk to contain the maximum capacity of the tanks intended to
be protected.
(11) Toxic and hazardous wastes. The use, handling, storage,
transportation or generation of hazardous materials or hazardous
wastes as identified by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) or the PA DER shall be restricted to those activities
authorized by this chapter and shall be limited to the materials
used by, or produced in connection with, the authorized activity.
The use, handling, storage, transportation or generation of
hazardous materials and hazardous wastes, further, shall conform
to all applicable regulations and permit requirements of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the PA DER.
B. Determination of compliance with performance standards. During the
review of an application for zoning approval, the applicant may be
required to submit data and evidence documenting that the proposed
activity, facility or use will comply with the provisions of this section. In
reviewing such documentation, the Township may seek the assistance
of any public agency having jurisdiction or interest in the particular
issues and the Township may seek advice from a qualified technical
expert. All costs of the expert's review and report shall be paid by the
applicant. A negative report by the technical expert and the applicant's
refusal or inability to make alterations to ensure compliance with this
Section shall be a basis for denying approval of the application.
C. Continuing enforcement.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall investigate any purported violation of the
performance standards and, subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, may employ qualified technical experts to assist in the
determination of a violation. Costs of the services of such experts
shall be paid by the owner or operator of the facility or use accused
of the violation if the facility or use is found to be in violation. If the
facility or use is found to be in compliance with the performance
standards, said costs shall be borne by the Township.
§ 175-139 WATER § 175-139
168:547
§ 175-140. Screening and landscaping.
(2) If the facility or use is found to be in violation, the owner or
operator shall be given written notice of violation in accordance
with § 175-184 of this chapter and a reasonable length of time to
correct the violation. Failure to correct the violation shall be
subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter and shall result in
the revocation of the occupancy permit for the facility or use.
A. Composition of buffer yards:
(1) Buffer Yards A and B shall be comprised of a mixture of 30%
deciduous and 70% evergreen trees spaced within the row 10 feet
apart, measured from the vertical center lines of adjacent trees.
The size of the required trees shall be in accordance with
Subsection F, below. In addition, the trees shall be supplemented
by a continuous low level screen which is a minimum of three feet
in height comprised of a combination of hedges, bushes and
earthen moundings.
(2) Buffer Yards C and D shall be comprised of a continuous, opaque
hedge or line of evergreen trees that will grow together when
mature, planted to achieve a minimum height of six feet within
three years of planting.
(3) The width of the buffer yards, as measured from the property line,
shall be as follows:
(a) Buffer Yard A: 20 feet.
(b) Buffer Yard B: 15 feet.
(c) Buffer Yard C: 10 feet.
(d) Buffer Yard D: Five feet.
B. Buffer yard requirements: Buffer yards shall be provided in accordance
with the following requirements:
(1) Buffer Yard A. Buffer Yard A shall be required in the following
circumstances:
(a) Where the express standards and criteria in § 175-95 et seq.
require Buffer Yard A.
(b) Between any property in an I-1 or C-3 District and any property
zoned R-1, R-2, AG-A, R-AG, or AG-B. [Amended 7-29-2015
by Ord. No. 128]
(c) Between any property containing a planned shopping center
and property zoned R-1, R-2, AG-A, R-AG, or AG-B. [Amended
7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
§ 175-139 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-140
168:548
(d) Between any planned residential development (PRD)
containing townhouses or garden apartments and any property
zoned R-1, R-2, AG-A, R-AG, or AG-B. [Amended 7-29-2015
by Ord. No. 128]
(2) Buffer Yard B. Buffer Yard B shall be required in the following
circumstances:
(a) Where the express standards and criteria in § 175-95 et seq.
require Buffer Yard B.
(b) Between any planned residential development (PRD)
containing single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings
and any property zoned R-1, R-2, AG-A, R-AG, or AG-B.
[Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
(c) Between any property in a TC District and property zoned R-1,
R-2, AG-A, R-AG, or AG-B. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No.
128]
(3) Buffer Yard C. Buffer Yard C shall be required in the following
circumstances:
(a) Where the express standards and criteria in § 175-95 et seq.
require Buffer Yard C.
(b) Between any planned residential development (PRD)
containing only single-family dwellings and any property zoned
R-1, R-2, AG-A, R-AG, or AG-B. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord.
No. 128]
(4) Buffer Yard D. Buffer Yard D shall be required in the following
circumstances:
(a) Where the express standards and criteria in § 175-95 et seq.
require Buffer Yard D.
(b) Between any property in a C-1 or C-2 District and any property
zoned R-1, R-2, AG-A, R-AG, or AG-B. [Amended 7-29-2015
by Ord. No. 128]
(c) Between any property in a C-1 or C-2 District and any property
zoned I-1.
(d) Between any property in a C-3 and any property zoned TC.
C. Conflict between buffer yard and yard requirements. When the width of
a required buffer yard is in conflict with the minimum side or rear yard
requirements for the Zoning District, the greater distance shall apply.
The buffer yard planting requirement shall be met regardless of the
minimum yard requirement.
D. Structures in buffer yards. No structures or uses shall be located within
the required buffer yard, including, but not limited to, principal
§ 175-140 WATER § 175-140
168:549
buildings or structures, accessory structures, parking spaces, access
driveways, and lighting devices; however, stormwater management
facilities, recreation facilities and pedestrian walkways may be located
in a required buffer yard.
E. Existing structures in buffer yards. Where an existing principal
structure exists in a required buffer yard, the width of the buffer yard
may be reduced to the width of the area between the building and the
nearest property line.
F. Size of trees in required buffer yards. All trees required to be planted
within the buffer yard shall be a minimum of two inches in diameter at a
point one foot above the ground measured along the trunk of the
planted tree. All required trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height
at time of planting, measured from the ground adjacent to the planted
tree to the top of the tree. All trees shall be planted in accordance with
accepted conservation practices.
G. Existing trees in buffer yards. Any existing trees within the required
buffer yard which are a minimum of two inches in diameter at a point
one foot above the ground shall be preserved and shall count as a
required tree within the buffer yard. At no point, however, shall any
existing trees and required trees to be planted in the buffer yard be
separated at a distance greater than the distance specified in the
required buffer yard.
H. Landscaping of open areas. All yard areas not utilized for buildings,
structures, required buffer yards, parking facilities, driveways or other
paved areas shall be seeded, sodded or landscaped within a reasonable
period of time. The phrase "a reasonable period of time" shall be
interpreted to be within two weeks after construction activities are
completed, unless those activities are completed between a November
1 through April 1 time period. In such case, the required sodding or
seeding must occur within two weeks of April 1.
I. Landscaping specifications. In addition to the landscaping of open
areas and required buffer yards, the following landscaping shall be
provided:
(1) For any nonresidential building or group of buildings that comprise
a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more, at least one
deciduous tree must be planted for each 2,000 square feet of lot
area covered by the building footprint.
(2) For residential developments containing more than 10 multifamily
dwelling units, at least one deciduous tree must be planted for each
multifamily dwelling unit.
(3) In parking areas containing more than 50 spaces, at least 5% of the
interior parking area shall be landscaped with plantings and one
tree shall be required for each 20 spaces.
§ 175-140 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-140
168:550
(4) Whenever an open parking area abuts a public street, a planting
strip, at least five feet in depth, planted and maintained with
shrubbery, trees or other landscape or decorative natural
materials, shall be installed across the entire frontage of the
property in order to prohibit vehicular access, except at approved
ingress and egress points. All plant material shall be of such a size
and height so that visibility for traffic entering or leaving the site is
not obstructed.
(5) All trees which are required to be planted by the regulations of this
section shall be a minimum of two inches in diameter at a point one
foot above the ground at the time of planting measured along the
trunk of the planted tree. All trees shall be planted in accordance
with accepted conservation practices.
(6) Any existing trees proposed to be preserved shall count towards
the number of trees required to be planted by this section, provided
they are not located in a required buffer yard and are a minimum of
two inches in diameter at a point one foot above the ground.
J. Landscaping plan requirements. Where buffer yards and landscaping of
open areas is required by this chapter, a landscaping plan, with detailed
drawings, shall be submitted with an application for approval of a
conditional use, use by special exception or planned residential
development. If the proposal does not involve a conditional use, use by
special exception or planned residential development, the landscaping
plan shall be submitted with the application for a building permit. The
landscaping plan shall contain the following information:
(1) All required buffer yards with proposed plantings (identifying each
proposed tree, bush or shrub) drawn to scale and identifying the
height and width of any proposed mounds,
(2) All additional landscaping required by Subsection I (identifying
each tree, bush, shrub, the use of sod or seeding, etc.) drawn to
scale.
(3) Any planting proposed in excess of the requirements in Subsections
B and I of this section.
(4) Any existing trees or vegetation which are to be preserved,
accurately identifying their relative location.
K. Posting of bond for landscaping. A maintenance bond in the form of
cash, certified check or letter of credit shall be posted with the
Township in the amount of 15% of the total cost of landscaping shown
on the approved landscaping plan for a period of two years from the
date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The maintenance bond
shall guarantee replacement of the required landscaping materials
during the term of the bond.
§ 175-140 WATER § 175-140
168:551
§ 175-141. Steep slope controls.
The following regulations shall apply in all zoning districts. An application
for approval of a land development plan shall contain adequate information
regarding natural and finished slopes on the site to show compliance with
these regulations. Any portion of any lot which has a natural or finished
slope of 25% or more shall be considered a steep slope and shall be subject
to these regulations.
L. Continuing responsibility for maintenance. After the expiration of the
required maintenance bond, it shall be the responsibility of the
landowner to assure the continued growth of all required landscaping
and/or to replace the same in the event of frost, vandalism, disease or
other reasons for the discontinued growth of the required trees, shrubs
and bushes. This responsibility shall continue for a period of 10 years
from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy or until
abandonment of the use or transfer of ownership, whichever occurs
first.
A. Preservation of slopes in excess of 40%: Grading or construction shall
not be permitted on slopes in excess of 40%. Applications for
development of properties which contain slopes in excess of 40% shall
be accompanied by a certification from a registered civil engineer that
slopes in excess of 40% shall not be disturbed.
B. Grading of slopes greater than 25%.
(1) Natural slopes in excess of 25%, but less than 40%, may be altered,
provided that the alteration is performed in compliance with the
Township Grading Ordinance.167
(2) The application for a grading permit for slopes which are in excess
of 25% shall be accompanied by a geotechnical report and a
certification by a registered professional soils engineer regarding
the feasibility of the proposed grading, the stability of the finished
slopes, measures to mitigate landslides, soil erosion, sedimentation
and stormwater management and potential impacts on adjacent
properties. The consultant selected to prepare the geotechnical
report shall have credentials acceptable to the Township and the
cost of preparation of the report shall be borne by the applicant.
C. Geologic hazards. Where evidence exists on sites which have steep
slopes regulated by this section of undermining, strip mining, landslideprone
soils or other geologic hazards on the site, a geologic report by a
qualified registered professional soils engineer regarding soils and
subsurface conditions and the probable measures needed to be
considered in the design of the development, site grading, location of
structures and design of foundations, if any, shall be submitted with the
application.
167. Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Grading, Excavation and Fill.
§ 175-140 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-141
168:552
§ 175-142. Special yard requirements.
In addition to the yard requirements specified in each zoning district,
the following yard requirements shall apply in all zoning districts to the
applicable circumstances described below:
D. Construction on slopes: Natural slopes or finished slopes after grading
that are less than 25% may be utilized for construction of any
authorized use in the zoning district in which they are located. Natural
slopes or finished slopes after grading which are in excess of 25%, shall
not be used for the construction of any principal or accessory building
in any zoning district.
E. Exclusion of steep slopes from minimum lot area. The total area of any
lot which has natural slopes or finished slopes in excess of 25% shall be
excluded from the calculation of the minimum lot area and maximum lot
coverage required in the zoning district in which the property is
located.
A. Corner lots. Corner lots shall provide front yards on each street
frontage. The remaining two yards shall constitute side yards.
B. Nonconforming lots of record: See § 175-169.
C. Accessory structures: In all zoning districts the following regulations
shall apply to accessory structures.
(1) Private swimming pools accessory to a dwelling:
(a) Swimming pools shall not be permitted in the front yard.
Swimming pools shall comply with the required side yard in the
zoning district and shall be subject to the rear yard
requirements for accessory structures.
(b) All swimming pools and the equipment necessary for
maintaining the pool shall be completely enclosed by a fence
which is at least four feet in height and which has a selflatching
gate. The dwelling may constitute a part of the
required enclosure.
(c) An above-ground swimming pool, the top of which is at least
four feet above the adjacent ground level on the entire
perimeter and which has removable or retractable steps, shall
not be required to be fenced, provided the steps are removed
or retracted when the pool is not in use. All other above-ground
swimming pools shall be fenced in accordance with the
requirements of this Subsection C(1)(b).
(2) Private tennis courts accessory to a dwelling. Tennis courts
accessory to a dwelling shall be located only in a rear yard and shall
be no closer to the side or rear property line than 20 feet. If lighting
is proposed, the lighting shall be shielded so that it shall not reflect
§ 175-141 WATER § 175-142
168:553
on any adjoining property. All tennis courts shall be enclosed by a
fence which is a minimum of 10 feet in height and a maximum of
12 feet in height and which shall contain openings equal to 50% or
more of the surface area of the fence.
(3) Swimming pools and tennis courts accessory to a golf course,
country club, public, noncommercial or commercial recreation
facility.
(a) Swimming pools and tennis courts accessory to a golf course,
country club, public, noncommercial or commercial recreation
facility shall comply with the yard requirements for a principal
use.
(b) All swimming pools and the equipment necessary for
maintaining the pool shall be completely enclosed by a fence or
wall which is at least six feet in height and which has a self
latching gate. All tennis courts shall be enclosed by a fence
which is a minimum height of 10 feet and a maximum height of
12 feet and which shall contain openings equal to 50% or more
of the surface area of the fence.
(c) Separate dressing rooms and toilet and shower facilities shall
be provided for men and women.
(d) If proposed for use after dusk, the swimming pool or tennis
court shall be lighted with a minimum intensity of one footcandle
on the surface of the pool or tennis court, if proposed
for use after dusk. The lighting shall not produce glare on
adjacent streets or properties.
(4) Fences, walls and landscaped areas. All walls, fences and
landscaped areas shall be located so as not to obstruct pedestrian
access, visibility for traffic on adjacent streets or traffic entering or
leaving the property or adjacent properties.
(5) Structures accessory to industrial uses. In the I-1, Light Industrial
District, no accessory structure to an industrial or warehousing use
shall be permitted in a front yard. Accessory structures shall be
permitted in a side or rear yard, provided that they shall be located
at least 20 feet from the side or rear lot line.
(6) Canopies and similar structures. Canopies and similar permanent
freestanding roofed structures without walls shall be permitted to
cover outdoor seasonal display and sales areas or fuel dispensing
areas accessory to authorized uses in the C-2 General Commercial
and I-1 Light Industrial Districts, provided that:
(a) Such structure shall not be attached to the principal building;
(b) Such structure shall be located at least 10 feet from any
property line or street right-of-way;
§ 175-142 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-142
168:554
(c) Such structure shall not be enclosed; and
(d) Such structure shall be removed immediately, once the
principal use or the use of the accessory structure is
discontinued.
(7) All other accessory structures. All other accessory structures shall
not be permitted in the required front yard or required side yards
and shall be located at least 25 feet from the rear lot line. All other
accessory structures shall be located at least 10 feet from any
principal building, except that a detached garage may be
connected to the principal building by contiguous walls,
breezeways or similar connections.
D. Flag lots. [Added 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
(1) Flag lots, as defined herein, may be permitted within Rural
Residential (AG-A), Agricultural (AG-B), Residential Agricultural
(R-AG), Low-Intensity Residential (R-1), and Moderate-Intensity
Residential (R-2), subject to the conditions specified by this
chapter. In all cases, the applicant must demonstrate that the
following site conditions exist and requirements are fulfilled:
(a) No more than two flag lots shall be permitted as a result of the
overall subdivision and no more than two (2) flag lots can be
located adjacent to each other.
(b) A flag lot design shall only be permitted if the Township
Supervisors determine that the proposed design is in the best
interest of the community, considering health, safety and/or
general welfare issues.
(c) The tract of land represents the total contiguous land area
owned by the applicant.
(d) The tract of land cannot be properly subdivided due to the
presence of certain physical or environmental development
constraints associated with the site.
(e) The configuration of the proposed lots will not limit the
potential for development on adjacent tracts of land in the
future.
(f) Single-family detached dwellings are the only type of dwelling
unit which can be located on a flag lot.
(g) The proposed flag lot shall be designed to comply with the
provisions specified in the Middlesex Township Zoning
Ordinance.
(h) No part of the flag stem or access strip shall be included in
determining the required area of the flag lot. No building or
structure shall be permitted in any portion of the flag stem or
§ 175-142 WATER § 175-142
168:555
access strip. The front building setback line of the required
front line shall be measured only from the interior front line
and not from the street line or right-of-way line. A flag stem or
access strip providing access to a flag lot may not exceed 500
feet in length as measured from the street right-of-way to the
interior lot line.
(i) The building setback line for the flag lot shall meet the
minimum required setback dimensions for the zoning district
in which the flag lot is located. The setback lines shall be
established at the flag portion of the lot. The front yard depth
or building setback shall be measured from the access strip or
stem (extended through the lot) and from the rear property line
of any adjacent property. All other setback requirements shall
comply with the rear yard setback provisions.
(j) The driveway serving only one flag lot shall be at least 10 feet
in width.
(k) Where permitted, a common driveway serving two flag lots
shall comply with the following design requirements:
[1] Each lot shall have a minimum of a fifty (50') foot access
strip or greater.
[2] The common driveway shall be at least 16 feet in width,
which shall be equally divided along the lot line separating
the flag lots. Where the common driveway divides to serve
the individual flag lots, the width of the driveway may be
reduced to 10 feet.
[3] An ownership and maintenance agreement shall be
prepared and recorded as a condition of municipal
approval for the subdivision plan. The agreement shall be
referenced on the proposed deeds for each residential lot.
The contents of the ownership and maintenance
agreement shall be subject to the approval of the Township
Supervisors.
(l) No more than two access strips serving such lots may be
located adjacent to each other, and any additional access strip
to another such lot shall be separated by a full lot width, as
required by the zoning district in which the land is located.
(m) All other pertinent design standards and specifications for
driveways shall be applied to the design of a driveway serving
a flag lot or common driveway serving flag lots, as determined
appropriate by the Township Supervisors.
(n) Unless the site conditions change as a result of improved roads
and/or the reestablishment of lot frontages, flag lots may not
be further subdivided or developed for any other purpose.
§ 175-142 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-143
168:556
§ 175-143. Permitted projections into required yards.
The following shall be permitted to project into any required yard in any
zoning district as follows:
§ 175-144. Height exceptions.
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to the following
structures: spires, chimneys, elevator bulk heads and other mechanical
equipment which is part of the principal structure, conveyors, flagpoles,
silos, standpipes, elevated water tanks, derricks, public utility structures,
and other structures not intended for human habitation. Any such structure
which is freestanding shall not be subject to the height limitations of the
zoning district. Any such structure which is attached to a building shall be
permitted to exceed the height limitations of the zoning district by no more
than 15 feet.
§ 175-145. Agricultural uses.
Agricultural uses shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Typical architectural features, including, but not limited to, bay
windows, window sills, cornices and eaves, shall be permitted to project
into required yards no more than 18 inches.
B. Decks and porches which do not have roofs, which are not enclosed and
which do not have habitable areas underneath them shall be permitted
to project into required front and side yards no more than six feet and
into the required rear yard no more than 15 feet.
C. Steps, open fire escapes and balconies shall be permitted to project into
required yards no more than 36 inches.
A. Animal holding areas for poultry or swine, feed lots, runs, pens, and
similar intensively used facilities for animal raising and care, excluding
pasture and grazing areas, shall not be located within 300 feet of an
adjoining property line.
B. Greenhouses and tree nurseries shall provide a building on the site for
the conduct of the business. The parking required by § 175-156B for
greenhouses and tree nurseries shall be provided on the site.
C. Roadside stands for sale of agricultural products shall be permitted,
provided all of the following requirements are met:
(1) Roadside stands shall be located at least 35 feet back from the
nearest edge of any paved surface of a public street;
(2) All products sold shall be grown or produced on the premises
where they are sold;
§ 175-143 WATER § 175-145
168:557
§ 175-146. Private stables or hobby farms. [Amended 7-29-2015 by
Ord. No. 128]
In the AG-A, AG-B, and R-AG Districts, a private stable or hobby farm for
personal use and enjoyment shall be permitted on a tract of land which does
not meet the acreage requirements for a farm, as defined by this chapter,
provided all of the following requirements are met:
(3) The roadside stand shall be located so that traffic can circulate into
and out of the property without creating a hazard and without the
need for vehicles to back onto the public street.
(4) Parking spaces shall be provided off the public street right-of-way.
(5) If a seasonal roadside stand is utilized for the sale of farm products,
the seasonal roadside stand shall not be installed prior to May 1 of
each year, and the stand shall be removed upon completion of the
growing season of the products offered for sale, but in no case shall
removal occur later than November 1 of each year.
(6) One temporary nonilluminated sign shall be permitted to announce
the sale of farm products, provided the surface area of the sign
shall not exceed 12 square feet and the sign shall be located on the
farm property and shall not be located in any public street right-ofway.
(7) If the roadside stand is seasonal, rather than permanent, the sign
shall be installed and removed in accordance with the
requirements for installation and removal of a seasonal roadside
stand in Subsection C(5), above.
A. A tract of at least five acres, but less than 20 acres, may be used for a
private stable. A tract of at least 10 acres, but less than 20 acres, may
be used for a hobby farm.
B. Hobby farms may include any of the activities encompassed by
agriculture, as defined by this chapter. The hobby farm shall be
restricted to personal use and enjoyment, and any sale of animals or
produce shall not constitute the principal economic activity of the
residents of the hobby farm. Roadside stands authorized by § 175-145C
of this chapter shall not be permitted on hobby farms; however, a
temporary sign which shall not exceed six square feet in surface area
may be erected on the property at least 10 feet from any street right-ofway
or property line to advertise the availability of agricultural
products raised on the hobby farm.
C. The number of animals maintained on a hobby farm, if any, shall be
reasonably related to the size of the property, the area available for
grazing and the capacity of the land to sustain the animals without
creating a nuisance.
§ 175-145 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-146
168:558
§ 175-147. Temporary construction trailers/sheds and temporary
dwellings.
Temporary dwellings or construction trailers or sheds shall be permitted in
any zoning district subject to the following conditions:
D. On a tract utilized for a private stable, one horse or pony shall be
permitted on the first three acres of land. One additional horse or pony
shall be permitted for each additional acre over three acres, but less
than 20 acres. Foals which are less than six months old shall not be
counted in the maximum number of horses or ponies permitted per
acre. Foals which are six months or older shall be counted in the
maximum number of horses or ponies permitted per acre.
E. A private stable shall be for the personal use and enjoyment of the
owner and shall not involve rental, boarding or any other profit-making
activity.
F. No stables or other buildings in which animals are kept or manure is
stored shall be located within 75 feet of any property line or within 100
feet of any occupied dwelling, other than the owner's dwelling.
G. No grazing of any animals shall be permitted closer than 100 feet from
any occupied dwelling, excluding the stable or hobby farm owner's
dwelling.
H. A stable or hobby farm owner shall not permit litter and droppings from
the horses or other animals to collect so as to result in the presence of
fly larvae or objectionable odors.
I. The area of the property used for grazing shall be adequately fenced to
properly enclose the animals and to protect adjacent properties.
A. Temporary dwellings or construction trailers or sheds shall be
permitted only during the period that the construction work is in
progress. Special permission from the Board of Supervisors for the
temporary structure shall be obtained prior to the commencement of
construction and may be renewed only at the discretion of the Board of
Supervisors.
B. Temporary dwellings or construction trailers or sheds shall be located
on the lot on which the construction is progressing and shall not be
located within 25 feet of any property line adjoining residential use.
C. Temporary construction trailers or sheds shall be used only as
temporary field offices and for storage of incidental equipment and
supplies and shall not be used for any dwelling use whatsoever.
D. No combustible materials shall be stored in temporary construction
trailers or sheds.
§ 175-146 WATER § 175-147
168:559
§ 175-148. Basement structures.
Occupancy of a basement or foundation structure prior to the completion
of the total structure shall not be permitted. This regulation shall not be
construed to prohibit earth-sheltered dwellings.
§ 175-149. Storage.
§ 175-150. Vehicle access.
E. Temporary dwellings for use by a landowner during construction of a
new dwelling or for use by security personnel may be approved by the
Board of Supervisors under the following conditions:
(1) The temporary dwelling shall not be the permanent residence of
the security personnel.
(2) The temporary dwelling shall be located at least 25 feet from any
property line.
(3) In the AG-A, AG-B, R-AG, and R-1 Districts, the temporary dwelling
shall be used only during the period that construction is underway.
Any long-term use of a dwelling for security purposes shall meet all
requirements of the zoning district for a permanent single-family
dwelling. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
(4) In the C-1, C-2 and I-1 Districts, use of a temporary dwelling by
security personnel may be continued after a certificate of
occupancy is issued for the completed construction, provided that
all area and bulk regulations of the zoning district applicable to a
principal structure are met for the temporary dwelling.
A. Except for nurseries, garden supply, building supply and similar
businesses which require outside storage of materials, storage and
display of materials outside a completely enclosed structure shall not
be permitted. In the case of nurseries, garden supply, building supply
and similar businesses, outside display and storage areas shall be
completely enclosed by a security fence and shall be screened by an
opaque fence or hedge which is at least six feet in height.
B. In the I-1 District, any material or equipment stored outside an
enclosed building shall be incidental to the principal use of the lot and
shall be stored to the rear of the building or an alternative location
which screens the storage area from public view from the street.
C. If existing buildings do not screen the storage area from public view
from the street, the area shall be screened by a hedge or opaque fence
at least six feet in height.
D. All organic rubbish and discarded materials shall be contained in tight,
vermin-proof containers which shall be screened from public view by an
opaque fence or hedge which is at least six feet in height.
§ 175-147 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-150
168:560
§ 175-151. Land development and grading.
The development of land in all zoning districts shall be subject to the
following controls governing grading and drainage.
A. Access to all commercial and industrial uses shall be designed to
minimize the number of points of access to arterial and collector
streets. Any site which contains two or more buildings shall be designed
to encourage the use of common driveways to control access to arterial
and collector streets.
B. All properties in the C-2 Highway Commercial District, shall have no
more than two points of access for every 400 feet of frontage on an
arterial or collector street. Access points shall be not more than 40 feet
in width nor less than 25 feet in width with a radius of at least 10 feet
provided at the point of intersection of the public street pavement and
the access drive or as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation (Penn DOT) along highways under its jurisdiction.
C. Ingress, egress and internal traffic circulation on the site shall be
designed to minimize congestion, to ensure safety and to provide
adequate accessibility to all buildings for fire-fighting equipment and
emergency vehicles.
A. Grading. Grading shall be permitted in all zoning districts where
construction has been approved by the Zoning Officer and a building
permit has been obtained, subject to the following controls.
(1) No grading shall occur within five feet of any property line or street
right-of-way line.
(2) Excavation of earth materials during grading shall result in a
finished grade not in excess of one foot vertical rise to each 1 1/2
feet horizontal run, provided no fill material is placed over
undisturbed soil in the cut area except for topsoil.
(3) Placing of earth fill upon previously undisturbed soil shall result in
a finished grade not in excess of one foot vertical rise to every two
feet of horizontal run.
(4) Fill slopes shall be keyed in to undisturbed earth with topsoil and
humus removed and shall be well-compacted in layers not to
exceed eight inches in thickness.
(5) The toe of a slope shall either be graded to a natural existing
drainageway or to a stormwater drainage system or shall be
provided with a stormwater pipe draining to such a system.
(6) Where a slope continues upward beyond the limits of grading, the
top of the graded area shall be protected from accumulation of
stormwater by a sloped bench and/or a collection pipe sloped to a
drainage system or existing drainageways.
§ 175-150 WATER § 175-151
168:561
§ 175-152. Mobile homes located outside mobile home parks.
(7) Slope areas shall be planted with erosion-resisting materials
approved by the Township Engineer.
(8) An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be prepared for the
site in accordance with the standards and requirements of the U.S.
Soil Conservation Service. The plan shall be approved by the Butler
County Conservation District and the approved plan shall be
submitted for review and approval by the Township Supervisors.
B. Drainage. The following requirements shall be met in all zoning
districts:
(1) Stormwater shall not be permitted to collect upon any property nor
to flow from one property to another without benefit of an
easement for such purpose, nor shall stormwater be permitted to
flow over any public street.
(2) A stormwater management plan shall be prepared to address the
method of controlling and managing stormwater on any site
proposed for development which will increase the impervious cover
by more than 5,000 square feet of surface area.
(3) In designing the stormwater drainage system, the flow
accumulating from a continuous three-inch per hour rainfall shall
be considered the maximum condition.
(4) The design of storm water management system and the
methodology and calculations on which the design is based shall be
subject to approval by the Township Engineer.
(5) Where storm water management facilities are required, the Zoning
Officer shall not issue a permit unless and until the Township
Engineer has approved the proposed system and all necessary
easements have been provided or acquired.
A. When a mobile home is intended to be used as a permanent singlefamily
dwelling or as a commercial structure, the mobile home shall be
supported on a continuous concrete block or a reinforced concrete
foundation extending at least three feet below finished grade. Such
foundations lowest course shall be reinforced concrete integral around
its perimeter with adequate bearing to avoid settlement.
B. Mobile homes shall be securely fastened to their foundations so that
they cannot be overturned by a steady horizontal wind load of at least
80 miles per hour.
C. The mobile home shall be connected to all available utilities. Mobile
homes which are intended to be used as permanent single-family
dwellings or commercial structures shall bear a seal guaranteeing
§ 175-151 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-152
168:562
§ 175-153. No-impact home-based businesses.
No-impact home based businesses are permitted by right in all residential
zoning districts as long as the business or commercial activity satisfies the
following requirements, except that such permission shall not supersede
any deed, restriction, covenant or agreement restricting the use of the land,
nor any master deed, bylaw or other document applicable to a common
interest ownership community:
§ 175-154. Sidewalks. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
compliance with the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act.
D. Additions to mobile homes, such as concrete patios and porches, shall
be permitted, provided they are permanently attached to the mobile
home and properly supported by adequate foundations and footers.
A. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
B. The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
C. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
D. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights, except that the name of the
business may be indicated on the residence mailbox, as long as the
mailbox sign does not exceed one square foot in area.
E. The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in a neighborhood.
F. The business activity may not generate any solid wastes or sewage
discharge in volume or type which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
G. The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
H. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
A. Purpose. In accordance with the Township Comprehensive Plan
objectives, the Township seeks to establish a general network for the
safe and efficient movement of pedestrians. Where feasible, the primary
segments of this system shall be integrated into the design of the
Township's arterial streets. For all development along arterial streets, a
developer shall consider and incorporate into all development
proposals related to this network.
§ 175-152 WATER § 175-154
168:563
§ 175-155. Greenways.
Within the Town Center (TC) and Regional Commerce District (C-3) and
General Commerce District (C-2), greenways shall be provided for along
arterial streets so that:
§ 175-155.1. Landscape business. [Added 3-28-2012 by Ord. No.
123]
Landscape business subject to:
B. Unless otherwise specified by the Township, PennDOT or other
designating authority, the general locations and minimum dimensions
of the primary segments within this said network shall be established in
accordance with the following:
(1) Route 8 (west of right-of-way boundary): five- to six-foot sidewalk;
and
(2) Route 8 (east of right-of-way boundary): five- to six-foot sidewalk.
C. Unless otherwise defined by the Township, sidewalks along arterial
roads shall begin a minimum of eight feet from the edge of the right-ofway
measuring toward the building setback line located within the
required Greenway. (See § 175-155, Greenways.) A landscaped planting
strip shall be maintained in the area between the edges of the right-ofway
and said sidewalk.
A. A landscaped strip of no less than 20 feet shall be provided along Route
8. Said strip shall be provided along the entire frontage of the parcel,
except for entranceways for vehicles. The strip may be comprised of
existing and/or new plantings of approved species of trees having a
minimum caliper of 2.5 inches not more than 35 feet apart. Understory
deciduous shrubs, flowering understory trees, native (or naturalized),
perennials, groundcover and seasonal plantings shall be incorporated
into the greenway planting. Groundcover shall not exceed 60% of the
greenway area on a lot. Any sidewalk planned in accordance with the
provisions of § 175-154 may count toward the total required dimension
of the landscape strip.
B. No structure shall be located closer than 10 feet to the edge of the
defined greenway. This dimension may be measured from the minimum
twenty-foot greenway dimension line toward the building setback line.
A. The landscape business shall be operated on a separately subdivided
parcel, which subdivided parcel shall not be less than 1 1/2 acres in
size.
B. The owner and operator of the landscape business shall reside on a
residentially zoned parcel located adjacent to the parcel on which the
landscape business is located.
§ 175-154 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-155.1
168:564
§ 175-155.2. Oil and gas well site development. [Added 8-13-2014
by Ord. No. 127168]
C. All products and services offered for sale by the landscape business
must be delivered to customers off site; no products may be provided to
customers on site; however, products may be stored on the premises for
delivery to customers off the premises.
D. The landscape business must be located not more than 750 feet from an
arterial street.
E. The landscape business shall not significantly intensify vehicular or
pedestrian traffic which is normal for the residences in the
neighborhood.
F. Objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare shall
not be produced by the landscape business.
G. Any landscape business shall cease operations between dusk and dawn,
prevailing time.
H. Adequate paved access and maneuvering facilities for loading and
unloading trucks shall be provided, and dirt, debris or excess materials
shall not be deposited on any public or private right-of-way.
I. Buffer Yard D, as defined in § 175-140A, shall be required in the
following circumstance: Where any residential structure is located on
an adjoining property within 100 feet of the landscape business
structure. The required buffer yard shall not be required if the residents
of a structure within 100 feet of the landscape business structure own
the business.
J. A landscape business shall be limited to 10 employees, including the
owner.
A. A company, entity or person desiring to engage in oil and gas well site
development shall obtain a zoning certificate from the Township.
B. Application requirements. The application must include the following
information:
(1) A written narrative, signed and dated by the applicant, describing
the proposed use and outlining an approximate time line for the
proposed development.
168. Editor's Note: Section 13 of this ordinance provided in part: "This Ordinance is to be
interpreted so that it meets all federal and state constitutional and statutory
requirements. This Ordinance is to be interpreted and applied to impose zoning
regulations identifying where gas and oil well and other related uses are permitted in the
Township and not to regulate technical aspects of such operations, including technical
aspects of oil and gas well functioning and matters ancillary thereto governed by Act 13 of
2012 or other laws of the Commonwealth, any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and
any applicable federal laws and/or regulations."
§ 175-155.1 WATER § 175-155.2
168:565
(2) Written authorization from the property owner(s) who has legal or
equitable title in and to the surface of the proposed development. A
copy of the oil and gas, mineral or other subsurface lease
agreement or similar document vesting legal or equitable title to
the surface will constitute written authorization.
(3) The name and address of each property owner for each property
within 1,000 feet of the proposed well, and well as all abutting
property owners.
(4) A copy of the applicant's erosion and sediment control plan
(ESCGP-2) and post-construction stormwater management plan
prepared by a licensed professional (e.g., engineer, surveyor,
geologist or landscape architect) who is registered in Pennsylvania.
Said professional should have attended training provided by
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Office of Oil
and Gas Management, on erosion and sediment control and postconstruction
stormwater management for oil and gas activities.
(5) A road access plan showing both temporary and permanent access
routes and identifying all ingress and egress points.
(6) If any weight-restricted Township roads will be used by the
applicant for any oil and gas development or operations, the
applicant shall comply with any applicable Township ordinances,
PennDOT regulations, and Township road bonding requirements
and provide proof of bonding of said roads and enter into a road
maintenance agreement with the Township. In lieu of road bonding,
the Township and the applicant may mutually agree to other terms
to provide for restoration of the affected road(s).
(7) A copy of highway occupancy permits and other permits already
obtained at the time of the application submission. If no such
permit has been obtained, the applicant shall provide a copy of its
application for the HOP and with an approved permit when
obtained. A driveway permit shall be required if the entrance to the
site is on a Township road.
(8) A copy of the applicant's preparedness, prevention and
contingency plan.
(9) The name of an individual or individuals and their emergency
contact information for the Township or residents to report
emergencies 24 hours a day, each day of the week.
(10) Fee reimbursement. The applicant agrees to reimburse the
Township for all fees permitted under Section 617.3(e) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10617.3(e).
C. Minimum lot requirement. Oil and gas well site development shall only
be permitted to be located on property that is a minimum of ten (10)
§ 175-155.2 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-155.2
168:566
acres or larger. Multiple properties may be combined to meet the ten
(10) acre minimum.
D. State and federal compliance. The applicant shall comply with all
applicable state and federal regulations and shall show evidence of
obtaining the required state and/or federal permits, including proof of
insurability, before initiating any work and maintaining the required
permits throughout the duration of all operations. The applicant shall
notify the Township immediately of any suspension or revocation of the
required state and/or federal permits. Upon notification of said
suspension or revocation, the Township-issued permits will hereby be
deemed suspended or revoked until state and/or federal compliance is
reached.
E. Access roads. Access to any well site shall be arranged to minimize
danger to traffic and nuisance to surrounding properties and to
maintain the integrity of Township roads. The following shall apply:
(1) The access road to the well site, beginning with its intersection
with a Township road, shall be paved for the first 50 feet and shall
be improved with gravel or limestone for the remaining length in a
manner that would reasonably minimize water, sediment or debris
carried onto any public road. This shall be in place prior to the
commencement of drilling operations.
(2) All roads and accessways shall be constructed and maintained to
prevent dust and mud from the surrounding area. A method of dust
abatement shall be utilized during dry weather, and under no
circumstances shall brine water, sulfur water or water in mixture
with any type of hydrocarbon be used for dust abatement.
F. Traffic. The applicant shall take necessary precautions to ensure the
safety of persons in areas established for road crossing and/or adjacent
to roadways (for example, persons waiting for public or school
transportation). Where necessary and permitted, during periods of
anticipated heavy or frequent truck traffic associated with
development, the applicant will provide flag persons or other
alternative and approved safety mechanisms to ensure the safety of
children at or near schools or school bus stops and include adequate
signs and/or warning measures for truck traffic and vehicular traffic.
The applicant will coordinate its efforts with affected school districts so
as to minimize heavy truck traffic during the hours school buses are
picking up or dropping off children and provide documentation of the
cooperation.
G. Site orientation. Before drilling, first responders shall have on-site
orientation and be provided with adequate awareness information.
Upon request from the Township, the applicant will, prior to drilling of
an oil or gas well, make available, at its sole cost and expense, an
appropriate site orientation for first responders. Such site orientation
§ 175-155.2 WATER § 175-155.2
168:567
shall be made available at least annually during the period when the
applicant anticipates drilling activities in the Township.
H. Noise standards. For oil and gas well site development, noise levels
shall be equal to or less than 60 dBa at the property line dividing the
site developed and all adjoining properties. In the event that an
applicant is unable to meet the aforementioned requirements, the
applicant may either:
(1) Utilize appropriate noise mitigation measures that may include
sound barriers or such technology or devices that will allow the
applicant to meet said noise requirements; or
(2) Obtain a release waiver of said noise requirements from the
owners/renters of those properties which would be affected by
noise conditions in excess of that allowed.
I. Lights. No applicant shall permit any lights located on any operation
site to be directed in such a manner so that they shine directly on public
road, protected use, adjacent property or property in the general
vicinity of the operation site. To the extent practicable, and taking into
account safety considerations, site lighting shall be directed downward
and internally so as to avoid glare on public roads, protected uses, and
adjacent dwellings and buildings. Exterior lights shall be turned off
except when personnel are working on site or motion sensors are
activated.
J. Water storage. Temporary water storage tanks or impoundments are
permitted on the same lot, provided the applicant shall adhere to the
following:
(1) Impoundment must be 200 feet from property lines;
(2) A copy of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection permit(s), if applicable, must be provided at the time of
application or when available;
(3) Chain-link fencing must be installed around any impoundment and
shall be at least six (6) feet in height; and
(4) The impoundment must be reclaimed in accordance with
Department of Environmental Protection's rules and regulations
after all of the proposed wells have been completed, or after each
well is completed in the event that no additional wells are to be
drilled within three (3) months.
K. Operating times. All site preparation and pre-production activities on
the site, as well as access road maintenance, site reclamation activity
and other ongoing ancillary activities, shall be permitted only on
Mondays through Saturdays (with the exception of federal and/or state
holidays) between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., prevailing time,
or as otherwise authorized by the Board of Supervisors. The active
§ 175-155.2 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-155.2
168:568
§ 175-155.3. Natural gas compressor station and natural gas
processing plant. [Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127169]
drilling and completions phases are exempt from the limitations of this
subsection.
L. Signage; site identification. All signage must comply with the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection's
unconventional well 911 emergency response information regulations,
35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7321(a)(4) and 25 Pa. Code § 78.55(e), as may be
amended.
M. Regulations set forth in this section supersede the regulations set forth
in § 175-139 of the Township Code.
N. If there are unique characteristics of a proposed site, the Township's
Zoning Officer (if a permitted use) and/or the Board of Supervisors (if a
conditional use) may impose or request additional requirements from
an applicant.
A. Natural gas compressor stations or natural gas processing plants shall
meet the location restrictions established by the commonwealth and its
regulatory agencies and found in those environmental acts.
B. No natural gas compressor Station or natural gas processing plant shall
be located closer than 1,000 feet from any dwelling, occupied structure,
library, school, place of worship or recreational use areas on adjoining
properties unless a written waiver is submitted by the owner of such
structures or properties.
C. A natural gas compressor station or natural gas processing plant shall
only be permitted to be located on property that is a minimum of ten
(10) acres or larger. Multiple properties may be combined to meet the
ten (10) acre minimum.
D. The applicant shall comply with all applicable state and federal
regulations and shall show evidence of obtaining the required state
and/or federal permits, including proof of insurability, before initiating
any work and maintaining the required permits throughout the duration
of all operations. The applicant shall notify the Township immediately of
any suspension or revocation of the required state and/or federal
permits. Upon notification of said suspension or revocation, the
Township-issued permits will hereby be deemed suspended or revoked
until state and/or federal compliance is reached.
169. Editor's Note: Section 13 of this ordinance provided in part: "This Ordinance is to be
interpreted so that it meets all federal and state constitutional and statutory
requirements. This Ordinance is to be interpreted and applied to impose zoning
regulations identifying where gas and oil well and other related uses are permitted in the
Township and not to regulate technical aspects of such operations, including technical
aspects of oil and gas well functioning and matters ancillary thereto governed by Act 13 of
2012 or other laws of the Commonwealth, any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and
any applicable federal laws and/or regulations."
§ 175-155.2 WATER § 175-155.3
168:569
E. A copy of the applicant's erosion and sediment control plan (ESCGP-2)
and post-construction stormwater management plan prepared by a
licensed professional (e.g., engineer, surveyor, geologist or landscape
architect) who is registered in Pennsylvania. Said professional should
have attended training provided by Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, Office of Oil and Gas Management, on
erosion and sediment control and post-construction stormwater
management for oil and gas activities.
F. First responders shall have on-site orientation and be provided with
adequate awareness information. Upon request from the Township, the
applicant will, prior to operations, make available at its sole cost and
expense an appropriate site orientation for first responders. Such site
orientation shall be made available at least annually during the period
when the applicant anticipates operations in the Township.
G. Noise standards. For natural gas compressor stations and natural gas
processing plants, levels shall be equal to or less than 60 dBa at the
property line dividing the site developed and all adjoining properties. In
the event that an applicant is unable to meet the aforementioned
requirements, the applicant may either:
(1) Utilize appropriate noise mitigation measures that may include
sound barriers or such technology or devices that will allow the
applicant to meet said noise requirements; or
(2) Obtain a release waiver of said noise requirements from the
owners/renters of those properties who would be affected by noise
conditions in excess of that allowed.
H. The applicant shall take the necessary safeguards to ensure that the
paved Township roads utilized shall remain free of dirt, mud, and debris
resulting from development activities and/or shall ensure such roads
are promptly swept or cleaned if dirt, mud and debris occur.
I. The applicant shall take necessary precautions to ensure the safety of
persons in areas established for road crossing and/or adjacent to
roadways (for example, persons waiting for public or school
transportation). Where necessary and permitted, during periods of
anticipated heavy or frequent truck traffic associated with
development, the applicant will provide flag persons or other
alternative and approved safety mechanisms to ensure the safety of
children at or near schools or school bus stops and include adequate
signs and/or warning measures for truck traffic and vehicular traffic.
The applicant will coordinate its efforts with school districts so as to
minimize heavy truck traffic during the hours school buses are picking
up or dropping off children and provide documentation of the
cooperation.
J. A copy of highway occupancy permits and other permits already
obtained at the time of the application submission. If no such permit has
been obtained, the applicant shall provide a copy of its application for
§ 175-155.3 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-155.3
168:570
§ 175-155.4. Violation of oil and gas regulations. [Added 8-13-2014
by Ord. No. 127170]
Any applicant/operator who violates or permits a violation of Ordinance
No. 127 shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township before a Magisterial District
Judge, pay a fine of not more than $600 for each day of violation plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Township
in the enforcement of Ordinance No. 127. No judgment shall be imposed
until the day of the determination of the violation by the Magisterial District
Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil
Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby
authorized to issue cease-and-desist notices and/or to seek equitable relief,
including injunction relief, to enforce compliance herewith. No bond will be
required if injunctive relief is sought by the Township. A person who violates
Ordinance No. 127 shall also be responsible for the Township's attorney's
fees and court costs associated with enforcement.
the HOP and with an approved permit when obtained. A driveway
permit shall be required if the entrance to the site is on a Township
road.
K. The access driveway off the public road to the natural gas compressor
station or natural gas processing plant site shall be gated at the
entrance to prevent illegal access.
L. Fencing of at least eight (8) feet in height shall be installed around all
natural gas compressor stations and natural gas processing plants.
M. Site lighting shall be directed downward and inward toward the natural
gas compressor station or natural gas processing plant so as to
minimize glare on public roads and adjacent buildings and properties.
N. Regulations set forth in this section supersede the regulations set forth
in § 175-139 of the Township Code.
O. If there are unique characteristics of a proposed site, the Township may
impose or request additional requirements from an applicant.
P. Construction permit. The applicant shall apply for and obtain a
Township construction permit prior to initiating the construction of
either a natural gas compressor station or natural gas processing plant.
170. Editor's Note: Section 13 of this ordinance provided in part: "This Ordinance is to be
interpreted so that it meets all federal and state constitutional and statutory
requirements. This Ordinance is to be interpreted and applied to impose zoning
regulations identifying where gas and oil well and other related uses are permitted in the
Township and not to regulate technical aspects of such operations, including technical
aspects of oil and gas well functioning and matters ancillary thereto governed by Act 13 of
2012 or other laws of the Commonwealth, any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and
any applicable federal laws and/or regulations."
§ 175-155.3 WATER § 175-155.4
168:571

ARTICLE XIII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 175-156. Off-street parking.
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
specifications in this article in any district whenever any new use is
established or existing use is enlarged.
A. Off-street parking design. Parking areas in all zoning districts shall
comply with the following standards.
(1) Size. Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less
than 162 square feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles, shall have
minimum dimensions of nine feet in width and 18 feet in length and
shall be maintained free from obstruction. Parking areas shall be
designed to provide sufficient turnaround area so that vehicles are
not required to back onto the cartway of any public street.
(2) Access. Access to parking areas shall be provided in accordance
with the following requirements:
(a) Where an existing lot does not adjoin a public or private street,
alley, or easement of access, an access drive shall be provided
leading to the parking areas.
(b) Access to off-street parking areas shall be limited to welldefined
locations, and in no case shall there be unrestricted
access along the length of a street. The street frontage shall be
curbed to restrict access to the lot, except where access drives
are proposed.
(c) In any zoning district, the number of access drives from a
single lot or development to any public street shall not exceed
two, except that for lots with more the 400 feet of frontage on a
public street, an additional two access drives for every 400 feet
of street frontage may be allowed. Access drives shall be no
more than 40 feet nor less than 25 feet in width, with a radius
of at least 10 feet provided at the point of intersection of the
public street paving and the access drive.
(d) Except on corner lots, access drives shall be located at least
200 feet from the intersection of any two street right-of-way
lines. Where a site has frontage on more than one street,
access shall be provided from the street with the lower traffic
volume, if physically practical.
(e) Access drives entering state highways shall be subject to a
highway occupancy permit issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT).
§ 175-156 WATER § 175-156
168:573
(f) Access drives entering Township streets shall be subject to a
Township driveway permit.
(g) Each parking space shall have access directly to a driveway.
Interior circulation of traffic shall be designed so that no
driveway providing access to parking spaces shall be used as a
through street. Interior traffic circulation shall be designed to
ensure safety and access by emergency vehicles.
(h) Access lanes serving parking spaces shall be at least 22 feet
wide where parking is at right angles to the lane and at least
15 feet wide where parking is at a forty-five-degree angle to
the lane.
(3) Safety requirements. The Board of Supervisors shall consider
whether safety requirements are warranted to reduce traffic
hazards which endanger public safety. The developer shall be
responsible for construction of any required islands, acceleration,
deceleration or turning lanes and shall bear the cost of installing
any required traffic control devices, signs or pavement markings.
(4) Marking. All parking spaces shall be clearly delineated by painted
lines or markers. Parking spaces shall be provided with bumper
guards or wheel stops, where necessary, for safety or protection of
adjacent structures or landscaped areas. All vehicular entrances
and exits to parking areas shall be clearly marked for all conditions.
Short-term visitor parking spaces shall be differentiated from longterm
employee spaces by suitable markings. Handicapped parking
shall be appropriately marked.
(5) Parking areas serving residential dwellings.
(a) Parking requirements for single-family, two-family and
townhouse dwellings shall be met by providing the required
spaces in an enclosed garage or in a private driveway on the
lot. Parking provided in driveways for a particular dwelling
unit shall not block access to parking for any other dwelling
unit, whether located in a driveway or in an enclosed garage.
(b) Parking for garden apartments shall be provided in a paved,
striped and curbed off-street parking area. Parking for garden
apartments and any parking serving townhouses which is not
located in a private driveway serving the dwelling unit shall be
surfaced with a permanent, all-weather surface placed over at
least six inches of crushed aggregate base course.
(c) Parking designed to serve multifamily dwellings or groups of
mobile homes shall be located so that no required space is
more than 100 feet from the building it is designed to serve.
(6) Parking areas serving uses other than residential dwellings.
§ 175-156 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-156
168:574
(a) Parking requirements for all uses other than residential
dwellings shall be met by providing a paved, striped and
curbed off-street parking area. All paved areas designed for
vehicular use shall be constructed of at least eight inches of
compacted aggregate base material under at least 2 1/2 inches
of asphalt wearing course or at least four inches of reinforced
concrete on at least four inches of compacted base.
(b) Parking designed to serve commercial or industrial uses shall
be located so that no required parking space is more than 500
feet from the building or use such space is designed to serve.
(7) Driveways serving nonresidential uses.
(a) Single-lane driveways which provide access to lots and parking
areas shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide and a maximum of 12
feet wide; two-lane driveways shall be a minimum of 22 feet
wide and a maximum of 24 feet wide.
(b) If parking spaces are aligned at less than 90º, driveways shall
be restricted to one-way traffic and head-in parking only.
(c) There shall be at least 15 feet between driveways at the street
line and at least five feet between a driveway and a fire
hydrant, catch basin or property line. There shall be at least 40
feet between a driveway and the right-of-way line of an
intersecting street.
(d) Adequate sight distance shall be provided, subject to review
and approval by the Township Engineer. Driveways shall not
exceed a slope of 10% within 12 feet of the street right-of-way
line.
(8) Location of parking areas.
(a) Required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot with
the principal use.
(b) No parking area containing more than five parking spaces shall
be located closer than 10 feet to any adjoining property line
and parking authorized in front yards shall be located at least
10 feet from the street right-of-way line.
(9) Screening and landscaping.
(a) Parking areas containing more than five parking spaces shall
be effectively screened by a Buffer Yard C, as defined by
§ 175-140B of this chapter, along any property line which
adjoins a residential use or residential zoning district
classification.
§ 175-156 WATER § 175-156
168:575
(b) In addition, a planting strip at least five feet wide shall be
provided between the edge of the right-of-way and any parking
area authorized in any yard which fronts on a street.
(c) Planting strips between the right-of-way and the parking area
shall be suitably landscaped and maintained in grass, ground
cover or other landscaping material not in excess of three feet
in height which shall not obstruct visibility for traffic entering
or leaving the lot or traveling on the public street.
(10) Drainage. All parking areas shall be sloped at least 0.5% and not
more than 6% toward storm drainage inlets connected to a
collection system emptying to a recognized drainageways.
(11) Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas
shall be designed to reflect the light away from the adjoining
premises of any residential zoning district or residential use and
away from any streets or highways. Where more than 20 parking
spaces are provided in a common parking area, the area shall be
lighted to produce an intensity of at least one footcandle measured
three feet above the pavement throughout the parking area.
(12) Stormwater management. All paved parking areas shall be
designed so that stormwater runoff shall not adversely affect
adjacent properties. The method of stormwater management and
the design of the proposed facilities shall be subject to the
requirements of § 175-151B of this chapter.
B. Off-street parking requirements. Any new use or change of use in any
zoning district shall comply with the following minimum requirements
for the provision of off-street parking spaces.
(1) When the calculation of required parking spaces results in a
requirement of a fractional parking space, any fraction shall be
counted as one parking space.
(2) Where more than one use exists on a lot, parking requirements for
each use shall be provided.
(3) Existing uses which do not conform to the requirements of this
section are not required to comply with the parking requirements
stipulated in the Table of Parking Requirements, except when such
use is enlarged or changed, the additional parking required to
serve the enlargement or change of use shall be provided in
accordance with these requirements.
(4) Any existing structure or building which does not comply with the
parking requirements stipulated in the Table of Parking
Requirements and is proposed to be enlarged to the extent of 50%
or more in the gross floor area or total number of dwelling units
shall be required to meet the specified requirements for the entire
structure in order to permit the enlargement.
§ 175-156 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-156
168:576
(5) Table of Parking Requirements. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord.
No. 128; 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
Table 3: Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Number of Parking Spaces
Required
Single-family and twofamily
dwellings
2 per dwelling unit
Garden apartments and
townhouses
2 per dwelling unit plus 0.5 per
dwelling unit for visitors located
within 100 feet of the units they are
intended to serve
Place of worship/place of
assembly
1 per 4 seats or 80 linear inches of
pew or 1 for each 40 square feet of
gross floor area used for assembly (no
fixed seats)
Day-care center, nursery
school
1 for each teacher and employee on
largest shift plus 1 space per 6
students
Public utility buildings 1 per employee on peak shift plus 1 for
each service vehicle stored on lot
Schools, elementary,
junior high
1 for each employee and faculty
member
Schools, secondary and
post-secondary
1 for each employee and faculty
member plus 1 for each 10 students
plus 1 for each 2 residents in a
dormitory
Group care facility,
personal care boarding
home or transitional
dwelling
1 for each employee on peak shift plus
1 for each resident authorized to drive
plus 1 for each 6 beds
Hospitals and nursing
homes
1 per 3 beds and 1 for each employee
on the peak working shift
Medical and dental
clinics
1 per 50 square feet of gross floor
Other professional and
business offices, business
services
1 for every 250 square feet of net
leasable floor area
Banks and financial
institutions
1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
area plus 1 per employee on peak shift
plus 5 off-street waiting spaces per
drive-in window
Hotel/motel 1 per employee on peak shift plus 1
per sleeping unit
§ 175-156 WATER § 175-156
168:577
Table 3: Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Number of Parking Spaces
Required
Theater 1 per 4 seats
Fast-food establishments 1 per 75 square feet of gross floor area
plus 1 per employee on peak shift
Other restaurants 1 for each 65 square feet of gross floor
area
Retail businesses,
personal service
establishments
1 for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area
Greenhouse or tree
nursery
1 for each 500 square feet of display
area or growing area accessible to the
public
Bowling alleys 5 for each alley
Tennis, racquetball and
handball courts
1 per employee plus 4 for each court
Golf courses 8 for each hole plus 1 for each
employee
Swimming pools, public
or commercial
1 for each 50 square feet of surface
water area
Funeral homes 25 for the first parlor plus 10 for each
additional parlor
Indoor places of
assembly
1 for each 75 square feet of net floor
area
Libraries/museums 1 for each 250 square feet of gross
floor area
Service stations/vehicle
repair garages
4 for each bay plus 1 for each
employee on peak shift plus 1 for each
business vehicle plus 3 waiting spaces
at each side of each pump island
Manufacturing
warehousing, freight
terminals, wholesaling
1 for each 1,500 square feet of gross
floor area or 1 for each employee on
the peak working shift, whichever is
greater, plus 1 for each 20 employees
designated as visitor parking plus 1 for
each company vehicle ordinarily
parked on the site
All other uses 1 for each 3 occupants at maximum
permitted occupancy or 1 for each 300
square feet of gross floor area,
whichever is greater
§ 175-156 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-156
168:578
C. Shared parking. [Added 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128; Amended
3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
(1) For all proposed uses located within the C-2, C-3, and TC District,
the applicant shall provide a shared parking analysis as well as
provide a certified parking study that indicates the adequacy of the
proposed shared parking, or provide parking in compliance with
§ 175-156B(5), Table of Parking Requirements, on the lot. The
shared parking analysis alternative may be used only if there are in
fact multiple uses and structures within the same development
under submission which have common or connected parking areas.
(2) The shared parking analysis shall assess the amount of
development square footage and the calculated number of parking
spaces based on the typical hourly demands for all land uses
situated within the proposed land development simultaneously. The
shared parking analysis shall utilize the Shared Parking Matrix as
identified within this section.
(3) The applicant shall obtain an electronic copy of the Shared Parking
Matrix from the Middlesex Township Zoning Officer. The applicant
shall determine the proposed development's total nonresidential
square footage and/or total number of dwelling units (garden
apartments only, if applicable) and/or number of hotel rooms and
insert the appropriate numbers into the Shared Parking Matrix.
(4) The following Shared Parking Matrix shall be utilized to determine
parking requirements if the applicant proceeds under this section:
Table 4: Shared Parking Matrix
Office Square
Footage Apartment
Retail Square
Footage
Restaurant
Square
Footage
Proposed
Development
— 0 0 — 0 0
Required
Parking
Ratio
0 0 0 0 Based
on
§ 175-156B(5)
Gross
Parking
Spaces
Required
by Use
(before
sharing)
— 0 0 0 0 0 Total
Parking
Spaces
Required
by
Use
(before
sharing)
Office Apartment Retail Restaurant
§ 175-156 WATER § 175-156
168:579
§ 175-157. Off-street loading.
In all zoning districts, whenever a new use is established or an existing use
is structurally altered, converted or enlarged, off-street loading spaces shall
be provided in accordance with the requirements of this section.
Table 4: Shared Parking Matrix
Office Square
Footage Apartment
Retail Square
Footage
Restaurant
Square
Footage
Time
Period
Percentage
of
Peak
Parking
Ratio
Total
Number
of
Active
Office
Spaces
Percentage
of
Peak
Parking
Ratio
Total
Number
of
Active
Residential
Spaces
Percentage
of
Peak
Parking
Ratio
Total
Number
of
Active
Retail
Spaces
Percentage
of
Peak
Parking
Ratio
Total
Number
of
Active
Restaurant
Spaces
Shared
Required
Spaces
Time
Period
8:00 70% 0 90% 0 0% 0 0% 0 0 8:00
9:00 80% 0 50% 0 5% 0 5% 0 0 9:00
10:00 90% 0 10% 0 15% 0 15% 0 0 10:00
11:00 90% 0 10% 0 20% 0 25% 0 0 11:00
Noon 85% 0 10% 0 30% 0 40% 0 0 Noon
1:00 85% 0 10% 0 35% 0 40% 0 0 1:00
2:00 82% 0 10% 0 25% 0 35% 0 0 2:00
3:00 75% 0 10% 0 20% 0 20% 0 0 3:00
4:00 65% 0 20% 0 20% 0 15% 0 0 4:00
5:00 50% 0 20% 0 20% 0 0 20% 0 5:00
6:00 35% 0 45% 0 40% 0 40% 0 0 6:00
7:00 15% 0 70% 0 60% 0 60% 0 0 7:00
8:00 10% 0 95% 0 40% 0 70% 0 0 8:00
9:00 5% 0 98% 0 20% 0 50% 0 0 9:00
10:00 0% 0 99% 0 10% 0 30% 0 0 10:00
11:00 0% 0 100% 0 5% 0 10% 0 0 11:00
Peak
Hour
Required
Parking
Spaces
(after
sharing)
0
§ 175-156 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-157
168:580
A. Off-street loading design:
(1) Size. Each loading berth shall be at least 65 feet in length and 12
feet in width with an overhead clearance of 14 feet. The area used
for loading berths shall not be used to satisfy parking area
requirements.
(2) Access. Loading berths shall be designed to provide sufficient
turnaround area so that vehicles are not required to back onto
public streets and the design shall be subject to review and
approval by the Township Engineer. Loading berths shall have
direct access to a driveway and shall be maintained free from
obstruction.
(3) Location. All loading berths shall be located on the same lot with
the principal use they are intended to serve. No loading berth shall
be located in a required front yard. Loading berths shall be located
at least 30 feet from the nearest point of intersection of any two
streets.
(4) Screening. Loading berths shall be screened by a six-foot hedge,
wall or opaque fence on all sides which face residential use or
zoning district classification.
(5) Surfacing. All loading berths shall have a paved concrete or
bituminous surface, graded with positive drainage to dispose of
surface water.
(6) Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminated loading berths shall be
designed to reflect from any adjoining residential use or zoning
classification and away from any street or highway.
B. Off-street loading requirements. In all zoning districts, every use which
requires the receipt or distribution, by vehicle, of material or
merchandise, shall provide off-street loading berths in accordance with
the following requirements: [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
(1) For department stores, freight terminals, industrial or
manufacturing establishments, retail or wholesale stores, personal
or business service establishments, storage warehouses or any
similar uses which receive deliveries:
Table 5
Gross Floor Area
(square feet) Number of Berths Required
Under 10,000 None
10,000 to 19,999 1
20,000 to 39,999 2
40,000 to 65,000 3
§ 175-157 WATER § 175-157
168:581
§ 175-158. Storage requirements.
In addition to required off-street parking and loading facilities, adequate
storage areas for vehicles awaiting loading and unloading shall be provided.
Under no circumstances shall vehicles be stored on or block access to a
public right-of-way.
Table 5
Gross Floor Area
(square feet) Number of Berths Required
For each additional 20,000 1 additional
(2) For auditoriums, convention or exhibit halls, sports arenas, hotels,
office buildings, restaurants, nursing homes, hospitals, schools,
apartment buildings, public buildings and similar uses which
receive deliveries:
Table 6
Gross Floor Area
(square feet) Number of Berths Required
Under 40,000 None
40,000 to 59,999 1
60,000 to 99,999 2
100,000 to 160,000 3
Over 160,000 4
§ 175-157 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-158
168:582
ARTICLE XIV
Signs
§ 175-159. Applicability.
The regulations contained in this article shall apply to all signs in all zoning
districts.
§ 175-160. Classification.
Signs in all zoning districts shall be categorized according to the types and
classes described below and shall comply with the requirements for those
types and classes described in this section.
A. Classes. Signs are classified by physical attributes into the following
categories.
(1) Freestanding. A sign supported on a foundation or by one or more
uprights, poles or braces permanently affixed to the ground and not
attached to any building or other structure, including:
(a) Pole sign. A freestanding sign which is supported by one or
more poles, uprights or braces and which has a minimum
clearance between the bottom edge of the sign and the
adjacent ground level, as specified by this chapter.
(b) Ground sign. A freestanding sign which is affixed to the ground
by means of a permanent foundation and which provides a
maximum clearance of 18 inches between the bottom edge of
the sign and the adjacent ground level.
(2) Wall. A sign attached to and erected parallel to the face of an
outside wall of a building, projecting outward no more than six
inches from the wall of the building.
(3) Arcade sign. A sign suspended beneath a ceiling of an arcade or a
covered pedestrian walkway containing only the name of a
business for the purpose of assisting pedestrian traffic traveling
under the arcade or covered pedestrian walkway to identify the
location of establishments within a shopping center or similar
building containing several businesses.
(4) Bulletin. A type of changeable copy sign constructed to allow
letters or symbols to be changed periodically, such as those used by
places of worship and schools to announce events.
(5) Roof sign. A sign erected and maintained upon or above the roof of
any building which projects no more than six feet above the roof.
(6) Overhanging. A sign, other than a wall sign or arcade sign, affixed
to a building or wall whose leading edge extends beyond such
building or wall more than six inches, including awnings, marquees
or similar structures used for business identification.
§ 175-159 WATER § 175-160
168:583
(7) Billboard. An off-premises sign which advertises an establishment,
activity, person, product or service which is unrelated to or
unavailable on the premises where the billboard is located. See
§§ 175-98, 175-252, and 175-258 for regulation of billboards.
[Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
(8) Changeable copy. A sign that is designed so that characters, letters
or illustrations can be changed or rearranged without altering the
face or surface of the sign.
(9) Indirectly illuminated. A sign which is lighted by means of lamps or
lighting devices external to, and reflected on, the sign, which
lighting is stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times
and which is shielded so that the illumination is concentrated on
the face of the sign and there is no spillover of illumination or glare
beyond the face of the sign.
(10) Internally illuminated. A sign which is lighted by means of lamps or
lighting devices internal to the sign, which lighting is either behind
the face of the sign or is an integral part of the sign structure and
the advertising effect.
B. Types. Signs are categorized by use, function or purpose into the
following types:
(1) Residential identification. A sign containing only the name and
address of the occupant of the premises.
(2) Home occupation or home office identification. A sign containing
only the name and address of the occupant of the premises and his
or her occupation. No logos or other advertising shall be permitted.
(3) Residential plan identification sign. A permanent wall or
freestanding ground sign containing only the name and address of
a plan of subdivision or a multifamily building or development.
(4) Real estate. A temporary sign advertising the sale or rental of
premises. The signs may also bear the words "sold," "sale pending"
or "rented" across their face.
(5) Development. A temporary sign erected during the period of
construction and/or development of a property by the contractor
and developer or their agent.
(6) Construction. A temporary sign announcing the name of
contractors, mechanics or artisans engaged in performing work on
the premises.
(7) Notification. Signs bearing legal and/or property notices such as
"no trespassing," "private property," "no turnaround," "safety
zone," "no hunting" and similar messages and signs posted by a
governmental agency for traffic control or the safety of the general
public.
§ 175-160 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-160
168:584
§ 175-161. General regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to signs in all zoning districts.
(8) On-premises directional. A sign which directs and/or instructs
vehicular or pedestrian traffic relative to parking areas, proper
exits, loading areas, entrance points and similar information on the
premises on which it is located.
(9) Off-premises directional sign. A sign, other than a billboard, which
advertises or directs the public to an establishment, activity,
person, product or service which is not sold, produced or available
on the property on which the sign is located.
(10) Political sign. A temporary sign which indicates the name, cause or
affiliation of anyone seeking public office or which refers to an
issue concerning which a public election is scheduled to be held.
(11) Business identification sign. A sign which contains the name,
address and goods, services, facilities or events available on the
premises.
(12) Temporary special event display. A banner, flag, pennant or similar
display constructed of durable material and affixed to the wall of a
building erected for a period of not exceeding 30 days whose sole
purpose is to advertise a special event.
(13) Memorial/historical plaques. Commemorative plaques placed by a
recognized agency of the Township, county, state or federal
government.
(14)Window display. A sign or group of signs affixed to the inside of a
display window in a commercial establishment which advertises a
product or service available on the premises or which announces or
promotes a special sale or special event.
A. Restricted signs. The following signs shall not be permitted in any
zoning district:
(1) A-frame or sandwich board signs.
(2) Portable or wheeled signs.
(3) Banners and pennants, other than temporary special event displays
authorized by this chapter.
(4) Inflatable structures of any kind.
(5) Moving or flashing signs, except for that portion of a permitted sign
which indicates time or temperature.
(6) Signs on trees, utility poles or official traffic control devices or
signs.
§ 175-160 WATER § 175-161
168:585
(7) Signs which imitate traffic control devices.
(8) Signs painted on chimneys of a building or on fences or
freestanding walls.
(9) Off-premises directional signs, as defined herein.
(10) Roof signs.
(11) Overhanging signs, as defined herein.
(12) Signs mounted or supported by any vehicles or temporary
structures.
B. Exempt signs. The following signs shall be permitted and shall be
exempt from these regulations:
(1) Residential identification signs, as defined herein;
(2) Holiday decorations displayed for recognized federal or state
holidays, provided they do not interfere with traffic safety or do not,
in any other way, become a public safety hazard;
(3) Memorial/historical plaques, as defined herein;
(4) Window displays, as defined herein, provided they shall not exceed
20% of the gross surface area of all windows in an establishment;
(5) Signs erected by a governmental agency, including street signs and
official traffic signs; and
(6) Notification Signs, as defined herein.
C. Lots with multiple street frontage: In all zoning districts, lots fronting
on more than one street shall be permitted to have one sign which is
authorized per lot on each street frontage.
D. Temporary signs. In all zoning districts where authorized by § 175-162,
real estate, construction and development signs shall be considered
temporary signs which shall be removed within 30 days of the
completion of sales or construction.
E. Visibility. No sign shall be located in such a position that it will cause a
hazard by obstructing visibility for traffic on a street or obscuring a
traffic signal or other traffic control device. No sign, other than official
traffic signs and off-premises directional signs, shall hang over or be
erected within the right-of-way of any street.
F. Illumination. Illumination, when authorized by this chapter, shall be
directed upon the sign face and not towards adjoining properties or
streets. Flashing or oscillating signs shall not be permitted. Lighting
shall be stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times. The
intensity of any source of illumination of any sign, whether indirect or
internal, shall be controlled so as to not create glare and to be
§ 175-161 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-161
168:586
§ 175-162. Signs authorized in all zoning districts.
The following signs are authorized in all zoning districts:
compatible with the intensity of ambient light and illumination on
surrounding properties.
G. Maintenance and inspection. All signs must be constructed of a durable
material and maintained in good condition. Any sign found to be in an
unsafe condition upon inspection shall be declared to be a public
nuisance, and the Zoning Officer shall give notice to the owner in
writing to repair or remove the sign within 10 days. Upon failure of the
owner to comply, the Township shall remove the sign at the owner's
expense.
H. Removal of signs. Whenever any business is discontinued or vacated, all
signs relating to the discontinued or vacated business shall be removed
within 30 days of the vacation or discontinuance of the business. Upon
failure of the owner to comply, the Township shall remove the sign at
the owner's expense.
I. Permits required. No permit shall be required for the following types of
signs as described in § 175-160B above: Real estate, construction and
development signs, as defined herein. Permits shall be required for all
other signs authorized by §§ 175-162 through 175-164. The Zoning
Officer shall issue the required permits upon submission of an
application which complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter
and payment of the required fee established from time to time by
resolution of the Township Supervisors.
J. Expiration of permits. Any permit issued by the Zoning Officer for
erection, alteration, replacement or relocation of any sign shall expire
automatically within six months of the date of issuance if work
authorized by the permit has not been initiated and diligently pursued.
K. Sign location. Except for billboards and political signs, as defined
herein, where authorized by this chapter, all signs shall be located on
the premises which they are intended to serve.
A. Bulletin sign. One bulletin sign which is nonilluminated or indirectly or
internally illuminated and which does not exceed 24 square feet in
surface area, shall be permitted in connection with any place of
worship, school, library or similar public or semipublic building.
B. Real estate sign. One nonilluminated temporary real estate sign shall be
permitted on each lot provided the surface area of the sign shall not
exceed six feet in height. The real estate sign shall not exceed 12
square feet in surface area when located in any residential zoning
district and shall not exceed 32 square feet in any other zoning district.
Such sign shall be removed within 30 days of the sale or rental of the
property on which it is located.
§ 175-161 WATER § 175-162
168:587
C. Development sign. One nonilluminated temporary development sign
shall be permitted on each lot, provided the surface area of the sign
shall not exceed 32 square feet in surface area. The development sign
shall not exceed six feet in height when located in any residential
zoning district and shall not exceed 10 feet in height in any other zoning
district. Such sign shall be removed within 30 days of the sale or rental
of the last lot or completion of the proposed construction in the
development.
D. Construction sign. One nonilluminated temporary construction sign
announcing the names of contractors, mechanics or artisans engaged in
performing work on the premises shall be permitted on a lot, provided
the sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and shall be removed
within 30 days of the completion of the work.
E. Temporary special event sign. One nonilluminated temporary special
event display sign, as defined by this chapter, shall be permitted to be
erected on the face of a public building, place of worship or building
housing a nonprofit organization, provided that the area of the signs
shall not exceed 40 square feet and provided the sign is displayed for a
period no longer than 30 days and is removed within five days following
the event that it is erected to promote.
F. Home occupation identification sign. One nonilluminated home
occupation identification sign shall be permitted for an approved home
occupation, provided that the surface area of the sign does not exceed
one square foot and the sign shall contain only the name, address and
occupation of the resident and shall not contain any logo or other
advertising.
G. Political signs.
(1) Nonilluminated temporary political signs erected during a political
campaign shall be permitted, provided that they are not of a type
restricted by § 175-161A(1) of this chapter and provided that the
surface area of such signs shall not exceed four feet by five feet.
The signs shall be erected no sooner than 14 days prior to the
election and shall be removed within three days after the election
for which they were erected.
(2) Permits for political signs shall be obtained by one person from
each political party who shall assume responsibility for all of the
political party's signs during any campaign.
(3) Political signs shall not be erected within 10 feet of the Middlesex
Township Municipal Building. Political signs which create a traffic
hazard shall be removed by the Township immediately and shall be
stored for a reasonable period of time at the Township Municipal
Building until the responsible person removes them during regular
business hours.
H. On-premises directional signs.
§ 175-162 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-162
168:588
§ 175-163. Signs authorized in residential zoning districts.
The following signs shall be permitted in all residential zoning districts:
§ 175-164. Signs authorized in commercial and industrial districts.
The following signs shall be permitted in all commercial and industrial
districts:
(1) On any lot which contains two or more multifamily or
nonresidential buildings and/or on any lot which provides more
than 100 parking spaces, on-premises directional signs shall be
permitted, provided that the surface area of any one sign shall not
exceed four square feet.
(2) On lots with areas of less than one acre, a maximum of four
nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated on-premises directional
signs shall be permitted. On lots with areas of one acre or more, a
maximum of six nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated onpremises
directional signs shall be permitted on the first acre. For
each additional acre or fraction thereof over one acre, two
additional on-premises directional signs shall be permitted.
A. Residential plan identification sign.
(1) One nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated permanent wall or
freestanding ground residential plan identification sign containing
only the street address and/or name of a residential subdivision
plan or multifamily building or development which shall not exceed
24 square feet in area.
(2) A sign identifying the name of a residential subdivision may be
affixed to a freestanding decorative wall, rather than to a building
wall, provided that the decorative wall meets all applicable chapter
requirements and does not obstruct visibility for traffic entering or
leaving the plan.
B. Business identification sign. One nonilluminated or indirectly
illuminated wall or freestanding ground identification sign for any
business use, other than a home occupation, which is a legal
nonconforming use or which is authorized as a conditional use or use by
special exception in a residential zoning district which shall not exceed
12 square feet in area.
A. Temporary special event display. Temporary special event displays, as
defined by this chapter, shall be permitted, provided that:
(1) No more than two signs or banners shall be permitted on any
establishment at any one time;
§ 175-162 WATER § 175-164
168:589
(2) The temporary special event display signs shall be securely
attached to the building or to the supporting structure of a
freestanding pole business identification sign;
(3) Temporary special event display signs shall be displayed for a
period not exceeding 30 days, either consecutively or cumulatively,
in any twelve-month period;
(4) The aggregate surface area of all temporary special event display
signs shall not exceed 40 square feet per establishment. In the
event that there is more than one establishment on a site, the
maximum aggregate surface area of all temporary special event
display signs on the site at any one time shall not exceed 100
square feet;
(5) Portable signs shall not be considered temporary special event
display signs; and
(6) Temporary special event display signs shall be nonilluminated.
B. Changeable copy signs. In addition to the authorized business
identification signs, one nonilluminated or internally illuminated
changeable copy sign shall be permitted per lot, regardless of the
number of businesses on the lot, which shall not exceed 30 square feet
in area and which shall be permanently affixed to the wall of the
building or to the supporting structure of an authorized freestanding
sign on the lot.
C. Business identification signs.
(1) Wall signs. Illumination, if provided, for any sign in the TC and C-3
District shall be achieved through an indirect lighting source only.
No internally illuminated signs shall be erected.
(2) Freestanding signs.
(a) Ground sign.
[1] No freestanding pole sign exists or is proposed to be
erected on the lot.
[2] The maximum surface area of the ground sign shall not
exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in the C-1 and C-2
Districts and shall not exceed 64 square feet in the I-1
District. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
[3] The height and location of the sign shall be designed so as
not to interfere with visibility for vehicular traffic entering
or leaving the lot or traveling on any street, and in no case
shall the total height exceed six feet.
§ 175-164 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-164
168:590
[4] Ground signs shall be nonilluminated or indirectly
illuminated only. Internally illuminated ground signs shall
be permitted. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
[5] All freestanding ground signs shall be located at least 10
feet from any property line or right-of-way. [Amended
7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
[6] The maximum surface area of the ground sign shall not
exceed 40 square feet in the TC District.
[7] The maximum surface area of the ground sign shall not
exceed 64 square feet in the C-3 District.
[8] The maximum height of a ground sign shall be eight feet.
(b) Pole sign. A pole sign shall be permitted only if all of the
following criteria are met:
[1] No freestanding ground sign exists or is proposed to be
erected on the lot.
[2] The pole sign shall be nonilluminated, indirectly
illuminated or internally illuminated.
[3] The maximum height of the top of the pole sign shall be 20
feet.
[4] The minimum height of the bottom edge of the sign shall
be eight feet.
[5] The maximum surface area of the freestanding pole sign
shall not exceed 40 square feet if there is only one
business on the lot and shall not exceed 64 square feet if
there is more than one business on the lot. Neither
dimension of such sign shall be less than five feet.
[6] No portion of any sign shall project over any public rightof-
way.
[7] All freestanding pole signs shall be set back at least 10 feet
from every property line, except where property abuts on a
public right-of-way, the sign shall be set back at least 20
feet from the right-of-way.
[8] No pole signs shall be permitted in the Town Center
District.
(3) Arcade signs. In shopping centers or office complexes which have
pedestrian accessways covered by a roof, marquee or exterior
arcade, one arcade sign, as defined herein, shall be permitted for
each business in the building, provided that the maximum surface
area of each sign shall not exceed eight square feet.
§ 175-164 WATER § 175-164
168:591
§ 175-165. (Reserved)171
(4) Permanent minor signs. The following are considered permanent
minor signs and do not require permits, provided the sign area of
each sign does not exceed six square feet.
(a) Directional signs. A sign conveying instructions with respect to
the use of the premises or a portion of the premises on which it
is located; i.e., internal directional signs for traffic, parking
hours, business hours, reserved parking spaces, etc. Such
signs shall not include advertising copy. An unlimited number
of directional signs may be located within the interior of a lot
so long as the sign copy is not legible from an adjacent public
right-of-way or lot line. Directional signs shall be a maximum of
three feet in height.
(b) Information or public service signs. A sign advertising
availability of rest rooms, telephone, or similar public
conveniences, or a sign advertising the meeting time of
nonprofit service or charitable clubs or organizations, provided
that such signs do not advertise any nonresidential or
industrial establishment activity or organization. Signs shall be
a maximum of three feet in height.
(c) Auxiliary advertising signs. Signs which are vital to the
operation of a business, such as certified auto inspection
stations, recognition of credit cards, issuance of premium
stamps, restaurant associations, etc., may be displayed. Signs
shall be a maximum of three feet in height.
(d) Nameplate signs or directories. Signs at entrances to
buildings, provided lettering does not exceed five inches in
height.
(e) Automated teller machine signs. Signs mounted or built into
the ATM machine.
171. Editor’s Note: Former § 175-165, Billboards, was repealed 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133.
§ 175-164 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-165
168:592
ARTICLE XV
Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
§ 175-166. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all nonconforming uses, structures, and lots as
defined by this chapter. Nothing contained herein shall require any change
in the overall layout, plans, construction, size or designated use of any
development, building, structure or part thereof for which official approval
and required permits have been granted prior to the effective date of this
chapter or any amendment thereto.
§ 175-167. Nonconforming uses.
These regulations shall apply to any use of a structure or lot in any zoning
district which is a nonconforming use as defined by this chapter. Whenever
the boundaries of a zoning district shall be changed so as to transfer
an area from one zoning district to another of a different classification,
these regulations shall also apply to any uses which thereby become
nonconforming.
A. Continuation. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this chapter, a lawful use of a lot or structure exists that is made no
longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or
amended, such use may be sold or otherwise transferred to other
owners and may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful.
B. Enlargement or expansion.
(1) No nonconforming use of a lot or structure shall be enlarged or
increased or extended to occupy a greater area than was occupied
at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter,
unless the Zoning Hearing Board, after public hearing, shall
authorize the enlargement or expansion as a use by special
exception in accordance with the following express standards and
criteria:
(a) There is evidence that the enlargement or expansion of the
nonconforming use is necessitated by the natural expansion
and growth of trade of the nonconforming use.
(b) Any such enlargement or expansion shall conform to the area,
height and yard requirements of the zoning district in which it
is located, unless a variance is granted.
(c) The enlargement or expansion is not proposed on property
which was not owned at the time the use became
nonconforming.
(2) No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot occupied by such use at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter.
§ 175-166 WATER § 175-167
168:593
§ 175-168. Nonconforming structures.
These regulations shall apply to all nonconforming structures as defined by
this chapter in all zoning districts.
(3) Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a
structure which was designed for such use at the time the use
became nonconforming; however, a nonconforming use shall not be
extended to occupy any structure, except on a lot or portion of a lot
owned at the time the use became nonconforming.
C. Change of use. When a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming
use, the use thereafter shall not be changed to a nonconforming use. A
nonconforming use shall not be changed unless to a conforming use,
except when permitted as a use by special exception by the Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with the following express standards and
criteria:
(1) The new use is equal to or better than the existing nonconforming
use. In making this determination, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider the other uses authorized in the most restrictive zoning
district in which the nonconforming use is listed as a permitted use,
conditional use or use by special exception to be equal uses and any
use authorized in any more restrictive zoning district in which the
nonconforming use is not listed as a permitted use, conditional use
or use by special exception to be better uses.
(2) The new use will more closely correspond to the uses permitted in
the district.
(3) The new use will be in keeping with the character of the
neighborhood in which it is located.
(4) Any change from one nonconforming use to another shall comply
with the parking requirements of Article XIII for the use and shall
be subject to the area, bulk and buffer yard regulations for such use
in the district where such use is authorized.
D. Abandonment. When a nonconforming use of a structure and/or lot is
discontinued or abandoned for 12 consecutive months, the structure
and/or lot shall not thereafter be used, except in conformance with the
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located, except when
extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board.
E. Damage or destruction. In the event that damage or destruction of a
structure in which a nonconforming use is conducted involves 75% or
less of the gross floor area of the structure, repairs or reconstruction
may be undertaken, provided that such restoration is started within 12
months of the date of destruction. In the event that a structure in which
a nonconforming use is conducted is damaged or destroyed by fire or
other means to an extent of more than 75% of its gross floor area, the
structure shall be reconstructed only to house a conforming use.
§ 175-167 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-168
168:594
§ 175-169. Nonconforming lots.
A. Structural alteration. No such structure may be enlarged or structurally
altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, except when the
Zoning Hearing Board, after public hearing, may determine undue
hardship and may authorize a reasonable modification of such
structure.
B. Damage or destruction. Any nonconforming structure which has been
partially or completely damaged or destroyed by fire or other means
may be rebuilt or repaired on its existing foundation even though such
foundation may violate the setback requirements for the zoning district
in which the structure is located, provided that the repair or
reconstruction and reoccupancy of the structure occurs within 18
months of the date that the original structure was damaged or
destroyed.
C. Moving. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any
distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the requirements of
the zoning district in which it is located.
D. Signs.
(1) Nonconforming signs may be repaired or reconstructed, provided
that no structural alterations are made which increase the gross
surface area of the sign; however, nonconforming signs which are
damaged or destroyed to an extent of more than 50% of their
replacement cost at the time of destruction shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) Nonconforming signs may not be enlarged, added to or replaced by
another nonconforming sign, use or structure, except that the
interchange of poster panels shall be permitted.
E. Repair or maintenance. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any
structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged
with protecting the safety of the public.
A. Any lot of record existing at the effective date of this chapter, and held
in separate ownership different from the ownership of adjoining lots,
may be used for the erection of a structure conforming to the use
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located, without a lot
area or lot width variance, even though its lot area and width are less
than the minimum required by this chapter; however, such lot must
comply with the front, rear and side yards, height and lot coverage
standards of the zoning district wherein it is located.
B. Where two or more adjoining lots of record with continuous frontage
have less than the required lot area and lot width and are held by one
owner, the lots shall be consolidated in accordance with the
§ 175-168 WATER § 175-169
168:595
§ 175-170. Registration of nonconformity.
requirements of the Township's Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance172 for the purpose of complying with this chapter. No division
of any lot shall be made which does not comply with the requirements
of this chapter, unless a variance is granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
C. Where structures exist on adjacent nonconforming lots of record which
have front yards less than the minimum depth required, the minimum
front yard for an adjacent undeveloped nonconforming lot of record
shall be the average depth of the nonconforming front yards on the
immediately adjacent developed nonconforming lots on either side of
the undeveloped lot; provided, however, that in no instance shall the
front yard be less than 50 feet from the center line of any public street.
A. The owner of a nonconforming use shall make an application for
registration of the nonconforming use and upon presentation of
documentation acceptable to the Zoning Officer that the use was
lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this chapter or any
amendment which created the nonconformity, the Zoning Officer shall
register the same on a map and by Butler County Deed and Assessment
Registry Tax Parcel Number as a legal nonconforming use.
B. In the course of administering this chapter and reviewing applications
for zoning certificates or variances, the Zoning Officer shall register all
nonconforming structures and nonconforming lots as they become
known through the application process.
172. Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 175-169 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-170
168:596
ARTICLE XVI
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 175-171. Organization; general powers and duties.
In accordance with law, the Township Supervisors shall appoint and
organize a Zoning Hearing Board, which Board may adopt rules to govern
its procedure. The Board shall hold meetings, keep minutes and, pursuant
to public notice, shall conduct hearings, compel the attendance of
witnesses, take testimony under oath, and render decisions in writing
within 45 days after hearing or continued hearing, in accordance with
the requirements of Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code. A fee shall be charged in accordance with a schedule affixed by
resolution for any appeal or proceeding filed with the Board.
§ 175-172. Membership; terms; vacancies; holding of additional
offices.
§ 175-173. Alternate members.
A. The membership of the Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of three
residents of the Township appointed by the Township Supervisors.
B. Their terms of office shall be three years and shall be so fixed that the
term of office of one member shall expire each year.
C. The Board shall promptly notify the Township Supervisors when
vacancies occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the
unexpired portion of the term.
D. Members of the Board shall hold no other office in the Township.
A. Appointment of alternate members.
(1) The Township Supervisors may appoint by resolution at least one,
but no more than three, residents of the Township to serve as
alternate members of the Board. The term of office of an alternate
member shall be three years.
(2) When seated pursuant to the provisions of Subsection B, an
alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and
discussions of the Board to the same and full extent as provided by
law for Board members, including specifically the right to cast a
vote as a voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all
the power and duties set forth in this chapter and as otherwise
provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other office in the
Township, including membership on the Planning Commission and
Zoning Officer. Any alternate may participate in any proceeding or
discussion of the Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a
member of the Board unless designated as a voting alternate
member pursuant to Subsection B of this section.
§ 175-171 WATER § 175-173
168:597
§ 175-174. Jurisdiction of the board.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudication in the following matters:
B. Participation by alternate members. If, by reason of absence or
disqualification of a member, a quorum is not reached, the Chairman of
the Board shall designate as many alternate members of the Board to
sit on the Board as may be needed to provide a quorum. Any alternate
member of the Board shall continue to serve on the Board in all
proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate was
initially appointed until the Board has made a final determination of the
matter or case. Designation of an alternate pursuant to this subsection
shall be made on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining
seniority among all alternates.
A. Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except
curative amendments brought before the Township Supervisors.
B. Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural
questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption,
which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken with 30 days after
the effective date of the ordinance.
C. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including, but not
limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the
application therefor, the issuance of any cease-and-desist order or the
registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or
lot.
D. Appeals from a determination by the Township Engineer or the Zoning
Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain or flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance.
E. Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance
pursuant to § 175-175.
F. Applications for uses by special exception under this chapter or
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land
use ordinance, pursuant to Article XI and § 175-176.
G. Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section 916.2 of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code173 (Act 247, as
amended).
H. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Township
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provision
thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and
stormwater management insofar as the same relate to development not
173. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 175-173 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-174
168:598
§ 175-175. Variances.
§ 175-176. Uses by special exception.
The Board shall have the power to hear and decide on applications for uses
by special exception subject to the application requirements of § 175-93 and
the express standards and criteria for the use set forth in Article XI. The
Board shall approve a use by special exception only if it meets all applicable
requirements of this chapter and the express standards and criteria set
forth in Article XI. In granting a use by special exception, the Board may
attach such reasonable safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this
involving subdivision and land development or planned residential
development.
A. The Board, upon appeal, shall have the power to authorize variances
from the requirements of this chapter, and to attach such conditions to
the variance as it deems necessary to assure compliance with the
purposes of this chapter. A variance may be granted if all of the
following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance necessary to afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
B. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter and protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 175-174 WATER § 175-176
168:599
chapter, as it may deem necessary to properly implement this chapter and
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 175-177. Conduct of hearings.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
the following requirements:
A. Scheduling of hearing. The hearing shall be held within 60 days from
the date of filing of a complete and properly filed application, unless the
applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time.
B. Notice.
(1) Public notice shall be given, as defined herein, and, in addition,
notice shall be given to the applicant, the Zoning Officer, the
Township Supervisors and to any person who has made timely
request for the same.
(2) Written notices shall be given by regular mail at least two weeks
prior to the public hearing to all property owners of record within
300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property for which the
appeal is filed, including those located across a street right-of-way.
[Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
(3) Written notice of said hearing shall be posted on the affected tract
of land at least one week prior to the hearing.
C. Parties to hearing. The parties to the hearing shall be the Township, any
person affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the Board, and any other person, including civic or
community organizations, permitted to appear by the Board. The Board
shall have the power to require that all persons who wish to be
considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms provided by
the Board for that purpose.
D. Conduct of hearing.
(1) The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may
appoint any member as a hearing officer. The decision or, where no
decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Board;
however, the parties may waive decision or findings by the Board
and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
(2) The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing
officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses
and documents requested by the parties.
(3) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
§ 175-176 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-177
168:600
and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(4) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial,
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
E. Stenographic record. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may
be, shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings. Fees for the
stenographer and the transcript shall be in accordance with the
provisions of § 175-180B.
F. Communications. The Board or the hearing officer shall not
communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his
representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon
notice and opportunity for all parties to participate; shall not take
notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or other
materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are
afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed; and shall not
inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of
hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are
given an opportunity to be present.
G. Decision.
(1) The Board or hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing
before the Board or hearing officer.
(2) Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon,
together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any
provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance, rule or regulation
shall contain a reference to the provisions relied on and the reasons
why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts
found.
(3) If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, and there has been
no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Board shall
make his report and recommendations available to the parties
within 45 days, and the parties shall be entitled to make written
representations thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry
of findings and the Board's decision shall be entered no later than
30 days after the report of the hearing officer.
H. Notice of decision. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is
called for, or the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally
or mailed to him not later than the day following its date. To all other
persons who have filed their names and addresses with the Board not
later than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall provide by mail or
otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the
place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.
§ 175-177 WATER § 175-177
168:601
§ 175-178. Failure to render decision or hold hearing in time.
§ 175-179. Mediation option.
I. Rehearing. If any application for a variance, use by special exception or
appeal from the Zoning Officer is denied, another identical application
shall not be filed within a period of one year from the date of denial,
except upon acceptance of the Board after the applicant demonstrates a
change of circumstances which would warrant a hearing.
A. Where the Board fails to render a decision within the period required by
§ 175-177G or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days of the
applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have
been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the applicant has agreed
in writing or on the record to an extension of time.
B. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of
failure of the Board to meet or render a decision, the Board shall give
public notice of the decision within 10 days from the last day it could
have met to render a decision. If the Board shall fail to provide such
notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this section shall prejudice
the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to
the Court of Common Pleas.
A. Parties to proceedings authorized in this article may utilize mediation
as an aid in completing such proceedings. In proceedings before the
Zoning Hearing Board, in no case shall the Zoning Hearing Board
initiate mediation or participate as a mediating party. Mediation shall
supplement, not replace, those procedures in this article once they have
been formally initiated. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as
expanding or limiting municipal police powers or as modifying any
principles of substantive law.
B. Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The
appropriateness of mediation shall be determined by the particulars of
each case and the willingness of the parties to negotiate. Any
municipality offering the mediation option shall assure that in each
case, the mediating parties, assisted by the mediator as appropriate,
develop terms and conditions for:
(1) Funding mediation.
(2) Selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working
knowledge of municipal zoning and subdivision procedures and
demonstrated skills in mediation.
(3) Completing mediation, including time limits for such completion.
(4) Suspending time limits otherwise authorized in this chapter or in
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as
amended), provided there is written consent by the mediating
§ 175-177 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-179
168:602
§ 175-180. Fees and expenditures.
§ 175-181. Time limitations.
parties, and by an applicant or Township decisionmaking body, if
either is not a party to the mediation.
(5) Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to
participate.
(6) Subject to legal restraints, determining whether some or all of the
mediation sessions shall be open or closed to the public.
(7) Assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by the
parties, and become subject to review and approval by the
appropriate decisionmaking body pursuant to the authorized
procedures set forth in this chapter.
C. No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the
final written mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in
any subsequent judicial or administrative proceedings.
A. Fees. The Township Supervisors may prescribe reasonable fees with
respect to hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said
hearings may include compensation for the Secretary and members of
the Zoning Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board,
expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants
or expert witness costs.
B. Stenographer's appearance fee and transcripts. The appearance fee for
a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is
made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by
the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
C. Expenditures. Members of the Board may receive compensation for the
performance of their duties as may be fixed by the Township
Supervisors, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation
authorized to be paid to the members of the Township Supervisors.
Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Township Supervisors,
the Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants and other technical and clerical services.
A. No person shall file any proceeding before the Zoning Hearing Board
later than 30 days after a preliminary or final application for
development has been approved by an appropriate Township officer,
agency or body, if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to
§ 175-179 WATER § 175-181
168:603
§ 175-182. Stay of proceedings.
limit the approval in any manner, unless such person alleges and proves
that he had no notice, knowledge or reason to believe that such
approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to his interest
after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his
predecessor in interest.
B. The failure of anyone, other than the landowner, to appeal from an
adverse decision on an application for tentative approval of a planned
residential development or from an adverse decision by a Zoning
Officer on a challenge to the validity of an ordinance or map filed
pursuant to Section 916.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code174 shall preclude an appeal from a final approval except in the
case where the final submission substantially deviates from the
approved tentative approval.
C. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed
by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination is
issued.
A. Upon filing of any proceeding and during its pendency before the
Board, all land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance,
order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or body, and all
official action thereunder shall be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or
any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board, facts
indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property,
in which case the development or official action shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the
Board or by the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals on petition
after notice to the Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body.
When an application for development, preliminary or final, has been
duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the
approval are filed with the Board by persons other than the applicant,
the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals to order such persons to post bond as a condition to continuing
the proceedings before the Board. The question whether or not such
petition should be granted and the amount of the bond shall be within
the sound discretion of the court.
B. All appeals from decisions rendered by the Zoning Hearing Board shall
be taken to the Butler County Court of Common Pleas and shall be filed
within 30 days after the entry of the decision or, in the case of a deemed
decision, within 30 days after the date upon which notice of said
deemed decision is given as required by Subsection 908(9) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended).175
174. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
175. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908(9).
§ 175-181 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-182
168:604
ARTICLE XVII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 175-183. Zoning Officer.
The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Township Supervisors and
shall hold no elective office in the Township. The Zoning Officer shall
meet the qualifications established by the Township and shall be able to
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Township, a working knowledge
of municipal zoning. The duties of the Zoning Officer shall include the
following:
§ 175-184. Enforcement.
A. Administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcement
when acting within the scope of his/her employment.
C. Issue building permits and certificates of occupancy.
D. Maintain a permanent file of all building permits and certificates of
occupancy and applications as public records.
E. Register and record nonconforming uses.
F. Inspect all land and structures for which a building permit or certificate
of occupancy has been applied for or issued to determine compliance
with this chapter and make all their inspections necessary to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
A. Enforcement notice. The enforcement notice shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the municipality intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
§ 175-183 WATER § 175-184
168:605
§ 175-185. Building permits.
B. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than
$500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure.
(2) Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the District Justice, determining that there has
been a violation, further determines that there was a good faith
basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this
chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation
until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a
violation by the District Justice and thereafter each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All
judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Township.
(3) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
C. Other remedies. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is,
or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter, the Township
Supervisors or, with the approval of the Township Supervisors, an
officer of the Township, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate
such building, structure, landscaping, or land, or to prevent, in or about
such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a
violation.
A. Permits required. A building permit shall be obtained from the
Township Zoning Officer before any person may construct, reconstruct,
move, structurally alter or enlarge any structure or building.
§ 175-184 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-185
168:606
B. Application requirements. Applications for building permits shall be
made to the Zoning Officer on forms supplied by the Township.
Applications for a building permit shall include the following
information in duplicate:
(1) A land development plan of the property upon which the proposed
construction is to occur, drawn to scale and dimensioned, showing:
(a) The boundaries of the property, indicating dimensions;
(b) The public streets abutting the property;
(c) Public utilities in the streets abutting the property and/or
easements across the property;
(d) Existing buildings on the property and those within 50 feet of
the property boundaries on adjacent properties;
(e) The proposed building or structure, indicating height and
dimensions between the building or structure and the property
boundaries;
(f) The location of proposed parking areas and drives, if
appreciable, indicating the number of parking spaces;
(g) Landscaping and buffer yards required by this chapter; and
(h) Any other information necessary to demonstrate compliance
with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
(2) A narrative statement indicating:
(a) The proposed use of the structure to which the permit applies
and the use of other buildings or structures on the property;
(b) The number of dwelling units, whether for sale or rent, or
commercial or retail service units, if applicable, that the
building is designed to accommodate;
(c) Evidence that the required approvals of agencies of the
commonwealth necessary to permit the development, if
applications have been secured; and
(d) If the building or structure is part of a larger complex of
buildings or structures to be erected over time on the same
property, an indication of scheduling of future construction.
(3) An application for a building permit for any construction which
requires approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry shall be accompanied by evidence of such approval.
(4) Any other information required by the Zoning Officer to document
compliance with any other applicable ordinances of the Township.
C. Action on application.
§ 175-185 WATER § 175-185
168:607
§ 175-186. Certificates of occupancy.
(1) If the application is satisfactory, the Zoning Officer shall approve it
and return one copy of the application documents, together with a
signed building permit, authorizing the applicant to proceed.
(2) If the application is not satisfactory, the Zoning Officer shall return
the application documents together with a letter indicating the
specific provisions of this chapter or any other applicable Township
ordinance which have not been met.
D. Amendments after approval. If an applicant wishes to amend the
building permit after the application has been approved, a new
application for a building permit shall be filed with the Zoning Officer
containing all the information required by Subsection C. An additional
building permit fee shall be charged only if the amendment results in an
increase in the value of construction; however, the Township
Supervisors may establish a review fee for amended applications.
E. Inspection. The Zoning Officer shall, from time to time, inspect the
property where the construction is taking place to assure himself that
the work is proceeding in accordance with the terms of the approved
building permit.
F. Access to property during construction. The Zoning Officer shall not be
denied access to the property to inspect construction in progress. The
Zoning Officer may issue a stop-work order pending an appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board or correction of violations determined during
inspection of the construction authorized by the building permit.
G. Maintenance of pins and monuments during construction. The property
and building location pins or monuments shall be located and
maintained in place prior to application for a building permit and
during construction to verify compliance with this chapter and any
other applicable ordinance.
A. Certificate of occupancy required. No person or corporation shall be
permitted to occupy any land or structure without securing a certificate
of occupancy from the Township Zoning Officer. A certificate of
occupancy shall be required before any person shall:
(1) Occupy or use any vacant land, except for agricultural purposes;
(2) Occupy or use any building or structure for which a building permit
has been issued;
(3) Change the use of a structure or land to a different use; or
(4) Change a nonconforming use.
B. Application for certificate of occupancy. Applications for certificates of
occupancy shall be made at the Township Municipal Building, and, upon
the payment of the required fee established from time to time by
§ 175-185 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-186
168:608
§ 175-187. Fees.
The Township Supervisors shall establish and revise, from time to time,
a schedule of fees by resolution, as well as a collection procedure for all
applications submitted under the provisions of this chapter. The schedule of
fees shall be available to the public from the Zoning Officer or the Township
Secretary.
§ 175-188. Method of appeal.
Any person or Township official aggrieved or affected by any provision of
this chapter, or by any decision of the Zoning Officer, may appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board by filing a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof in accordance with the provisions of § 175-174 of this chapter.
§ 175-189. Access modifications.
(Reserved)
resolution of the Township Supervisors and inspection of the premises
by the Zoning Officer, said permit shall be issued if said premises meet
the requirements of this chapter.
C. Applications requiring approval of PA Department of Labor and
Industry. An application for a certificate of occupancy for any proposed
use or change of an existing use which requires approval by the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry shall be accompanied
by evidence of such approval.
§ 175-186 WATER § 175-189
168:609

ARTICLE XVIII
Amendments
§ 175-190. Introduction and consideration.
The Township Supervisors may introduce and consider amendments to this
chapter and to the Zoning Map as proposed by a Supervisor, by the Planning
Commission or by a petition of a landowner within the Township.
§ 175-191. Petitions.
Petitions for amendment shall be filed with the Planning Commission, and
the petitioner, upon such filing, shall pay an advertising deposit and a filing
fee in accordance with a schedule affixed from time to time by resolution
of the Township Supervisors. The Planning Commission shall review the
proposed amendment and report its findings and recommendations in
writing to the Township Supervisors and to the petitioner.
§ 175-192. Required referrals.
§ 175-193. Posting of notice of hearing.
In the case where a proposed amendment involves the rezoning of property,
notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the Township
at points deemed sufficient by the Township along the perimeter of the tract
to notify potentially interested citizens. The affected tract or area shall be
posted at least one week prior to the date of the public hearing.
§ 175-194. Public hearing.
A. Referral to Township Planning Commission. Any proposed amendment
introduced by a Township Supervisor without written findings and
recommendations from the Planning Commission shall be referred to
the Planning Commission for review at least 30 days prior to public
hearing by the Township. The Planning Commission shall report its
findings and recommendations in writing to the Township Supervisors
within such reasonable time prior to the public hearing as the Township
Supervisors may specify in the referring action.
B. Referral to County Planning Commission. The proposed amendment
shall be submitted to the Butler County Planning Commission for
recommendations at least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the
amendment by the Township Supervisors.
A. Before acting upon a proposed amendment, the Township Supervisors
shall hold a public hearing thereon. Notice of such public hearing,
containing a brief summary of the proposed amendment and a
reference to the place where copies of the same may be examined, shall
be published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Township. The first publication shall be no
§ 175-190 WATER § 175-194
168:611
§ 175-195. Mediation.
The Township may offer a mediation option as an aid in completing
proceedings authorized by this article. In excercising such an option, the
Township and the mediating parties shall meet the stipulations and follow
the procedures set forth in § 175-179 of this chapter.
§ 175-196. Filing amendment with county planning commission.
Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this chapter
shall be forwarded to the Butler County Planning Commission.
§ 175-197. Rehearing.
If any petition for amendment is denied, another identical application shall
not be filed within a period of one year from the date of denial, except upon
acceptance of the Township Supervisors after the petitioner demonstrates a
change of circumstances which would warrant a rehearing.
§ 175-198. Landowner curative amendments.
Any landowner who wishes to challenge, on substantive grounds, the
validity of this chapter or Map or any provision thereof which prohibits or
restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest may
prepare and submit a curative amendment to the Township Supervisors, in
the form he proposes it be adopted, together with a written request that his
challenge and proposed amendment be heard. The Township Supervisors
shall hold a public hearing, pursuant to public notice, on the matter within
60 days of receiving the request at a regular monthly meeting.
more than 30 days and the second notice shall be not less than seven
days prior to the date of hearing.
B. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially, or is revised to include land
previously not affected by it, the Township Supervisors shall hold
another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to
vote on the amendment.
A. Referral to Planning Commission. The curative amendment and
challenge shall be referred to the Township Planning Commission and
County Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the public
hearing for review and comment.
B. Public hearing. The Township Supervisors shall conduct a public
hearing in accordance with procedures governing a hearing before the
Zoning Hearing Board as stipulated by Section 908 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.176
176. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
§ 175-194 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-198
168:612
C. Evaluation of merits of curative amendment. If the Township
Supervisors determine that a validity challenge has merit, the Township
Supervisors may accept a landowner's curative amendment, with or
without revision, or may adopt an alternative amendment which will
cure the challenged defects. The Township Supervisors shall consider
the curative amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by
the landowner and shall also consider:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available to and
affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by
the challenged provisions of this chapter or Map;
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the
site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features;
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural
features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the
tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts; and
(5) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and
other land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.
D. Declaration of invalidity by the court. If the Township does not accept a
landowner's curative amendment brought in accordance with this
section and a court subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the
court's decision shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for this
entire Ordinance, but only for those provisions which specifically relate
to the landowner's curative amendment and challenge.
§ 175-198 WATER § 175-198
168:613

ARTICLE XIX
R-2 Residential District
§ 175-199. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to accommodate areas of moderate-intensity,
single-family and multifamily residential development that complement
existing residential development patterns and infrastructure availability.
§ 175-200. Authorized uses.
In the R-2 Residential District, the following principal uses are authorized:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Communication antennas.
(2) Garden apartments.
(3) Essential services.
(4) Forestry.
(5) Quad-plexes.
(6) Public utilities, except buildings.
(7) Single-family dwellings.
(8) Townhouses.
(9) Two-family dwellings.
(10) Accessory uses (including, but not limited to, stables, hobby farms,
sale of farm products, keeping of domestic pets and private
residential pools and tennis courts) customarily incidental to and
on the same lot with any other permitted use. Private garages and
storage sheds shall be only permitted on a lot with a single-family
dwelling.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Noncommercial recreation.
(2) Planned residential development.
(3) Public recreation.
(4) Public utility buildings.
C. Uses by special exception.
(1) Place of worship/place of assembly.
(2) Conversion apartments.
§ 175-199 WATER § 175-200
168:615
§ 175-201. Area and bulk regulations.
In the R-2 Residential District, all uses shall be subject to the following
regulations, except as they may be modified by Article X governing planned
residential development or by the express standards and criteria for the
specific conditional uses or uses by special exception contained in Article
XI.
(3) Day-care center or nursery school in a place of worship or school.
(4) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction trailer or
temporary dwelling.
A. Minimum lot size.
(1) Single-family dwelling: 10,000 square feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 21,780 square feet.
(3) All other uses: 43,560 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width.
(1) Single-family dwelling: 80 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 100 feet.
(3) All other residential uses: 24 feet.
(4) All other nonresidential uses: 100 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 45%.
D. Minimum front yard: 30 feet from front lot line or 50 feet from street
center line, whichever is greater.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) Principal structures: 30 feet.
(2) All accessory structures: 10 feet.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Single-family dwellings: 10 feet each side.
(2) Two-family dwellings: 15 feet each side.
(3) All other uses: 15 feet each side.
G. Maximum height: NOTE: Height limitations of this chapter shall not
apply to the following structures: place of worship steeples or spires;
steeples; chimneys; elevator bulk heads and other mechanical
equipment which are part of a principal structure; conveyors; flagpoles;
silos; standpipes; elevated water tanks; derricks; and public utility
structures.
§ 175-200 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-201
168:616
§ 175-202. Parking and loading.
See Article XIII.
§ 175-203. Signs.
See Article XIV.
§ 175-204. Performance standards.
See § 175-139.
§ 175-205. Storage.
See § 175-149.
§ 175-206. Screening and landscaping.
See § 175-140.
§ 175-207. Vehicular access.
See § 175-150.
§ 175-208. Steep slope controls.
See § 175-141.
(1) All principal structures: 36 feet or three stories.
(2) All accessory structures: 15 feet or one story.
§ 175-201 WATER § 175-208
168:617

ARTICLE XX
TC Town Center District
§ 175-209. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide a mixture of residential, retail
shopping, consumer service and personal service uses intended to serve
household needs where such land use activity, character and scale can be
accessible for pedestrians and vehicles to and from adjacent residential
areas as well as considers the Township's historic development patterns
while accommodating modern trends.
§ 175-210. Authorized uses.
In the TC Town Center District, the following principal uses are authorized:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Garden apartments.
(2) Single-family dwellings.
(3) Townhouses.
(4) Two-family dwellings.
(5) Automotive service station.
(6) Communication antenna.
(7) Convenience store.
(8) Essential services.
(9) Financial institution.
(10) Food store.
(11) Forestry.
(12) Home-based business, no impact.
(13) Offices, professional and business.
(14) Open space.
(15) Public park and recreation areas.
(16) Personal services.
(17) Pharmacy.
(18) Public utilities.
(19) Retail store, excluding adult businesses.
§ 175-209 WATER § 175-210
168:619
§ 175-211. Area and bulk regulations.
In the TC Town Center District, all uses shall be subject to the following
regulations, except as they may be modified by the express standards and
criteria for the specific conditional uses and uses by special exception
contained in Article XI.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Commercial recreation.
(2) Home occupation, other.
(3) Manufacturing.
(4) Place of worship/place of assembly. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord.
No. 133]
(5) Public utility buildings.
(6) Restaurant.
(7) Vehicle repair garage.
(8) Vehicle sales.
(9) Oil and gas well site development, subject to § 175-155.2. [Added
8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
(10) Large land development. [Added 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
C. Uses by special exception.
(1) Group care facility or transitional dwelling.
(2) Clinics.
(3) Comparable uses not specifically listed.
(4) Day-care center.
(5) 177Temporary use or structure, other than for construction.
A. Minimum lot size: 8,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 80 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
D. Front yard:
177. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(5), Place of worship/place of assembly, was repealed
3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133. This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection C(6) as
Subsection C(5).
§ 175-210 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-211
168:620
§ 175-212. Parking and loading.
See Article XIII.
§ 175-213. Signs.
See Article XIV.
§ 175-214. Performance standards.
See § 175-139.
§ 175-215. Storage.
See § 175-149.
§ 175-216. Screening and landscaping.
See § 175-140.
(1) Minimum: 35 feet from a front lot line adjacent to an arterial street;
or 20 feet from a front lot line adjacent to all other road rights-of
way.
(2) Maximum: 85 feet from a front lot line adjacent to any road rightsof-
way.
(3) No double frontage lots shall be permitted.
E. Minimum rear yard.
(1) All principal structures: 20 feet.
(2) All accessory structures: five feet.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Adjoining AG or R District: 15 feet.
(2) All other districts: 10 feet each side.
G. Special yard requirements: See § 175-142.
H. Permitted projections into required yards: See § 175-143.
I. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: 36 feet or three stories.
(2) All accessory structures: 15 feet or one story.
J. Height exceptions: See § 175-144.
§ 175-211 WATER § 175-217
168:621
§ 175-217. Vehicular access.
See § 175-150.
§ 175-218. Steep slope controls.
See § 175-141.
§ 175-219. Design standards.
The following section defines a series of provisions for the Town Center
District. If a conflict exists between the following provisions and any other
requirements defined by this chapter, these provisions shall take
precedence.
A. The maximum gross floor area of a building or structure shall be 40,000
square feet.
B. For nonresidential development, no curb cuts along a public right-ofway
shall be permitted within 150 feet of another curb cut or driveway
entry. For curb cuts located less than such established minimum, a
developer shall either:
(1) Prepare a legal agreement specifying the establishment and use of
a shared driveway; shared driveway entrances and access drives
are encouraged; or
(2) Obtain a modification from the Township Planning Commission and
Board of Supervisors. The process for such modification shall be in
accordance with Article XVII, Administration and Enforcement.
C. To safeguard the safety of residents and minimize conflicts between
regional and local traffic, the development of any residential land use
shall not occur within 150 feet of the rights-of-way of an arterial street
as defined by this chapter.
D. All buildings in the Town Center District shall provide prominent and
highly visible street-level doorway entrances along the front or side of
the building which faces a public street.
E. Awnings, sunscreens or other similar architectural treatments shall be
permitted on the front facade of all nonresidential buildings. Such
treatments shall be permitted to project into required front and side
yards no more than three feet.
F. All fire escapes or similar life safety features shall be located on the side
or rear facade of a building or structure.
G. No mechanical or electrical equipment related to a building or
structure shall be visible from a public right-of-way. Wherever feasible,
the use of exterior mechanical systems should be minimized.
§ 175-217 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-219
168:622
H. All land development within a Town Center District shall provide
sidewalks within the front yard setback. The minimum width of all
sidewalks within the front yard setback shall be five feet unless
otherwise specified by the Township. Sidewalks shall be located to
optimize the amount of contiguous area available for landscaping
within the front yard. When practical, all new sidewalks shall directly
connect to existing sidewalks situated on adjoining lots. See also
§ 175-154, Sidewalks. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
I. Off-street parking.
(1) To the greatest extent possible, off-street parking areas shall be
designed to reduce negative visual effects of extensive paved areas
and contain defined landscaped pedestrian walkways. Parking
areas shall be constructed within centralized location(s) accessible
to multiple land uses. Parking areas on multiple lots shall be
interconnected to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic
congestion and the number of curb cuts along public streets. If said
layout can be demonstrated not to be physically feasible, then said
parking shall be located to the rear or side of the lot's structures.
(2) No single parking lot area shall exceed 40% of the overall lot.
(3) All parking areas shall be landscaped as per Township standards.
(4) One landscape island measuring at a minimum of 160 square feet
in area shall be constructed for every 10 parking spaces. The island
shall contain a minimum of one deciduous tree that has a minimum
caliper size of three inches and ground cover planting covering
50% of the island's area.
(5) Parking lots shall be located a minimum of five feet from any lot
line.
(6) Lighting for vehicular and pedestrian safety shall be provided in
accordance with Township specifications. Streetlighting shall not
exceed 24 feet in height. Pedestrian lighting shall not exceed 16
feet in height.
J. Upon review of a proposed land development plan, the Township may
permit a developer to exceed the maximum building coverage
applicable to this district, if the developer provides for enhanced
pedestrian spaces and amenities within a lot's setback area. Enhanced
pedestrian spaces and amenities may consist of a combination of
features, such as plaza, courtyards, outdoor seating, widened
sidewalks/pathways, increased landscape treatments, street furniture
or other public space amenities.
K. All service and loading areas shall be located in the rear yard of a lot.
The service and loading area of all nonresidential developments shall be
screened by an eight-foot high hedge, earth berm, masonry wall or
fence with a minimum opacity of 80%.
§ 175-219 WATER § 175-219
168:623

ARTICLE XXI
C-3 Regional Commerce District
§ 175-220. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to accommodate larger-scale nonresidential
facilities, generally located in high-volume traffic corridors, and where such
uses are primarily retail, office, research and development, and limited
industrial in nature and geared to the needs of both the community and the
region.
§ 175-221. Authorized uses.
In the C-3 Regional Commerce District, the following principal uses are
authorized:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Any other permitted use specifically listed in the C-2 District
business services.
(2) Clinic.
(3) Communication antenna.
(4) Conference and training center.
(5) Commercial recreation.
(6) Drive-in facilities.
(7) Essential services.
(8) Forestry.
(9) Motels/hotels.
(10) Offices, business and professional.
(11) Planned shopping center.
(12) Public utilities, except buildings.
(13) Research and development, including pilot manufacturing.
(14) Restaurants.
(15) Wholesale sales in conjunction with retail business.
B. Uses by special exception.
(1) Billboards.
(2) Comparable uses not specifically listed.
§ 175-220 WATER § 175-221
168:625
§ 175-222. Area and bulk regulations.
In the C-3 Regional Commerce District all uses shall be subject to the
following regulations, except as they may be modified by the express
standards and criteria for the specific conditional uses and uses by special
exception contained in Article XI.
(3) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction trailer or
temporary dwelling.
(4) Warehousing and distribution.
C. Conditional uses. [Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
(1) Oil and gas well site development, subject to § 175-155.2.
(2) Natural gas compressor station, subject to § 175-155.3.
(3) Natural gas processing plant, subject to § 175-155.3.
(4) Large land development. [Added 7-29-2015 by Ord. No. 128]
A. Minimum lot size: one acre (43,560 square feet).
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
D. Minimum front yard: 85 feet from front lot line plus one foot for each
building foot over 36 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Adjoining AG or R District: 50 feet.
(2) All others: 20 feet each side.
G. Minimum distance between buildings: 20 feet (where there is more
than one building on a lot).
H. Special yard requirements: See § 175-142.
I. Permitted projections into required yards: See § 175-143.
J. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: 50 feet or four stories.
(2) All accessory structures: 20 feet or one story.
K. Height exceptions: See § 175-144.
§ 175-221 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-223
168:626
§ 175-223. Parking and loading.
See Article XIII.
§ 175-224. Signs.
See Article XIV.
§ 175-225. Performance standards.
See § 175-139.
§ 175-226. Storage.
See § 175-149.
§ 175-227. Screening and landscaping.
See § 175-140.
§ 175-228. Vehicular access.
See § 175-150.
§ 175-229. Steep slope controls.
See § 175-141.
§ 175-230. Design standards.
A. Nonresidential uses contained in one structure shall not exceed five
individual uses.
B. For nonresidential development, no curb cuts along a public right-ofway
shall be permitted within 150 feet of another curb cut or driveway
entry. For curb cuts located less than such established minimum, a
developer shall either:
(1) Prepare a legal agreement specifying the establishment and use of
a shared driveway; shared driveway entrances and access drives
are encouraged; or
(2) Obtain a modification from the Township Planning Commission and
Board of Supervisors. The process for such modification shall be in
accordance with Article XVII, Administration and Enforcement.
C. All buildings in the Regional Commerce District shall provide
prominent and highly visible street-level doorway entrances along the
front or side of the building which faces a public street.
D. Awnings, sunscreens or other similar architectural treatments shall be
permitted on the front facade of all nonresidential buildings. Such
§ 175-223 WATER § 175-230
168:627
treatments shall be permitted to project into required front and side
yards no more than three feet.
E. All fire escapes or similar life safety features shall be located on the side
or rear facade of a building or structure.
F. No mechanical or electrical equipment related to a building or
structure shall be visible from a public right-of-way. Wherever feasible,
the use of exterior mechanical systems should be minimized.
G. All land development within a Regional Commerce District shall provide
sidewalks within the front yard of a lot and on a lot in order that a
continuous internal sidewalk shall be provided from the public sidewalk
along the street to the principal building entrance of any use. The
minimum width of all sidewalks within the front yard setback shall be
six feet. All other sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet. Sidewalks
shall be located to optimize the amount of contiguous area available for
landscaping on a lot. When practical, all new sidewalks shall directly
connect to existing sidewalks situated on adjoining lots. See also
§ 175-154, Sidewalks. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
H. Off-street parking.
(1) To the greatest extent possible, off-street parking areas shall be
designed to reduce negative visual effects of extensive paved areas
and contain defined landscaped pedestrian walkways. Parking
areas shall be constructed within centralized location(s) accessible
to multiple land uses. Parking areas on multiple lots shall be
interconnected to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic
congestion and the number of curb cuts along public streets. If said
layout can be demonstrated not to be physically feasible, then said
parking shall be located to the rear or side of the lot's structures.
(2) No single parking lot area shall exceed 40% of the overall lot.
(3) All parking areas shall be landscaped as per Township standards.
(4) One landscape island measuring at a minimum of 150 square feet
in area shall be constructed for every 10 parking spaces. The island
shall contain a minimum of one deciduous tree that has a minimum
caliper size of three inches and ground cover planting covering
50% of the island's area.
(5) Parking lots shall be located a minimum of five feet from any lot
line.
(6) Lighting for vehicular and pedestrian safety shall be provided in
accordance with Township specifications. Streetlighting shall not
exceed 24 feet in height. Pedestrian lighting shall not exceed 16
feet in height.
I. Upon review of a proposed land development plan, the Township may
permit a developer to exceed the maximum building coverage
§ 175-230 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-230
168:628
applicable to this district, if the developer demonstrates the
incorporation of enhanced pedestrian spaces and amenities within the
setback area. Enhanced pedestrian spaces and amenities may consist of
a combination of features, such as plaza, courtyards, outdoor seating,
widened sidewalks/pathways, landscaping, street furniture or other
public space amenities.
J. All service and loading areas shall be located in the rear yard of a lot.
The service and loading area of all nonresidential developments shall be
screened by an eight-foot high hedge, earth berm, masonry wall or
fence with a minimum opacity of 80%.
§ 175-230 WATER § 175-230
168:629

ARTICLE XXII
Airport District Overlay
[Added 9-28-2011 by Ord. No. 122]
§ 175-231. Purpose. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
The purpose of this article is to create an Airport District Overlay that
considers safety issues around the Pittsburgh-Butler Regional Airport,
regulates and restricts the heights of constructed structures and objects
of natural growth, creates appropriate zones, establishing the boundaries
thereof and providing for changes in restrictions and boundaries of such
zones, creates the permitting process for use within said zones and provides
for enforcement, assessment of violation penalties, an appeals process, and
judicial review.
§ 175-232. Relation to other zone districts.
The Airport District Overlay shall not modify the boundaries of any
underlying zoning district. Where identified, the Airport District Overlay
shall impose certain requirements on land use and construction in addition
to those contained in the underlying zoning district.
§ 175-233. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meaning given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
AIRPORT ELEVATION — The highest point of an airport's usable landing
area measured in feet above sea level. The airport elevation for the
Pittsburgh-Butler Regional Airport is 1,248.[Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord.
No. 133]
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or object, natural or man-made, or use
of land which obstructs the airspace required for flight of aircraft in landing,
or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous as defined in 14 CFR
Part 77 and 74 Pa. C.S.A. § 5102.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — Any area of land or water upon which an airport
hazard might be established if not prevented as provided for in this article
and the Act 164 of 1984 (Pennsylvania laws relating to aviation).178
APPROACH SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface longitudinally
centered on the extended runway center line and extending outward and
upward from each end of the primary surface. An approach surface is
applied to each of the runways based on the planned approach. The inner
edge of the approach surface is the same width as the primary surface
and expands uniformly depending on the planned approach. The approach
surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,179 is derived from the approach surface.
178. Editor's Note: See 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.
179. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 175-231 WATER § 175-233
168:631
CONICAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface extending outward
and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20
feet horizontally to one foot vertically for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
The conical surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,180 is based on the conical
surface.
DEPARTMENT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration of the United States Department of
Transportation.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this article and shown on the Zoning Map,181 the datum shall be
mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary plane 150 feet above
the established airport elevation that is constructed by swinging arcs of
various radii from the center of the end of the primary surface and then
connecting the adjacent arc by tangent lines. The radius of each arc is based
on the planned approach. The horizontal surface, as shown on Figure 1,182
is derived from the horizontal surface.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of greater than 12,500
pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any preexisting structure, object of natural
growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this
article or an amendment thereto.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a
straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved
or planned.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth, or other object, including a
mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth by this article.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having a existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system
(ILS) or a precisions approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for
which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an
approved airport layout plan or any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface longitudinally
centered on the runway, extending 200 feet beyond the end of paved
runways or ending at each end of turf runways. The elevation of any point
on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on
180. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Township offices.
181. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
182. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 175-233 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-233
168:632
the runway center line. The primary surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,183
is derived from the primary surface.
RUNWAY — A defined area of an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE — An object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by man, including but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes,
smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface that extends
outward and upward from the edge of the primary surface to the horizontal
surface at a slope of seven feet horizontally to one foot vertically (7:1).
The transitional surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,184 is derived from the
transitional surface.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and intended to be
used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight
or less.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures.
§ 175-234. Establishment of airport zones. [Amended 3-20-2019 by
Ord. No. 133]
There are hereby created and established certain zones within the Airport
District Overlay Ordinance, defined in § 175-233 and depicted on Figure
1185 and illustrated on the Pittsburgh-Butler Regional Airport Hazard Area
Map, hereby adopted as part of this article, which include:
§ 175-235. Permit applications; exceptions.
A. Approach Surface Zone.
B. Conical Surface Zone.
C. Horizontal Surface Zone.
D. Primary Surface Zone.
E. Transitional Surface Zone.
A. As regulated by Act 164 and defined by 14 Code of Federal Regulations
Part 77.13 (a) (as amended or replaced), any person who plans to erect
a new structure, to add to an existing structure, or to erect and
maintain any object (natural or man-made), that exceeds 200 feet above
ground level in the vicinity of the airport, shall first notify the
Department's Bureau of Aviation (BOA) by submitting PennDOT Form
183. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Township offices.
184. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Township offices.
185. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 175-233 WATER § 175-235
168:633
§ 175-236. Variance.
AV-57 to obtain an obstruction review of the proposal at least 30 days
prior to commencement thereof. The Department's BOA response must
be included with this permit application for it to be considered
complete. If the Department's BOA returns a determination of no
penetration of airspace, the permit it requests should be considered
in compliance with the intent of this Overlay Ordinance. If the
Department's BOA returns a determination of a penetration of airspace,
the permit shall be denied, and the project sponsor may seek a variance
from such regulation as outlined in § 175-236.
B. No permit is required to make maintenance repairs to or to replace
existing structures which do not enlarge or increase the height of an
existing structure.
A. Any request for a variance shall include documentation in compliance
with 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 77 Subpart B (FA Form 7460-1
as amended or replaced). Determinations of whether to grant a
variance will depend on the determinations made by the FAA and the
Department's BOA as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of
air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable air space.
In particular, the request for a variance shall consider which of the
following categories the FAA has placed the proposed construction in:
(1) No objection: The subject construction is determined not to exceed
obstruction standards and marking/lighting is not required to
mitigate potential hazards. Under this determination, a variance
shall be granted.
(2) Conditional determination: The proposed construction/alteration is
determined to create some level of encroachment into an airport
hazard area which can be effectively mitigated. Under this
determination, a variance shall be granted contingent upon
implementation of mitigating measures as described in § 175-239,
Obstruction marking and lighting.
(3) Objectionable: The proposed construction/alteration is determined
to be a hazard and is thus objectionable. A variance shall be denied,
and the reasons for this determination shall be outlined to the
applicant.
B. Such requests for variances shall be granted where it is duly found that
a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in
unnecessary hardship and that relief granted will not be contrary to the
public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do
substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the intent of this
article.
§ 175-235 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-237
168:634
§ 175-237. Use restrictions. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use shall be made
of land or water within the Airport District Overlay in such a manner
as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communications between the airport and aircrafts, make it difficult for
pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, impair visibility in
the vicinity of the airport, create bird stroke hazards or otherwise endanger
or interfere with the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft utilizing the
Pittsburgh-Butler Regional Airport.
§ 175-238. Preexisting nonconforming uses.
The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require
the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or
tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this
article, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming
use. No nonconforming use shall be structurally altered or permitted to
grow higher, so as to increase the nonconformity, and a nonconforming use,
once substantially abated (subject to the underlying ordinance) may only be
reestablished consistent with the provisions herein.
§ 175-239. Obstruction marking and lighting.
Any permit or variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this article
may be conditioned according to the process described in § 175-236 to
require the owner of the structure or object of natural growth in question to
permit the Township, at its own expense, or require the person requesting
the permit or variance, to install, operate, and maintain such marking or
lighting as deemed necessary to assure both ground and air safety.
§ 175-240. Violations and penalties.
In the event the Township identifies any person, partnership or corporation
who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of
this article, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings against the
offending person, partnership or corporation as listed in § 175-184 of the
Township Code.
§ 175-241. Appeals.
Any person or Township official aggrieved or affected by any provision of
this chapter, or by any decision of the Zoning Officer, may appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board by filing a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof in accordance with the provisions of § 175-174 of the Township
Code.
§ 175-237 WATER § 175-242
168:635
§ 175-242. Conflict with other provisions.
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this article and any other regulation applicable to the same
area, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.
§ 175-242 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-242
168:636
ARTICLE XXIII
R-AG Residential Agriculture District
[Added 11-21-2012 by Ord. No. 125]
§ 175-243. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide for agricultural uses, low-density
residential development and planned higher density development in areas
where the general character is defined by rural areas which are in close
proximity to major roads, infrastructure and areas near existing
concentrated residential development and to provide for compatible public,
semipublic and accessory uses as conditional uses or uses by special
exception.
§ 175-244. Authorized uses.
In the R-AG Residential Agriculture District, the following uses are
authorized:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Farms.
(b) Greenhouse or tree nursery.
(c) Single-family dwellings.
(d) Two-family dwelling.
(e) Government buildings.
(f) Municipal firehouses.
(g) Schools.
(h) Public utilities, except buildings.
(i) Municipal recreation.
(j) Oil and gas well site development, subject to § 175-155.2.
[Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127]
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Signs, subject to Article XIV.
(b) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article XIII.
(c) Private garages and storage sheds.
(d) Private residential swimming pools or tennis courts, subject to
§ 175-142C.
§ 175-243 WATER § 175-244
168:637
(e) Fences.
(f) Gardening as an avocation.
(g) Keeping of domestic pets.
(h) Private stables or hobby farms, subject to § 175-146.
(i) Sale of farm products, subject to § 175-145C.
(j) Construction trailer or temporary dwelling, subject to
§ 175-147.
(k) Oil and gas well site development, subject to § 175-155.2.
[Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 127186]
(l) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Planned residential development, subject to Article X.
(b) Mobile home parks, subject to § 175-120.
(c) Golf courses and country clubs, subject to § 175-110.
(d) Public recreation, subject to § 175-126.
(e) Noncommercial recreation, subject to § 175-126.
(f) Public utility buildings, subject to § 175-127.
(g) Lakes, ponds and water impoundments, subject to § 175-117.
C. Uses by special exception.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Kennels and veterinary clinics, subject to § 175-116.
(b) Horse boarding and riding academies, subject to § 175-114.
(c) Conversion apartments, subject to § 175-106.
(d) Places of worship, subject to § 175-101.
(e) Cemeteries, subject to § 175-100.
(f) Day-care center or nursery school in a place of worship or
school, subject to § 175-107.
186. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection A(2)(k) as Subsection
A(2)(1).
§ 175-244 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-244
168:638
§ 175-245. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 7-29-2015 by Ord.
No. 128; 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 133]
In the R-AG Residential Agriculture District, all uses shall be subject to
the following regulations, except as they may be modified by Article X
governing planned residential development or by the express standards
and criteria for the specific conditional uses or uses by special exception
contained in Article XI.
(g) Nursing home, subject to § 175-102.
(h) Personal care boarding home, subject to § 175-111.
(i) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction trailer
or temporary dwelling subject to § 175-129.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Kennels and veterinary clinics, subject to § 175-116.
(b) Horse boarding and riding academies, subject to § 175-114.
(c) Home occupations, subject to § 175-113.
(d) Private use helipad, subject to § 175-125.
A. Minimum lot size:
(1) Farms: 20 acres.
(2) Single-family dwellings:
(a) On lots with both public water and public sewage: threequarters
(3/4) of an acre (32,670 square feet).
(b) On lots without public water or public sewage: one acre
(43,560 square feet).
(3) Two-family dwellings:
(a) On lots with both public water and public sewage: one and onehalf
(1.5) acres (65,340 square feet).
(b) On lots without public water or public sewage: two acres
(87,120 square feet).
(4) Schools: five acres.
(5) All other uses: one acre.
B. Minimum lot width:
(1) Farms: 200 feet.
(2) Single-family dwellings: 125 feet.
§ 175-244 WATER § 175-245
168:639
§ 175-246. Parking and loading.
See Article XIII.
§ 175-247. Signs.
See Article XIV.
§ 175-248. Screening and landscaping.
See § 175-140.
§ 175-249. Steep slope controls.
See § 175-141.
(3) Two-family dwellings: 175 feet.
(4) All other uses: 150 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage:
(1) Farms: 5%.
(2) All others: 20%.
D. Minimum front yard: 50 feet from front lot line or 75 feet from street
center line, whichever is greater.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) Principal structures: 75 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: 10 feet.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Dwellings: 25 feet each side.
(2) Accessory structures: 10 feet each side.
G. Special yard requirements: See § 175-142.
H. Permitted projections into required yards: See § 175-143.
I. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: 35 feet and 2 1/2 stories.
(2) All accessory structures.
(a) Less than two acres: 15 feet.
(b) Two or more acres: 25 feet.
J. Height exceptions: See § 175-144.
§ 175-245 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-249
168:640
ARTICLE XXIV
RT-228 Route 228 Corridor Commercial and Mixed Use Overlay
District
[Added 11-16-2016 by Ord. No. 130]
§ 175-250. Purpose.
The purposes of this district are to:
§ 175-251. Location.
The Route 228 Corridor Overlay applies to all properties within the corridor,
generally abutting the existing and/or proposed realigned Route 228 rightof-
way, as indicated on the revised Middlesex Township Official Zoning Map,
and the Route 228 Corridor Overlay District Sheet.187
§ 175-252. Applicability.
The requirements of the Route 228 Corridor Overlay District are
complementary and in addition to any other applicable requirements of the
existing base zoning districts and any other applicable zoning regulations.
Where there is a conflict between the Route 228 Corridor Overlay District
and any other applicable zoning requirement of the existing base zoning
districts, the Route 228 Corridor Overlay District shall supersede the
conflicting requirement to the extent of the conflicting requirement only,
except that the Route 228 Corridor Overlay District shall completely
preempt any base zoning district regulations with respect to billboards.
A. Allow for new commercial and office development while also
accommodating the preservation of farm land, open space, and rural
character;
B. Provide a gradation of land use intensity and density from the rural
nature of the Township to the more suburbanized Town Center zoning
area of the Township within the Route 228 Corridor;
C. Create a desirable "front door" gateway for the Township;
D. Accommodate land uses that primarily provide for services and
amenities utilized by the local community;
E. Introduce commercial and other uses into an area of the Township
where these uses were previously not permitted. The introduction of
these uses shall be sensitive to the existing land use context and
landscape. The uses and development of land along this corridor
overlay is intended to be of lesser density than that permitted in the
existing C-2 Highway Commercial or C-3 Regional Commerce Zoning
Districts.
187. Editor's Note: Said map and sheet are on file in the Township offices.
§ 175-250 WATER § 175-253
168:641
§ 175-253. Authorized uses.
§ 175-254. Additional conditional use regulations.
In addition to any applicable conditional use requirements of this article,
the following additional requirements shall be met for the following
conditional uses in the Route 228 Corridor Overlay District:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Church.
(2) Dwelling, single-family.
(3) School.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Business service.
(2) Grocery store.
(3) Motel/hotel.
(4) Multifamily residential.
(5) Nursing homes.
(6) Offices, business and professional.
(7) Restaurants.
(8) Retail store.
(9) Townhouses, subject to § 175-255A(3). [Amended 8-21-2019 by
Ord. No. 134]
(10) Planned residential development.
(11) Planned shopping center, subject to § 175-124. [Added 8-21-2019
by Ord. No. 134]
A. All conditional uses must meet the following requirements:
(1) The maximum building footprint shall be 40,000 square feet,
except as otherwise may be specifically provided for by the
requirements of this Overlay District.
(2) The development of any proposed conditional use within 1,000 feet
of the western Township boundary on the southern side of Route
228 shall construct a Township gateway sign. The sign shall meet
the following requirements:
(a) A monument sign with exterior lighting, with a minimum sign
area of 4 feet by 6 feet.
§ 175-253 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-254
168:642
§ 175-255. Area and bulk regulations.
(b) Contain the Township logo, as provided by the Township.
(c) Include only the words "Welcome to Middlesex Township."
(3) Grocery store, retail, and office uses.
(a) In addition to any other required setback or buffering, grocery
store, retail, and office uses may exceed the maximum building
footprint of 40,000 square feet up to a maximum building
footprint of up to 80,000 square feet, provided that the
building shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any
boundary line of any adjacent property within the following
zoning districts: R-1, R-2, PRD, AG-A, and R-AG, whether the
abutting property is within or outside of the Overlay District.
(b) Grocery store, retail and office uses proposed as part of a
multi-parcel, master-planned development that includes two or
more buildings and two or more land uses, may have a building
footprint larger than 80,000 square feet, provided that the
building shall be set back at least 200 feet from any boundary
line of any adjacent property within the following zoning
districts: R-1, R-2, PRD, AG-A, and R-AG, whether the abutting
property is within or outside of the Overlay District.
(4) Motel/hotels.
(a) Only permitted when proposed as part of a multi-parcel,
master-planned development that includes two or more
buildings and two or more land uses where the proposed
access point(s) to Route 228 is shared by multiple tenants and/
or land uses.
(5) Nursing homes.
(a) See § 175-102.
(6) Restaurants.
(a) Only permitted when proposed as part of a multi-use, masterplanned
large land development where the proposed access
point(s) to Route 228 is shared by multiple tenants and/or land
uses.
A. Residential uses.
(1) Setbacks, lot coverage, and other area and bulk regulations for
residential uses in a planned residential development shall be those
as required by the applicable base zoning district.
(2) Residential uses are permitted only where nonresidential
development is existing or proposed between the residential
§ 175-254 WATER § 175-255
168:643
development and the Route 228 right-of-way; residential uses may
not be located immediately adjacent to Route 228. Alternatively, all
residential uses must be set back from the Route 228 right-of-way
by 300 feet. [Amended 8-21-2019 by Ord. No. 134]
(3) Setbacks, lot coverage, area and bulk regulations and other
requirements for townhouses in this zoning district shall be as
follows: [Added 8-21-2019 by Ord. No. 134]
(a) Minimum lot size:
[1] Two (2) units: 6,000 square feet.
[2] Three (3) units: 8,000 square feet.
[3] Four (4) units: 10,000 square feet.
[4] Five (5) units: 12,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet.
(c) Minimum rear yard setback: 10 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet.
(e) Maximum height:
[1] All principal structures: 36 feet.
(f) Maximum permitted density for townhouses is four (4)
dwelling units per acre.
(4) No accessory structures are permitted. [Added 8-21-2019 by
Ord. No. 134]
(5) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided within the front yard
setback, and side yard setback on corner lots, on both sides of
public or private roads. The minimum width of all sidewalks shall
be four (4) feet. When practical, all new sidewalks shall directly
connect to existing sidewalks situated on adjoining lots. [Added
8-21-2019 by Ord. No. 134]
B. Nonresidential uses.
(1) Height.
(a) Principal structure maximum height: 60 feet.
(b) Accessory structure maximum height: 40 feet.
(2) Setbacks.
(a) Front yard setback: setback from Route 228 right-of-way:
minimum of 75 feet from the edge of the right-of-way or 100
feet from the center line of Route 228, whichever is greater.
§ 175-255 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-255
168:644
However, the front yard setback may be reduced to no less
than 50 feet from the edge of the right-of-way, provided that
the following buffering is provided between the Route 228
right-of-way and any parking lot, at a minimum:
[1] Street trees, minimum of two-inch caliper in size at the
time of planting, planted 30 feet on center.
[2] Continuous row of evergreen shrubs, a minimum of three
feet in height at the time of planting.
(b) Side yard setback: 20 feet.
(c) Rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(d) Where a commercial use abuts a residential or agricultural
use, the following side and rear yard setbacks shall apply:
[1] Side yard setback: 30 feet.
[2] Rear yard setback: 75 feet.
(3) Lot coverage:
(a) Maximum: 70% of lot area with impervious surface and
building.
(4) Landscaping shall be required pursuant to the requirements of
§ 175-140. In addition to any other requirements of this section, the
following landscape buffers shall apply:
(a) Bufferyard A shall be provided along the side and rear
perimeter of any land development where such land
development abuts property that is within the AG-A Rural
Residential, R-2 Residential, or R-AG Residential Agricultural
PRD and R-1 Suburban Residential Zoning Districts.
(b) Bufferyard B shall be provided where any proposed residential
use abuts an existing or proposed nonresidential use.
(c) Bufferyard C shall be provided along the side and rear
perimeter of any land development where such land
development abuts property that is within the Town Center or
C-2 Highway Commercial Zoning Districts.
(5) Buildings.
(a) Front building facade materials shall be brick, stone, or similar
material from the ground level to the top of the building
structure.
(b) The ground-level front facade and the facade of any building
facing a public, private or internal street shall have windows
and/or doors covering at least 50% of the horizontal length of
§ 175-255 WATER § 175-255
168:645
§ 175-256. Parking and loading.
the facade, between the height of three feet and eight feet
above the walkway or grade, allowing views into and out of
the interior. Product display windows may be used to meet the
transparency requirement.
[1] The percentage of required window and door openings,
above, allowing interior views, may be reduced by using
false or opaque window features, provided that they match
the form of the required window and door openings and
comprise no more than half of the required 50% coverage
requirement and that the openings appear as an integral
part of the facade.
[2] No more than two sides of any one building shall be
subject to the transparency requirements.
(c) All buildings shall provide prominent and highly visible streetlevel
doorway entrances along the front or side of the building
which faces a public street.
(d) No mechanical or electrical equipment related to a building or
structure shall be visible from a public right-of-way. Wherever
feasible, the use of exterior mechanical systems should be
minimized.
(e) Buildings included in proposed land development within the
Overlay District shall have a common architectural theme that
includes colors, materials, and architectural design that are
common among buildings within the Overlay District.
A. Number of spaced required: See Article XIII.
(1) To the greatest extent possible, off-street parking areas shall be
designed to reduce negative visual effects of extensive paved areas
and contain defined landscaped pedestrian walkways. Parking
areas shall be constructed within centralized locations accessible
to multiple land uses. Parking areas on multiple lots shall be
interconnected to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic
congestion and the number of curb cuts along public streets. If said
layout can be demonstrated not to be physically feasible, then said
parking shall be located to the rear or side of the lot's structures.
(2) No single parking lot area shall exceed 40% of the overall lot.
(3) All parking areas shall be landscaped as per Township standards.
(4) One landscape island measuring at a minimum of 160 square feet
in area shall be constructed for every 10 parking spaces. The island
shall contain a minimum of one deciduous tree that has a minimum
§ 175-255 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-256
168:646
§ 175-257. Lighting.
§ 175-258. Signs.
See Article XIV. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any previous
ordinance, billboards are not permitted in the Route 228 Corridor Overlay
District, including any properties within the Overlay District that are also
within the C-2 base zoning district.
§ 175-259. Steep slope controls.
See § 171-141.
§ 175-260. Storage.
See § 175-149.
§ 175-261. Access and circulation.
caliper size of three inches and ground cover planting covering
50% of the island's area.
(5) Parking lots shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any lot line
of an adjacent property or adjacent land development. This
requirement shall not apply where multiple parking lots and
properties are included within one land development.
(6) All service and loading areas shall be located in the rear yard of a
lot. The service and loading area of all nonresidential developments
shall be screened by an eight-foot-high hedge, earth berm, masonry
wall or fence with a minimum opacity of 80%.
A. Lighting along streets and within parking lots shall not exceed 24 feet
in height. Pedestrian lighting in public areas and along sidewalks shall
not exceed 16 feet in height.
B. All parking lot light fixtures shall be sharp cutoff fixtures such that the
source of illumination is not visible.
C. All light fixtures installed within 50 feet of an adjacent land
development or property not within the same land development where
the fixture is located must be shielded to direct the illumination from
the fixture away from the adjacent land development or property.
A. Vehicular access.
(1) Access to Route 228: Access shall be designed to minimize the
number of points of access to arterial and collector streets. Any site
which contains two or more buildings shall be designed to
encourage the use of common driveways to control access to Route
228.
§ 175-256 WATER § 175-261
168:647
§ 175-262. Screening and landscaping.
See § 175-140.
(2) All land developments shall have no more than one point of access
for every 500 feet of frontage on Route 228.
(3) Ingress, egress and internal traffic circulation on the site shall be
designed to minimize congestion, to ensure safety and to provide
adequate accessibility to all buildings for firefighting equipment
and emergency vehicles.
B. Pedestrian circulation.
(1) Sidewalks are required to be constructed on local roadways and
access drives, not within or adjacent to the Route 228 right-of-way.
(2) Sidewalks shall directly connect to existing sidewalks situated on
adjoining lots.
C. Connectivity.
(1) All land developments shall provide for vehicular and pedestrian
access between the proposed development and any adjacent
existing development. Where a proposed land development is
adjacent to undeveloped land, the proposed land development shall
accommodate future pedestrian and vehicular connections to such
adjacent undeveloped land by accommodating such access within
the overall sight layout and reservation of recorded construction
and access easements to facilitate construction of the future
connection.
§ 175-261 MIDDLESEX CODE § 175-262
168:648
Appendix
Chapter A177
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ 175-262 WATER § 175-262
168:649

ARTICLE I
Agreement With North Pittsburgh Telephone Company
[Adopted 1-16-2008 by Ord. No. 115188]
§ A177-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, each of the following terms shall have
the meaning ascribed below. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense include the plural and singular number and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The present governing body of the Township
or any future board constituting the legislative body of the Township.
CABLE SERVICE — The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service and subscriber interaction, if
any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other
programming service.
CABLE SYSTEM — A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment
that is designed to provide cable service which includes, among other
things, video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers
within the Township, but such term does not include: 1) a facility that
serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television
broadcast stations; 2) a facility that serves subscribers without using any
public rights-of-way; 3) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in
whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act,
except that such facility shall be considered a cable system [other than
for purposes of Section 621(c) of the Cable Act] to the extent such facility
is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers,
unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand
services; 4) an open video system that complies with federal laws; or 5) any
facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility
system. The foregoing definition of cable system shall not be deemed to
circumscribe or limit the valid authority of the Township to regulate or
franchise the activities of any other communications system or provider of
communications services as permitted by law.
GRANTEE — The person, firm or corporation to whom or to which a
franchise under this ordinance is granted by the Board of Supervisors and
the lawful successor and assignee of such person, firm or corporation.
GROSS REVENUES — All revenue derived directly or indirectly by the
grantee or by any affiliate that is a cable operator from the operation of the
grantee's cable television system to provide cable services. Gross revenues
shall include, but are not limited to, the following: basic service fees;
fee(s) charged to subscribers for any type of cable service in addition to
188. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. A177, Cable Television
Franchise, adopted 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 98, and named North Pittsburgh Telephone
Company of Gibsonia, Pennsylvania, as the grantee of this franchise.
§ A177-1 WATER § A177-1
168:651
basic service; fee(s) charged to subscribers for any optional, premium, perchannel
or per-program cable services; charge(s) for installation, additional
outlet(s), relocation, disconnection, reconnection and changes in service;
fee(s) for leasing of channels; fee(s) for video-on-demand; charge(s) for
rental of any and all cable service equipment, including, but not limited to,
converters and remote controls; revenues based on the sale or lease of cable
system or fiber capacity for cable services; revenues from the insertion of
local commercial advertising availabilities; revenues from home shopping
channels sales generated in the franchise area; Internet or cable modem
service fees to the extent such services may be characterized as a cable
service under applicable law; sales of program guides; fee(s) for any and all
music services; late payment fees; revenue from data transmissions (to the
extent such transmissions are considered cable services under applicable
law); and revenue from interactive services (to the extent that such services
are considered cable services under applicable law). Gross revenues shall
not include bad debts or any taxes on services furnished by the franchise
and imposed directly on any subscriber or user by the Township or other
state or federal governmental unit, nor shall it include amounts collected
from subscribers for support of public, educational and governmental
access or for support of institutional networks as set forth in this ordinance.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
SUBSCRIBER — An authorized recipient lawfully receiving cable service.
TOWNSHIP — Middlesex Township, Butler County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A professional engineer, duly registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, employed by the Township or engaged as a
consultant thereto.
TOWNSHIP IMPROVEMENT DESIGN STANDARDS — The officially
adopted Improvement Design Standards Ordinance of the Township and all
subsequent amendments thereto.189
§ A177-2. Grant of franchise.
A. In consideration of the within undertakings by the grantee, the
Township agrees that the grantee shall have, and hereby confirms and
grants unto the grantee, the right, license and privilege to construct
and reconstruct, to install, maintain, repair, replace and remove, and
solicit and sell customers, subscribers, users and advertisements for,
and otherwise to own, promote and operate, a cable system with the
Township.
B. The right, license and privileges hereby granted shall not be exclusive,
and the Township reserves the right to grant similar rights, licenses and
privileges to any person at any time.
189. Editor's Note: Editor's Note: See Ch. 101, Improvement Design Standards.
§ A177-1 MIDDLESEX CODE § A177-2
168:652
§ A177-3. Construction and maintenance activities.
In cases where existing poles or other structures, conduits or other facilities
owned or leased by public utilities or other third parties having the right to
permit attachment thereto or location therein or thereon of the system by
the grantee are not available or are impractical for that purpose, then the
proposed means of attachment, construction or conduit shall be submitted
to the Board of Supervisors or designated person by drawings, plans and
explanatory addenda at least 30 days before such proposed attachment,
installation or construction and shall be subject to his approval in writing
before commencement of such attachment, installation or construction,
and such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, and the Board of
Supervisors or designated person shall advise the grantee of its
determination within 20 days after receipt of the grantee's proposed means
of attachment, construction or conduit.
§ A177-4. Conditions on use and occupancy of streets.
C. The right, license and privilege herein granted and confirmed shall be
deemed to include a continuing right to enter upon and to use and
occupy the surface, subsurface and space above any public streets,
lanes, alleys, paths, ways, bridges and viaducts within the Township
when and to the extent necessary to carry out the intent and purposes
of this ordinance, subject, however, to limitations and qualifications
herein contained.
D. In exercising the right, license and privilege granted and confirmed
hereby, the grantee shall be and remain subject to and shall comply
with all federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations applicable to
it in the conduct of the activities contemplated hereby.
A. Use. Pole attachments and the construction, installation, repair and
replacement of basic system hardware and the operation and removal
of the system and all parts thereof by the grantee within the Township
shall be conducted in such manner as to cause minimum interference
with the proper use of streets, lanes, alleys, bridges and viaducts and
other public places and to cause minimum interference with the rights
or reasonable convenience of the property owners, tenants or
occupants who adjoin any of said streets, lanes, alleys, bridges, viaducts
and other public places.
B. Restoration. In the event of any disturbance caused by the grantee's
activities hereunder to the pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other
surfacing as to which the Township is responsible, the grantee, at its
own cost and expense, shall replace and restore all such paving,
sidewalk, driveway or surface so disturbed in a good and workmanlike
manner and to as functionally sound a condition as before said activities
were commenced, and it shall be completed within 60 days of the
disturbance, or such longer period as may be approved by the Board of
Supervisors. All such replacement and restoration by the grantee shall
§ A177-2 WATER § A177-4
168:653
be installed in accordance with the Township Improvement Design
Standards and subject to inspection by the Township Engineer or other
designated person, and such approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
C. Relocation. In the event that, at any time during the existence of the
within right, license and privilege in the grantee, the Township elects to
alter or change the grade, alignment or paved width of any street, lane,
alley, bridge or viaduct or other public way, the grantee, upon notice by
the Township, at its own expense, shall remove and relocate any
affected part of the system within 30 days of the date of notice or such
reasonable extension thereof as may be granted, in writing, by the
Board of Supervisors.
D. Placement of fixtures. The grantee shall not place the system or any
part thereof where the same will interfere with any gas, electric,
telephone or telegraph line or fixture, water hydrant or main, nor in
such manner as would interfere with the usual travel on the streets,
lanes, alleys, bridges and viaducts and other public places of the
Township.
E. Temporary removal. Upon the request of any person, firm or
corporation holding a moving permit issued by the Township or other
governmental regulatory agency having jurisdiction of the matter, by
which permit any building or buildings, large pieces of equipment or
structural materials or the like are to be moved from place to place, the
grantee shall temporarily raise or lower its system as and to the extent
necessary to permit the moving of such buildings, equipment,
structural materials and the like, provided the expense of such
temporary raising or lowering of the system or any part thereof shall
have been paid or tendered by the person, firm or corporation
requesting the same. However, payment from the Township for
temporarily moving the cable system shall not be required. The grantee
shall be given not less than 10 days' advance notice to arrange for such
temporary changes to its system.
F. Protective barriers. Any opening or obstruction in the streets or other
public ways made by the grantee in the course of the installation,
operation, maintenance or removal of equipment, structures, facilities,
apparatus and appurtenances shall be guarded and protected at all
times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences or boarding, or as
otherwise directed by the Township, including but not limited to the
installation of steel plates to allow a public way to remain usable while
openings or obstructions exist.
G. Tree trimming. The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees which
are located on or which overhang streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the Township. All trimming shall be at the expense of the
grantee.
§ A177-4 MIDDLESEX CODE § A177-4
168:654
§ A177-5. Fees and reports.
H. Underground requirements. The grantee shall place its cables, wires or
other like facilities underground, as may be required by the provisions
of the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the ordinances of the
Township, as they may be amended, any pertinent subdivision
restrictions and the applicable section(s) of the officially adopted
electrical code of the Township, as revised. The Township acknowledges
that as of the effective date of this ordinance, the grantee's existing
cables, wires and other like facilities are in compliance with this
provision. For all new residential structures in which undergrounding is
required by the Township, the builder, subdivider or developer of such
structure, at his sole cost and expense, shall provide, in accordance
with grantee's current specifications, all conduits and trenches to the
structure's point of entry from the boundary of the development, and
provide for the backfill and restoration of trench areas.
I. Moving of system for traffic, safety or other utilities. The grantee shall,
at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the
same street or other streets or remove from the street any property of
the grantee when required by the Township by reason of traffic
conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street
construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of
sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, power lines, signal lines and tracks
and other types of improvements by the Township or public agencies.
J. Inspection. The Township shall have the right to inspect all pole
attachments, installation, construction, repair and replacement of basic
system in hardware, and the removal of the system or any part thereof
to insure compliance with Subsection A of this section.
A. In consideration of the right, license and privilege granted hereby and
in order to defray any costs and expenses of the Township in connection
with the execution, delivery, performance and administration of this
ordinance, the grantee shall pay to the Township, within 30 days after
the end of each calendar quarter, an amount equal to 5% of the gross
revenues of the grantee. The Township reserves the right to increase
the annual fee upon 90 days' written notice to the grantee. Any such
increase shall comply with all federal and state laws and all federal and
state regulations.
B. The Township and the grantee may subsequently agree that the fee be
paid on a prepaid or deferred basis. However, the sum so paid may not
exceed the amount, including the line value of money, which would have
lawfully been collected if such fees had been paid per annum. Should
the Township elect to be paid on a prepaid or deferred basis, such
election shall be made in writing and submitted to the grantee by
December 31 of the year preceding the year the election is to take
effect.
§ A177-4 WATER § A177-5
168:655
§ A177-6. Safety measures.
§ A177-7. Voluntary subscriptions.
All subscriptions for services under any agreement shall be on a voluntary
basis and may be terminated at any time by the customer.
§ A177-8. System services.
§ A177-9. Operation and maintenance.
The grantee shall make reasonable efforts to assess subscriber need and
viewing preferences. If any existing service becomes unavailable, the
grantee shall endeavor to provide substitute programming; grantee may
C. Not later than 60 days after the close of each fiscal quarter, the grantee
shall file with the Township a written report, certified by the grantee's
chief accounting officer, setting forth the amount of basic subscriber
service receipts and premium subscriber service receipts paid to the
grantee during such fiscal year, which amount equals the gross
revenues of the grantee.
D. The Township shall have the right to inspect and audit the grantee's
records from which the payments hereunder are computed and to
recompute the amount of such payments to correct errors in the
computation and reporting of same and to correct errors in the amount
due to the Township as disclosed by the audit.
A. Construction and maintenance of the system shall be in accordance
with the provisions of the officially adopted electrical code of the
Township and of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and such
other applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, County of
Butler, and regulations of the Township which may be lawfully in effect
from time to time.
B. All structures, lines, equipment and connections in, over, under and
upon the streets of the Township, wherever situated or located, shall at
all times be kept and maintained in a safe, suitable condition and in
good order and repair.
A. The grantee, at all times, shall provide subscriber service as and to the
extent required to be provided by applicable federal and state rules and
regulations from time to time in effect.
B. If the grantee operates a citizens awareness channel or similar
programming option, it shall post free of charge any notices properly
submitted by the Board of Supervisors.
C. Additional services may, at the sole discretion of the grantee, be
provided by the grantee, including services for which a per-program,
per-service or per-channel charge is made consistent with applicable
federal and state rules and regulations.
§ A177-5 MIDDLESEX CODE § A177-9
168:656
combine programming into composite channels to improve efficiency of
channel utilization or to attract a larger viewing audience.
§ A177-10. Service standards.
§ A177-11. Subscriber rates and charges.
A. The grantee will investigate and resolve all subscriber complaints
regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar
matters expeditiously and in accordance with the following procedure:
(1) The grantee shall have qualified personnel available during normal
working hours to investigate and resolve subscriber complaints.
(2) The grantee shall maintain a telephone answering service during
times other than normal business hours with a qualified technician
on call 24 hours a day to respond to emergencies.
(3) Upon notification of a service complaint, the grantee shall dispatch
a qualified employee to investigate the complaint and adjust, repair
or replace grantee equipment as necessary to resolve the
complaint. The grantee shall not be responsible for malfunctions of
any television receivers or other equipment owned or operated by
any subscriber.
(4) All complaints shall be investigated and resolved within 24 hours
after initial notification to the grantee (absent unusual
circumstances).
(5) The grantee shall maintain a service log in which an entry shall be
made of each complaint, the date of notification thereof, the nature
of the complaint and the means by which it was resolved. The
Township reserves the right to inspect the log at any time.
B. In the construction, maintenance and operation of the system, the
grantee shall, at a minimum, at all times, fully comply with technical
standards which have been or which hereafter may be adopted by the
Federal Communications Commission, including (without limitations), if
applicable, requirements relating to channel capacity, bandwidth and
periodic testing. Further, should any federal, state or local
governmental unit with jurisdiction establish technical standards that
exceed those of the Federal Communications Commission, the grantee
will comply therewith when and to the extent required by such
governmental unit, unless to require the grantee to do so would be held
invalid by the Federal Communications Commission or a court or
administrative tribunal of competent jurisdiction. The technical quality
of the service provided by the grantee shall be sufficient to provide
subscribers with uniformly high quality television reception. The
grantee shall maintain the system in good repair and working order at
all times.
§ A177-9 WATER § A177-11
168:657
§ A177-12. Discriminatory practices prohibited.
The grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service, service facilities, rules,
regulations, or in any other respect, make or grant unlawful undue
preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to any
unlawful prejudice or disadvantage, provided that nothing in this ordinance
shall be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of
charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within
such classification would be entitled. Connection and/or service charges
may be waived or modified during promotional campaigns of the grantee.
§ A177-13. Liability and indemnification.
A. Rates and charges for installation, monthly service fees, equipment
rental, additional outlets, moves, changes and any other rates charged
by the grantee to its subscribers and users shall be regulated according
to current and subsequent Federal Communications Commission rules
and regulations.
B. The grantee shall offer the services of the system within the Township
on terms and conditions which are uniform and nondiscriminatory.
C. The rates and charges for all system services (specifically including but
not limited to basic subscriber service and additional service provided
pursuant to § A177-8, or any connection, maintenance or similar
service) and equipment shall be subject to adjustment from time to
time, at the sole discretion of the grantee.
A. Indemnification.
(1) The grantee shall indemnify, defend, save and hold harmless the
Township, its officers, agents and employees from any and all
claims for injury, loss, liability, cost or expense arising in whole or
in part from, incident to or connected with any act or omission of
the grantee or its officers, agents or employees, arising out of or in
any way connected to, but not limited to, the construction,
installation, reconstruction, operation, maintenance or removal of
the cable system or any other equipment or facilities. The
obligation to indemnify, defend, save and hold the Township
harmless shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay
judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages, attorneys' fees, expert
fees, court costs and all other reasonable costs of such
indemnification.
(2) The Township shall not at any time be liable for any injury or
damage to persons or property from any cause whatsoever arising
from or in any way connected to the construction, installation,
reconstruction, operation, maintenance or removal of the cable
system or any other equipment or facilities by the grantee or its
employees, agents, representatives, contractors and
subcontractors.
§ A177-11 MIDDLESEX CODE § A177-13
168:658
§ A177-14. Effective date and term.
B. Insurance.
(1) The grantee shall maintain insurance throughout the term of this
franchise, with the Township as an additional insured, with an
insurance company which is authorized to conduct business in
Pennsylvania and which has an A.M. Best rating (or equivalent) no
less than "A," indemnifying the Township from and against any and
all claims for injury or damage to persons or property, both real and
personal, caused by the construction, installation, reconstruction,
operation, maintenance or removal of the cable system by grantee
or any of its contractors, subcontractors, agents or employees in
the following amounts:
(a) The amount of such insurance against liability for damage to
property shall be no less than $1,000,000 as to any one
occurrence.
(b) The amount of such insurance against liability for injury or
death to any person shall be no less than $1,000,000.
(c) The amount of such insurance for excess liability shall be
$5,000,000 in umbrella form.
(d) The amount of such insurance against all claims arising out of
the operation of motor vehicles and general tort or contract
liability shall be $1,000,000.
(e) The grantee shall maintain workers' compensation insurance
on all employees engaged in the installation or service of its
equipment.
(2) All insurance coverage shall be maintained throughout the period
of this franchise. All insurance policies shall contain a provision
that the Township will receive 30 days' written notice prior to any
changes or cancellation of the policy. All expenses incurred for said
insurance shall be at the sole expense of the grantee.
(3) A certificate evidencing the insurance coverage required herein
shall be provided by the grantee to the Township within 30 days of
the effective date of this franchise.
A. The right and privilege herein granted shall take effect and be in force
from and after February 1, 2008, and shall continue in force and effect
for a period of eight years from the effective date of this ordinance. At
the end of the initial term, the grantee may renew the franchise by
giving written notice to the Township not less than 90 days prior to the
expiration hereof. In determining whether to grant a renewal, the
Township shall consider those factors prescribed by applicable law and,
among other things: 1) whether the grantee has substantially complied
with the material terms of this franchise and with applicable law; 2) the
§ A177-13 WATER § A177-14
168:659
§ A177-15. Federal regulation.
In the event and to the extent that the terms and provisions hereof shall
be superseded and preempted by or become inconsistent with state law
or federal law (including rules and regulations promulgated by the Federal
Communications Commission), then and in each such event, it shall be the
right of each party hereto to take such action (including the execution
and delivery of written instruments and the adoption of ordinances and
resolutions) within 60 days after such event as shall be reasonably
necessary and may be reasonably requested to so amend or modify, in
writing, this franchise and to preserve the written contract for rights and
benefits of the grantee and fulfill the intent and purposes of this ordinance.
§ A177-16. Severability.
Subject to the provisions of § A177-12 hereof, if any section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance is for any reason
held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative tribunal of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.
§ A177-17. Interpretation.
Notwithstanding any provision of this ordinance to the contrary, the
Township agrees that in the event of any ambiguity with respect to the
provisions of this ordinance, or dispute as to meaning, the Township shall
make a good faith effort to establish the meaning of such term or condition
in a manner consistent with the original intent of the language.
extent and quality of the grantee's service; 3) whether the grantee
remains financially, legally and technically qualified; and 4) whether
the grantee's renewal would reasonably meet the future cable-related
community needs and interest. Any renewal of the initial term hereof
shall be for an additional five years. In reviewing or declining to renew
the franchise, the Township shall comply with applicable federal, state
and local laws.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Township shall have the right to
terminate this franchise for cause upon 90 days' written notice to the
grantee and upon the grantee's failure to correct any deficiencies
within 45 days from said written notice from the Township. For
purposes of this section, the term "for cause" shall mean the grantee's
substantial noncompliance with the material terms of the ordinance or
with applicable law, the extent or quality of the grantee's services are
below industry standards, the grantee is financially, legally or
technically unqualified, or the grantee is unable to meet the future
cable-related community needs and interests.
§ A177-14 MIDDLESEX CODE § A177-18
168:660
§ A177-18. Grantee's inability to perform.
In the event the grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions,
obligations or requirements of this franchise is prevented or impaired due
to any cause beyond its control or not foreseeable, such inability to perform
shall be deemed to be excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be
imposed as a result thereof, provided that the grantee has notified the
Township in writing within 30 days of its discovery of the occurrence of such
an event. This section shall not be construed to relieve the grantee of the
obligation for adjustments contained in § A177-11. Such causes beyond the
grantee's control or not foreseeable shall include, but shall not be limited
to, acts of God, civil emergencies, and possible labor unrest or strikes,
including by telephone or power owners of said poles.
§ A177-19. Favored nations.
In the event the Township enters into an agreement, permit, license, or
authorization of any kind with any other person or entity other than the
grantee for the purpose of constructing or operating a cable system or
providing cable service to any part of the franchise area, and such
agreement, permit, license, or authorization contains terms which are more
favorable than this franchise, the grantee may request that the Township
Board of Supervisors amend this franchise, so as to give the grantee the
benefit of any such more favorable terms. The Township shall rule on such
request using its reasonable discretion and grant such franchises on terms
comparable to this agreement in all material respects.
§ A177-20. Binding effect.
This franchise shall bind and inure to the benefit of the Township and the
grantee, and their respective successors and assigns; provided, however,
that without the written consent of the Township, which consent shall not
be unreasonably withheld or delayed, the grantee shall not assign the
right, license or privilege herein granted to any person, firm or corporation
other than a person, firm or corporation affiliated with it. The terms and
provisions of this franchise may not be amended or modified, by ordinance
or otherwise, except as agreed upon in writing by both parties hereto.
§ A177-21. Assignment or transfer.
The right and privilege given to the grantee shall not be assigned or
transferred without the prior written approval of such transfer by the
Township.
§ A177-22. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency only.
§ A177-18 WATER § A177-23
168:661
§ A177-23. Community service.
Upon the approval of this agreement by the Township, the grantee will, at
no charge to the Township, schools, and Volunteer Fire Department, provide
basic cable services and one broadband/high-speed internet connection to
the Township buildings, school buildings, public library, police stations and
fire stations located in the Township and which are also located within 150
feet of the grantee's existing cable system. The buildings into which the
grantee shall provide basic cable service under this § A177-23 are identified
in Exhibit A attached hereto and made part hereof.190
190. Editor's Note: Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ A177-23 MIDDLESEX CODE § A177-23
168:662
ARTICLE II
Agreement With Armstrong Utilities
[Adopted 3-20-2013 by Ord. No. 126]
§ A177-24. Definitions.
For the purpose of this agreement, each of the following terms shall have
the meaning ascribed below. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number
include the singular number and words in the singular number include
the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
CABLE SERVICE — The one-way or two-way transmission to or from
subscribers of video programming or other programming services
(including music), and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for
the selection of such video programming or other programming service,
and the installation and rental of equipment necessary for the receipt to
transmission thereof.
CABLE SYSTEM or SYSTEM — A system of poles, wires, cables, fibers,
lines, underground conduits, converters, equipment, appliances and/or
facilities designed, constructed or used for the purpose of producing,
receiving, amplifying, transmitting and distributing radio, television,
telephone, data and two-way interactive impulses and energy and other
information, related services, products or matters to residential and
commercial customers of the grantee within the Township.
GRANTEE — Armstrong Utilities, Inc. or its successors and assignees.
GROSS RECEIPTS — For the purpose of the calculation of the franchise
fee, any and all revenues of any kind or nature including, without limitation,
cash, credits, property and in-kind contributions received directly or
indirectly by the grantee or its affiliated entities from any source
whatsoever arising from, attributable to or in any way derived from the
provision of cable service within the Township. Gross receipts will include
the following: basic service fees; fees charged to subscribers for any
programming service other than basic service; fees charged to subscribers
for any optional, per-channel or per-program services; installation,
additional outlets, relocation, disconnection, reconnection and change-inservice
fees; fees for control devices and antennas; fees for any and all
music services. Gross receipts will not include bad debts or any taxes on
services furnished by the grantee and imposed directly upon any subscriber
or user by the Township, state, federal or other governmental unit.
§ A177-25. Grant of franchise.
A. In consideration of the within undertakings by the grantee, the
Township agrees that the grantee shall have, and hereby confirms and
grants unto the grantee, the right, license and privilege to construct
and reconstruct, to install, maintain, repair, replace and remove, and
solicit and sell customers, subscribers, users and advertisements for,
§ A177-24 WATER § A177-25
168:663
§ A177-26. Construction and maintenance activities.
§ A177-27. Conditions on use and occupancy of streets.
and otherwise to own, promote and operate, a cable system throughout
the Township.
B. The right, license and privilege hereby granted shall not be exclusive,
and the Township reserves the right to grant a similar franchise to any
person at any time. The Township will not enter into a franchise
agreement, permit, license, authorization or any other agreement with
another person or entity to construct a similar system or provide cable,
internet or telecommunication services in any part of the franchise area
which grants more favorable terms and conditions.
C. The right, license and privilege herein granted and confirmed shall be
deemed to include a continuing right to enter upon and to use and
occupy the surface, subsurface and space above or below any public
streets, lanes, alleys, paths, ways, bridges and viaducts within the
Township, when and to the extent necessary to carry out the intent and
purposes of this agreement, subject, however, to limitations and
qualifications herein contained.
D. In exercising the right, license and privilege granted and confirmed
hereby, the grantee shall be and remain subject to and shall comply
with all federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations applicable to
it in the conduct of the activities contemplated hereby.
A. In cases where existing poles or other structures, conduits or other
facilities owned or leased by public utilities or other third parties
having the right to permit attachment thereto or location therein or
thereon of the system by the grantee are not available or are
impractical for that purpose, then the proposed means of attachment,
construction or conduit shall be submitted to the Township
representative or designated person by drawings, plans and
explanatory addenda at least 30 days before such proposed attachment,
installation or construction, and shall be subject to his approval in
writing before commencement of such attachment, installation or
construction, and such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld and
the Township representative or designated person shall advise the
grantee of its determination within 20 days after receipt of the
grantee's proposed means of attachment, construction or conduit.
B. The grantee shall extend the cable system into all areas of the Township
where there is a minimum of 20 dwelling units per linear mile of aerial
cable, and 30 dwelling units per linear mile of underground cable,
calculated from the nearest trunk line. To be counted for purposes of
this section, dwelling units must be located within 200 feet of the to-bebuilt
cable system extension.
§ A177-25 MIDDLESEX CODE § A177-27
168:664
A. Pole attachments and the construction, installation, repair and
replacement of basic system hardware and the operation and removal
of the system and all parts thereof by the grantee within the Township
shall be conducted in such manner as to cause minimum interference
with the proper use of streets, lanes, alleys, bridges and viaducts and
other public places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights
or reasonable convenience of the property owners, tenants or
occupants who adjoin any of said streets, lanes, alleys, bridges, viaducts
and other public places.
B. In the event of any disturbance caused by the grantee's activities
hereunder to the pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing as to
which the Township is responsible, the grantee, at its own cost and
expense, shall replace and restore all such paving, sidewalk, driveway
or surface so disturbed in a good and workmanlike manner and to as
functionally sound a condition as before said activities were
commenced, and shall be completed within 30 days of the disturbance
or such longer period as may be approved by the Township. All such
replacement and restoration by the grantee shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Engineer or designated person and such
approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
C. In the event that at any time during the existence of the within right,
license and privilege to the grantee, the Township elects to alter or
change the grade, alignment or paved width of any street, lane, alley,
bridge or viaduct or other public way, the grantee, upon notice by the
Township, at its own expense, shall remove and relocate any affected
part of the system within 30 days of the date of notice or such
reasonable extension thereof as may be granted by the Township
representative considering the circumstances of the case.
D. The grantee shall not place the system or any part thereof where the
same will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone or telegraph line or
fixture, water hydrant or main, nor in such manner as would interfere
with the usual travel on the streets, lanes, alleys, bridges and viaducts
and other public places of the Township.
E. Upon the request of any person, firm or corporation holding a moving
permit issued by the Township or other governmental regulatory
agency having jurisdiction of the matter, by which permit any building
or buildings, large pieces of equipment or structural materials or the
like are to be moved from place to place, the grantee shall temporarily
raise or lower its system as and to the extent necessary to permit the
moving of such buildings, equipment, structural materials and the like,
provided the expense of such temporary raising or lowering of the
system or any part thereof shall have been paid or tendered by the
person, firm or corporation requesting the same. The grantee shall be
given not less than 15 days advance notice to arrange for such
temporary changes to its system.
§ A177-27 WATER § A177-27
168:665
§ A177-28. Fees and reports.
F. Any opening or obstruction in the streets or other public ways made by
the grantee in the course of the installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of equipment, structures, facilities, apparatus and
appurtenances shall be guarded and protected at all times by the
placement of adequate barriers, fences or boarding or as otherwise
directed by the Township representative. Whenever it is deemed
necessary by the Township, the grantee shall install steel plates to allow
a public way to remain usable while openings or obstructions exist.
G. The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees which are located on
or which overhang streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the
Township to the extent that such trimming activities are minor in nature
or required to be performed without delay due to the risk of danger to
personal or property damage arising by reason of the location of such
trees. The grantee shall have the authority to perform all other tree
trimming activities only with the prior approval of the Township, and
such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. All trimming shall be
at the expense of the grantee.
H. In such sections, if any, of the Township in which all cables, wires and
other like facilities of public utilities are required to be and are placed
underground, the grantee shall place its cables, wires and other like
facilities underground.
I. The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate in the same street or other streets or remove from
the street any property of the grantee when required by the Township
by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway
and street construction, change or establishment of street grade,
installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, power lines, signal
lines and tracks and other types of improvements by the Township or
public agencies.
J. The Township shall have the right to inspect all pole attachments,
installation, construction, repair and replacement of basic system
hardware, and the removal of the system or any part thereof to ensure
compliance with this section of this agreement.
A. In consideration of the right, license and privilege granted hereby and
in order to defray any costs and expenses of the Township in connection
with the execution, delivery, performance and administration of this
agreement, the grantee shall pay to the Township, with respect to each
calendar quarter, on or before the 30th day following the end of such
calendar quarter during the term of this agreement, an amount equal to
5% of the gross receipts.
B. If the grantee is required to pay a fee to the Township pursuant to this
section, not later than 60 days after the close of each fiscal year of the
grantee during the term of this agreement, the grantee shall file with
§ A177-27 MIDDLESEX CODE § A177-28
168:666
§ A177-29. Safety measures.
§ A177-30. Voluntary subscriptions.
All subscriptions for services under any franchise shall be on a voluntary
basis, and may be terminated at any time by the customer except in
circumstances whereby a mutually agreed upon contract has been
executed.
§ A177-31. System services.
§ A177-32. Operation and maintenance of system.
The grantee shall make reasonable efforts to assess subscriber need and
viewing preferences. If any existing service becomes unavailable, or the
the Township representative a written report, certified by the grantee's
chief accounting officer, setting forth the amount of gross receipts as
defined in § A177-24, paid to the grantee during such fiscal year.
C. If the grantee is required to pay a fee to the Township pursuant to this
section, the Township shall have the right to inspect and audit the
grantee's records from which the payments hereunder are computed
and to recompute the amount of such payments to correct errors in the
computation and reporting of same. The grantee's records shall be
made available at the grantee's headquarters. Such requests to inspect
the records shall be made in writing by the Township and scheduled by
the grantee's corporate accounting staff.
A. Construction and maintenance of the system shall be in accordance
with the provisions of the National Electric Safety Code of the National
Board of Fire Underwriters, and such other applicable laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Butler County, and regulations of the
Township which may be lawfully in effect from time to time.
B. All structures, lines, equipment and connections in, over, under and
upon the streets of the Township, wherever situated or located, shall at
all times be kept and maintained in a safe, suitable condition and in
good order and repair.
A. The grantee, at all times, shall provide all subscriber service as and to
the extent required to be provided by applicable federal and state rules
and regulations from time to time in effect.
B. If the grantee operates a Citizens Awareness Channel, or similar
programming option, it shall post free of charge any notices properly
submitted by the Township.
C. Additional services may, at the sole discretion of the grantee, be
provided by the grantee, including services for which a per-program,
per-service or per-channel charge is made consistent with applicable
federal and state rules and regulations.
§ A177-28 WATER § A177-32
168:667
grantee decides to discontinue a service, the grantee shall endeavor to
provide substitute programming. The grantee may combine programming
into composite channels to improve efficiency of channel utilization or to
attract a larger viewing audience.
§ A177-33. Service standards.
§ A177-34. Subscriber rates and charges.
A. The grantee will investigate and resolve all subscriber complaints
regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar
matters expeditiously and in accordance with the following procedure:
(1) The grantee shall have qualified personnel available during normal
working hours to investigate and resolve subscriber complaints;
(2) The grantee shall maintain a telephone answering service during
times other than normal business hours with a qualified technician
on call 24 hours a day to respond to emergencies;
(3) Upon notification of a service complaint, the grantee shall dispatch
a qualified employee to investigate the complaint and adjust, repair
or replace grantee equipment as necessary to resolve the
complaint. The grantee shall not be responsible for malfunctions of
any television receivers or other equipment owned or operated by
any subscriber;
(4) All complaints shall be investigated and resolved in accordance
with the Cable Television Consumer Protection Act of 1992; and
(5) The grantee shall maintain a service log in which an entry shall be
made of each complaint, the date of notification thereof, the nature
of the complaint and the means by which it was resolved.
B. In the construction, maintenance and operation of the system, the
grantee shall, at a minimum, at all times, fully comply with technical
standards which have been or which hereafter may be adopted by the
Federal Communications Commission ("FCC"), including (without
limitations), if applicable, requirements relating to channel capacity,
bandwidth and periodic testing. Further, should any federal, state or
local governmental unit with jurisdiction establish technical standards
that exceed those of the FCC, the grantee will comply therewith when
and to the extent required by such governmental unit, unless to require
the grantee to do so would be held invalid by the FCC or a court of
administrative tribunal of competent jurisdiction. The technical quality
of the service provided by the grantee shall be sufficient to provide
subscribers with uniform quality television reception. The grantee shall
maintain the system in good repair and working order at all times.
A. Installation charges, monthly service rates and any other residential
rates charged by the grantee related to the basic service tier, as defined
by the FCC, may be regulated under this franchise only to the extent
§ A177-32 MIDDLESEX CODE § A177-34
168:668
§ A177-35. Discrimination practices prohibited.
The grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service, service facilities, rules,
regulations, or, in any other respect, make or grant unlawful undue
preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to any
unlawful prejudice or disadvantage, provided that nothing in this franchise
shall be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of
charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within
such classification would be entitled. Connection and/or service charges
may be waived or modified during promotional campaigns of the grantee.
The Township acknowledges that the offering of different programming
and service rates by the grantee in portions of the Township also served
by another multi-channel video distributor shall not constitute an act of
discrimination prohibited by this section.
§ A177-36. Insurance.
permitted by the Communications Act of 1934, as amended in 1984,
1992 and 1996 and applicable FCC rules and regulations. Commercial
installation charges and monthly service rates are negotiable and not
covered by federal regulations.
B. The grantee shall offer the services of the system within the Township
on terms and conditions which are uniform and nondiscriminatory to
the fullest extent practicable. The provisions of this Section will not
apply in any area of the Township in which another multi-channel video
distributor provides cable, internet or telecommunication services,
whereby the parties agree such action constitutes effective
competition.
C. The rates and charges for all services of the system (specifically
including but not limited to basic subscriber service, any additional
service provided pursuant to this section, or any connection,
maintenance or similar service) and equipment shall be subject to
adjustment from time to time, at the sole discretion of the grantee.
A. The grantee shall maintain insurance throughout the term of this
agreement with the Township as an additional insured, with an
insurance company which is authorized to conduct business in
Pennsylvania and which has an A.M. best rating (or equivalent) no less
than "A", indemnifying the Township from and against any and all
claims for injury or damage to persons or property, both real and
personal, caused by the construction, installation, reconstruction,
operation, maintenance or removal of the cable system by the grantee
or any of its contractors, subcontractors, agents or employees in the
following amounts:
(1) The amount of such insurance against liability for damage to
property shall be no less than $1,000,000 as to any one occurrence.
§ A177-34 WATER § A177-36
168:669
§ A177-37. Effective date and term of franchise.
The right and privilege herein granted shall take effect and be in force
from and after the effective date and shall continue in force and effect for
a period of 10 years from the effective date of this agreement. Upon the
expiration of said period and provided that the grantee has complied with
the terms and conditions hereof, the grant and provisions hereof shall be
renewed under the provisions of the Cable Communications Act of 1984,
Section 626. In the event the term expires without a renewed agreement,
the parties agree hereto that the grantee shall be permitted to continue
to operate the cable system and collect the franchise fees until a formal
agreement is reached.
§ A177-38. Federal regulation.
In the event and to the extent that the terms and provisions hereof shall
be superseded and preempted by or become inconsistent with state law or
federal law (including rules and regulations promulgated by the FCC), then
and in each such event, it shall be the right of the grantee to take such
action within 60 days after such event as shall be reasonably necessary
and may be reasonably requested to so amend or modify in writing this
agreement and to preserve the written contract for rights and benefits of
the grantee and fulfill the intent and purposes of this agreement.
§ A177-39. Severability.
Subject to the provisions of this section hereof, if any section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this agreement is for any reason
held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative tribunal of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.
(2) The amount of such insurance against liability for injury or death to
any person shall be no less than $1,000,000.
(3) The amount of such insurance for excess liability shall be
$5,000,000 in umbrella form.
(4) The amount of such insurance against all claims arising out of the
operation of motor vehicles and general tort or contract liability
shall be $1,000,000.
(5) The grantee shall maintain workers' compensation insurance on all
employees engaged in its installation or service of its equipment.
B. All insurance coverage shall be maintained throughout the period of
this agreement. All expenses incurred for said insurance shall be at the
sole expense of the grantee.
§ A177-36 MIDDLESEX CODE § A177-40
168:670
§ A177-40. Interpretation.
Notwithstanding any provision of this agreement to the contrary, the
Township agrees that in the event of any ambiguity with respect to the
terms and conditions of this franchise, or dispute as to meaning, the
Township shall, in conjunction with the grantee, make a good faith effort to
establish the meaning of such terms and conditions in a manner consistent
with the parties' original intent of the language.
§ A177-41. Conflict of interest.
The grantee shall not engage in the business of selling, leasing or repairing
television or radio receivers in connection with the operation of its cable
system; nor shall the grantee and its employees require or attempt to direct
its customers to deal with any particular firm or person engaged in such
business.
§ A177-42. Defaults; arbitration.
A. In the event that the Township determines that grantee is in violation of
the terms and conditions of this agreement, the Township shall provide
the grantee with written notice, which describes the violation for which
such notice is being issued, of such determination. The grantee shall
have 60 days from the date of the Township's written notice to either
cure the violation or, for violations which cannot reasonably be cured
within such sixty-day period, demonstrate to the Township that the
grantee is using its reasonable best efforts to cure such violation. If the
Township provides the grantee with written notice under this section
and the grantee fails to either cure or demonstrate that it is using its
reasonable best efforts, the Township shall have the right to invoke the
arbitration procedure set forth in this section hereof.
B. In the event of any dispute arising under this agreement, as the same
may be amended or supplemented, such dispute shall be submitted to
arbitration upon request of any one or more of the disputants, who shall
notify each of the other disputants in writing of such request. Each of
the disputants shall confer with the other disputants for the purpose of
selecting by unanimous agreement an independent arbitrator. Failing
such agreement within 30 days of the earliest such notice, upon request
of any one or more of the disputants, such selection shall be made
through the services and facilities of the regional office of the American
Arbitration Association located, geographically, nearest to the cable
system and in accordance with the rules thereof. The decision and
award of the arbitrator shall be final and binding upon the disputants.
The costs of the arbitration proceeding, including the fees of the
arbitrator, shall be borne by the non-prevailing party in such
arbitration.
§ A177-40 WATER § A177-43
168:671
§ A177-43. Grantee's inability to perform.
In the event the grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions,
obligations or requirements of this agreement is prevented or impaired due
to any cause beyond its control or not foreseeable, such inability to perform
shall be deemed to be excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be
imposed as a result thereof, provided the grantee has notified the Township
in writing within 30 days of its discovery of the occurrence of such an event.
This section shall not be construed to relieve the grantee of the obligation
for adjustments contained in § A177-38. Such causes beyond the grantee's
control or not foreseeable shall include, but shall not be limited to, acts
of God, civil emergencies and possible labor unrest or strikes including by
telephone or power company owners of said poles.
§ A177-44. Binding effect.
This agreement shall bind and inure to the benefit of the Township and the
grantee, and their respective successors and assigns; provided, however,
that without the written consent of the Township, which consent shall not
be unreasonably withheld or delayed, the grantee shall not assign the right,
license or privilege herein granted to any person, firm or corporation other
than a person, firm or corporation affiliated with it. Township consent shall
not be required for the collateral assignment of a grant of security interest
in this agreement for purposes of securing indebtedness. The terms and
provisions of this agreement may not be amended or modified, by ordinance
or otherwise, except as agreed upon in writing by both parties hereto.
§ A177-45. Community service.
The grantee will, at no charge to the Township, provide basic cable service
to the Township buildings, public school buildings, public library, police
stations and fire stations located in the Township and which are also located
within 150 feet of the grantee's existing cable system. The buildings into
which the grantee shall provide basic cable service under this section are
identified in Exhibit A attached hereto and made part hereof.191
191. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ A177-43 MIDDLESEX CODE § A177-45
168:672
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
103 4-20-2005 Sewers and sewage
disposal: mandatory
connection
Ch. 134, Art. III
104 9-21-2005 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
105 9-21-2005 Junked or abandoned
vehicles
Ch. 164
106 11-16-2005 Debt agreement NCM
107 2-15-2006 General obligation note NCM
108 9-20-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
109 11-15-2006 Nuisances Ch. 115
110 3-21-2007 Mandatory sewer
connections amendment
Ch. 134, Art. III
111 4-18-2007 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 65
112 7-18-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
113 10-3-2007 Subdivision and land
development and zoning
amendment
Chs. 150, 175
114 11-21-2007 Local services tax Ch. 155, Art. III
115 1-16-2008 Cable television
franchise
Ch. A177
116 4-16-2008 Intergovernmental
agreements: Butler
County Council of
Governments
Ch. 19, Art. VIII
117 2-17-2010 Police pension plan
amendment
Ch. 28, Art. II
118 10-20-2010 Peddling, soliciting and
canvassing
Ch. 120
119 10-20-2010 Fire insurance claims Ch. 103, Art. I
120 7-20-2011 Stormwater management Ch. 144
§ A177-45 WATER § DL-1
168:673
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
121 Not adopted
122 9-28-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
123 3-28-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
124 3-28-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
125 11-21-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
126 3-20-2013 Cable television
franchise: agreement
with Armstrong Utilities
Ch. A177, Art. II
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
127 8-13-2014 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 175 7
128 7-29-2015 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 175 7
129 8-18-2015 Intergovernmental
Agreements:
PSATS
Unemployment
Compensation
Group Trust
Ch. 19, Art. IX 7
130 11-16-2016 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 175 7
131 6-21-2017 Intergovernmental
Agreements:
Emergency
Services Unit
Ch. 19, Art. X 7
132 6-20-2018 Floodplain
Management
Ch. 84 7
133 3-20-2019 Subdivision and
Land Development
Amendment;
Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment;
Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 150; Ch.
162; Ch. 175
7
134 8-21-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 175 7
§ DL-1 MIDDLESEX CODE § DL-1
168:674